     __________________________________________________________________

          Title: The History of the Origins of Christianity. Book VI. The Reigns
                 of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius. (A.D. 117-161)
     Creator(s): Renan, Ernest (1823-1892)
  CCEL Subjects: All; History
     __________________________________________________________________

THE HISTORY

    OF THE

                            ORIGINS OF CHRISTIANITY.

BOOK VI.

COMPRISING

THE REIGNS

OF

HADRIAN AND ANTONINUS PIUS

(A.D. 117-161)

    BY

ERNEST RENAN

   Member of the French Academy, and of the Academy of Inscriptions
   and Fine Arts.

London:

MATHIESON & COMPANY

25 PATERNOSTER SQUARE, E.C.

   LONDON PRINTED BY THE TEMPLE PUBLISHING COMPANY.
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE.

   I thought at first that this Sixth Book would finish the series of
   volumes which I have devoted to the history of the origins of
   Christianity. It is certain that at the death of Antoninus, circa A.D.
   160, the Christian religion had become a complete religion, having all
   its sacred books, all its grand legends, the germ of all its dogmas,
   the essential parts of its liturgies; and in the eyes of most of its
   adherents, it was a religion standing by itself, separated from and
   even opposed to Judaism. I, however, thought it right to add a last
   work, containing the ecclesiastical history of the reign of Marcus
   Aurelius, to the preceding books. In the truest sense, the reign of
   Marcus Aurelius belongs to the origins of Christianity. Montanism is a
   phenomenon of about the year 170, and is one of the most notable events
   of early Christianity. After more than a century had elapsed since
   those strange hallucinations which had possessed the apostles at the
   Last Supper at Jerusalem, suddenly in some remote districts of Phrygia
   there sprung up again prophecy, the glossolalia, those graces which the
   author of the Acts of the Apostles praises so much. But it was too
   late: under Marcus Aurelius, religion, after the confused
   manifestations of Gnosticism, had more need of discipline than of
   miraculous gifts. The resistance that orthodoxy, as represented by the
   episcopate, was able to offer to the prophets of Phrygia, was the
   decisive act of the constitution of the Church. It was admitted that,
   above individual inspiration, there existed the average judgment of the
   universal conscience. This average opinion, which will triumph in the
   course of the history of the Church, and which, representing as it did
   relative good sense, constituted the power of that great institution,
   was already perfectly characterised under Marcus Aurelius. A
   description of the first struggles which thus took place between
   individual liberty and ecclesiastical authority, seemed to me to be a
   necessary part of the history which I wished to trace of rising
   Christianity.

   But besides that, there was another reason that decided me to treat the
   reign of Marcus Aurelius in its relations to the Christian community in
   the fullest detail. It is partial and unjust to represent the
   endeavours of Christianity as an isolated fact, as a unique, and, in a
   manner, a miraculous attempt at religious and social reform.
   Christianity was not alone in attempting what it alone was able to
   carry out. Timidly still in the first century, openly and brilliantly
   in the second, all virtuous men of the ancient world were longing for
   an improvement in morals and in the laws, and piety thus became a
   general requirement of the time. With regard to high intellectual
   culture, the century was not what the preceding age had been; there
   were no men of such large minds as Cæsar, Lucretius, Cicero and Seneca,
   but an immense work of moral amelioration was going on in all
   directions, and philosophy, Hellenism, the Eastern creeds and Roman
   probity, contributed equally to this. The fact that Christianity has
   triumphed is no reason for being unjust towards those noble attempts
   which ran parallel with its own, and which only failed because they
   were too aristocratic, and did not possess enough of that mystic
   character which was formerly necessary in order to attract the people.
   In order to be perfectly just, the two attempts ought to be studied
   together, allowances ought to be made for both, and it ought to be
   explained why one has succeeded whilst the other has not.

   The name of Marcus Aurelius is the most noble among all that noble
   school of virtue which tried to save the ancient world by the force of
   reason, and thus a thorough study of that great man belongs essentially
   to our subject. Why did not that reconciliation between the Church and
   the Empire, which took place under Constantine, take place under Marcus
   Aurelius? It is all the more important to settle this question, as
   already in this volume we shall see that the Church identifies her
   destinies with those of the Empire.

   In the latter half of the second century, some Christian doctors of the
   highest authority seriously faced the possibility of making
   Christianity the official religion of the Roman world, and it might
   almost be said that they divined the great events of the fourth
   century. Looked at closely, that resolution by which Christianity,
   having entirely changed its past, has become the protégé, or perhaps we
   had better say the protector, of the State, from having been persecuted
   by it, ceases to be surprising. St Justin and Melito foresaw this quite
   clearly. St Paul's principle, "All power is of God," will bear its
   fruits, and the Gospel will become, what Jesus certainly did not
   foresee, one of the bases of absolution. Christ will have come into the
   world to guarantee the crowns of princes, and in our days a Roman
   Pontiff has tried to prove that Jesus Christ preached and died to
   preserve the fortunes of the wealthy, and to consolidate capital.

   As we advance in this history, we shall find that documents become more
   certain, and preliminary discussions less necessary. The question of
   the Fourth Gospel has been so often treated in the preceding volumes,
   that we need not return to that subject now. The falseness of the
   Epistles to Timothy and Titus, which are attributed to St Paul, has
   been already demonstrated, and the apocryphal character of the Second
   Epistle of St Peter is shown by the few pages which are devoted to that
   work. The problems of the epistles attributed to St Ignatius, and of
   the epistle attributed to St Polycarp, are absolutely identical, and
   attention need only be drawn to what has been said in the introduction
   to our preceding work. Nobody has any further doubt about the
   approximate age of the Pastor of Hermas. The account of Polycarp's
   death bears the same characteristics of authenticity as the epistle to
   the faithful at Lyons and Vienne, which will be mentioned in our last
   book, and to discriminate between the authentic and the supposititious
   works of St Justin, does not require the same lengthy explanation as
   the introductions to the former volumes naturally did. It can plainly
   be seen, and all signs seem to point to the fact, that we are
   approaching the end of the age of origins. Ecclesiastical history is
   about to begin. The same interest is felt in it, but everything takes
   place in the full light of day, and for the future, criticism will no
   longer encounter those obscurities which can only be got over by
   hypotheses or bold speculation. Hic cestus artemque repono. After
   Irenæus and Clement of Alexandria, our old works on Ecclesiastical
   History of the seventeenth century are almost sufficient. Any one who
   reads in Fleury the two hundred and twenty pages that correspond to our
   seven volumes, will perceive all the difference. The seventeenth
   century only cared to know what was quite clear, and all origins are
   obscure; but for the philosophic mind, they are of unequalled interest.
   Embryogeny is from its very essence the most interesting of sciences,
   for by it we can penetrate the secrets of nature, its plastic force,
   its final aims, and its inexhaustible fecundity.
     __________________________________________________________________

                             THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.

CHAPTER I.

  HADRIAN.

   Trajan's health was daily growing worse, and so he set out for Rome,
   leaving the command of the army at Antioch to Hadrian, his second
   cousin, and grand-nephew by marriage. He was forced to stop at Selinus,
   on the coast of Cilicia, by inflammation of the bowels, and there he
   died August 11, 117, at the age of sixty-four. The condition of affairs
   was very unfortunate: the East was in a state of insurrection; the
   Moors, the Bretons, the Sarmatians were becoming menacing, and Judea,
   subjugated but still in a state of suppressed agitation, appeared to be
   threatening a fresh outbreak. A somewhat obscure intrigue, which
   appears to have been directed by Plotina and Matidias, bestowed the
   Empire on Hadrian, under these critical circumstances.

   It was an excellent choice, for though he was a man of equivocal
   morals, he was a great ruler. Intellectual, intelligent, and eager to
   learn, he had more greatness of mind than any of the Cæsars, and from
   Augustus down to Diocletian, no other Emperor did so much for the
   constitution as he did. His administrative capacities were
   extraordinary, as, although he administered too much, according to our
   ideas, he nevertheless administered well. He was the first to give the
   Imperial Government a definite organisation, and his reign marked a
   principal epoch in the history of Roman law.

   Up till his time, the house of the sovereign had been the house of the
   highest personage in the land,--an establishment composed like any
   other of servants, freemen, and private secretaries. Hadrian organised
   the palace, and for the future it was necessary to be a knight in order
   to arrive at any office in the household, and the servants in Cæsar's
   palace became public functionaries. A permanent council of the prince,
   composed chiefly of jurisconsults, undertook all definite public
   powers; those senators who were specially attached to the government
   already were made comtes (counts); everything was done through regular
   offices, in the constitution of which the senate took its proper share,
   and not through the direct will of the prince. It was still a state of
   despotism, but of despotism which was analogous to that of the old
   French royalty, kept in check by independent councils, law courts, and
   magistrates.

   The social ameliorations which took place were still more important,
   for everywhere a really good and great spirit of liberalism was
   manifested; the position of slaves was guaranteed, the condition of
   women was raised, paternal authority was restricted within certain
   limits, and every remaining vestige of human sacrifices was abolished.
   The Emperor's personal character responded to the excellence of these
   reforms, for he was most affable towards those of lowly station, and
   never would allow himself to be deprived of his greatest pleasure--that
   of being amiable--under the pretext of his imperial greatness.

   In spite of all his failings, he was a man of a quick, unbiassed,
   original intellect. He admired Epictetus and understood him, without,
   however, feeling obliged to follow out his maxims. Nothing escaped him,
   and he wished to know everything; and as he did not possess that
   insolent pride and that fixed determination which altogether excluded
   the true Roman from all knowledge of the rest of the world, Hadrian had
   a strong inclination for everything that was strange, and would wittily
   make fun of it. The East, above all, had strong attractions for him,
   for he saw through Eastern impostures and charlatanism, and they amused
   him. He was initiated into all their absurd rites, fabricated oracles,
   compounded antidotes, and made fun of the medicine; and, like Nero, he
   was a royal man of letters and an artist, while the ease with which he
   learnt painting, sculpture, and architecture was surprising. Besides
   this, he also wrote tolerable poetry, but his taste was not pure, and
   he had his favourite authors and singular preferences; in a word, he
   was a literary smatterer, and a theatrical architect. He adopted no
   system of religion or of philosophy, but neither did he deny any of
   them, and his distinguished mind was like a weather-cock, which moves
   its position with every wind; his elegant farewell to life, which he
   murmured a few moments before his death,

   "Animula, vagula, blandula,"

   gives us his measure exactly. For him, whatever he examined into ended
   in a joke, and he had a smile for everything that was an object of his
   curiosity. The sovereign power itself could not make him more than half
   serious, and his bearing always had that easy grace and negligence of
   the most fluctuating and changeable man that ever existed.

   All that naturally made him tolerant. He did not indeed abrogate the
   laws which indirectly struck at Christianity, and so put it continually
   in the wrong, and he even allowed them to be applied more than once,
   but he personally very much modified the effect of them. In this
   respect he was superior to Trajan, who, without being a philosopher,
   had very fixed ideas about State affairs, and to Antoninus and Marcus
   Aurelius, who were men of high principle, but who thought that they did
   right in persecuting the Christians. In this respect Hadrian's laxity
   of morals was not without a good effect, for it is the peculiarity of a
   monarchy that the defects of sovereigns serve the public good even more
   than their better qualities. The immorality of a really witty man, of a
   crowned Lucian, who looks upon the whole world as some frivolous game,
   was more favourable to liberty than the serious gravity and lofty
   morality of the most perfect Emperors.

   Hadrian's first care was to settle the difficulties of the accession
   which Trajan had left him. He was a distinguished military writer, but
   no great general. He clearly saw how impossible it would be to keep the
   newly conquered provinces of Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria, and so
   he gave them up. That must have been a very solemn hour, when, for the
   first time, the Roman eagles retreated, and when the Empire was obliged
   to acknowledge that it had exceeded its programme of conquest, but it
   was an act of wisdom. Persia was as inaccessible for Rome as Germany,
   and the mighty expeditions which Crassus, Trajan, and Julian had led
   into that part of the world failed, whilst less ambitious
   expeditions--those of Lucius Verus and of' Septimus Severus, whose
   object was not to attack the very foundations of the Parthian Empire,
   but to detach the feudatory provinces which bordered on the Roman
   Empire, from it--succeeded. The difficulty of relinquishing conquests,
   which was so humiliating to the Roman mind, was increased by the
   uncertainty of Hadrian's adoption by Trajan. Lucius Quietus and Marcus
   Turbo had an almost equal right to adoption with him, from the
   importance of the last commission that they had carried out. Quiltus
   was killed, and it may be supposed that, eager as they were to find out
   the deaths of their enemies, in order to discover in them a token of
   celestial vengeance, the Jews saw in this tragic death a punishment for
   the new evils which the fierce Berber had inflicted on them.

   Hadrian was a year on his return journey to Rome, thus at once
   beginning those roaming habits which were to make his reign one
   continual rush through the provinces of the Empire. After another year
   devoted to the gravest cares of government administration, which was
   fertile in constitutional reforms, he started on an official progress
   (tour) and successively visited Gaul, the banks of the Rhine, Britain,
   Spain, Mauritania and Carthage, and his vanity and antiquarian tastes
   made him dream of becoming the founder of cities, and the restorer of
   ancient monuments. Moreover, he did not approve of the idleness of
   garrison life for soldiers, and he found a means of occupying them in
   great public works, and that is the reason for these innumerable
   constructions--roads, ports, theatres--temples which date from
   Hadrian's reign. He was surrounded by a crowd of architects, engineers,
   and artists, who were enrolled like a legion. In each province where he
   set his foot, everything seemed to be restored and to spring up afresh.
   At the Emperor's suggestion, enormous public companies were formed to
   carry out great public works, and generally the State appeared as a
   shareholder. If any city had the smallest title to celebrity, or was
   mentioned in classical authors, it was sure to be restored by this
   archæological Cæsar; thus he beautified Carthage and added a new
   quarter to it; and in all directions towns which had fallen into decay
   rose up from their ruins, and took the name of Colonia Ælia Hadriana.

   After a short stay in Rome, during which he extended the circumference
   of the pomoesium (the symbolical, not actual wall of the city), he
   started, during the course of the year 121, on another journey, which
   lasted nearly four years and a half, and during which he visited nearly
   the whole of the East. This journey was even more brilliant than the
   former, and it might have been said that the ancient world was coming
   to life again beneath the footsteps of a beneficent deity. Thoroughly
   acquainted with ancient history, Hadrian wished to see everything, was
   interested in everything, and wished to have everything restored that
   had existed formerly. Men sought to revive the lost arts, in order to
   please him, and a neo-Egyptian style became the fashion, as did also a
   neo-Phoenician. Philosophers, rhetoricians, critics, swarmed about him,
   and he was another Nero without his follies. A number of ancient
   civilisations which had disappeared, aspired after their resuscitation,
   not actually, but in the writings of historians and archæologists. Thus
   Herennius, Philo of Byblos, tried--very likely under the direct
   inspiration of the Emperor himself--to discover ancient Phoenicia. New
   fêtes, the Hadrianian Games, which the Greeks introduced--recalled for
   the last time the splendour of Hellenic life; it was like a universal
   restoration to life of the ancient world, a brilliant restoration
   indeed, but it was hardly sincere, and rather theatrical, and each
   country found, in Rome's comprehensive bosom, its former titles of
   nobility again, and became attached to them. Whilst studying that
   singular spectacle, one cannot help thinking of that and of
   resurrection from the dead which our own century has witnessed, when,
   in a moment of universal goodwill, it began to restore all things, to
   rebuild Gothic churches, to re-establish pilgrimages which had fallen
   into neglect, and to reintroduce fêtes and ancient customs.

   Hadrian, the turn of whose mind was more Greek than Roman, favoured
   this ecclectic movement, and contributed powerfully towards it, and
   what he did in Asia Minor was really prodigious. Cyzicus, Nicaea,
   Nicomedia, sprang up again, and everywhere temples of the most splendid
   works of architecture, immortalised the memory of that learned
   sovereign, who seemed to wish that another world, in all the freshness
   of its youth, should date from him. Syria was no less favoured. Antioch
   and Daphne became the most delightful places of abode in the world, and
   the combinations of picturesque architecture, the imagination of the
   landscape painter, and the forces of hydraulic power, were exhausted
   there. Even Palmyra was partially restored by the great imperial
   architect, and, like a number of other towns, took the name of
   Hadrianople from him.

   Never had the world had so much enjoyment or so much hope. The
   Barbarians beyond the Rhine and the Danube were hardly thought about,
   for the liberal spirit of the Emperor caused a sort of feeling of
   universal contentment; and the Jews themselves were divided into two
   parties. Those who were massed at Bether, and in the villages south of
   Jerusalem, seemed to be possessed by a sort of sombre rage. Their one
   idea was to take the city, to which access was denied them, by force,
   and to restore to the hill which God had chosen for his own, its former
   honours. Hadrian had not at first been obnoxious to the more moderate
   party, especially to the half-Christian, half-Essenian survivors of the
   Egyptian catastrophe under Trojan. They could imagine that he had
   ordered the death of Quietus to punish him for his cruelty towards the
   Jews, and perhaps for a moment they conceived the hope that the
   ecclectic Emperor would undertake the restoration of Israel, as another
   caprice amongst so many. In order to inculcate these ideas, a pious
   Alexandrian took a form of thought that had already been consecrated by
   success. In his poem he supposed that a Sybil, sister of Isis, had had
   a disordered vision of the trials which were reserved for the latter
   centuries.

   Hatred for Rome bursts out at the very beginning:--

   O Virgin, enervated and wealthy daughter of Latin Rome, who hast joined
   the ranks of slavery whilst drunk with wine, for what nuptials hast
   thou reserved thyself! How often will a cruel mistress tear these
   delicate locks!

   The author, who is a Jew and a Christian at the same time, looks upon
   Rome as the natural enemy of the saints, and to Hadrian alone he pays
   the homage of admiring him thoroughly. After enumerating the Roman
   Emperors, from Julius Cæsar to Trajan, by the nonsensical process of
   ghematria, the Sybil sees a man ascend the throne--

   Who has a skull of silver, who will give his name to a sea. He will be
   unequalled in every way and know everything. Under thy reign O
   excellent, O eminent and brilliant sovereign, and under thy offspring,
   the events which I am about to mention shall take place.

   According to custom, the Sybil now unfolds the most gloomy pictures;
   every scourge is let loose at the same time, and mankind becomes
   altogether corrupt. These are the throes of the Messianic child-birth.
   Nero, who had been dead for more than fifty years, was still the
   author's nightmare. That destructive dragon, that actor, that murderer
   of his own relations, and assassin of the chosen people, that kindler
   of numberless wars, will return to put himself on an equality with God.
   He weaves the darkest plots amongst the Medes and Persians who have
   received him; and, borne through the air by the Fates, he will soon
   arrive to be once more the scourge of the West. The author vomits forth
   an invective, fiercer still than that with which he began:--

   Unstable, corrupted, reserved for the very lowest destinies, the
   beginning and end of all suffering, because in thy bosom creation
   perishes and is born again continually, source of all evil, scourge,
   the point where everything ends for mortal men, who has ever loved
   thee? who does not detest thee internally? what dethroned king has
   ended his life in peace within thy walls? By thee the whole world has
   been changed in its innermost recesses. Formerly there existed in the
   human breast a splendour like a brilliant sun; it was the rays of the
   unanimous spirits of the prophets, which brought to all the nourishment
   of life, and thou hast destroyed these good gifts. Therefore, O
   imperious mistress, origin and cause of all these great evils, sword
   and disaster shall fall on thee . . . Listen, O scourge of humanity, to
   the harsh voice which announces thy misfortunes.

   A divine race of blessed Jews, come down from heaven, shall inhabit
   Jerusalem, which shall extend as far as Jaffa, and rise to the clouds.
   There shall be no more trumpets or war, but on every side eternal
   trophies shall rise, trophies consecrating victories over evil.

   Then there shall come down from heaven once more an extraordinary man,
   who has stretched out his hands over a fruitful wood, the best of the
   Hebrews, who formerly stopped the sun in his course by his beautiful
   words and his holy lips.

   This is doubtlessly Jesus, Jesus, in an allegorical manner, by his
   crucifixion, playing the part of Moses stretching out his arms, and of
   Joshua the saviour of the people.

   Cease at length to break thy heart, O daughter of divine race, O
   treasure, O only lovely flower, delightful brightness, exquisite plant,
   cherished germ, gracious and beautiful city of Judea, always filled
   with the sound of inspired hymns. The impure feet of the Greeks, their
   hearts filled with plots, shall not tread thy soil under them, but thou
   shalt be surrounded by the respect of thy illustrious children, who
   shall deck thy table in accord with the sacred muses, with sacrifices
   of all kinds, and with pious prayers. Then the just who have suffered
   pain and anguish will find more pleasure than they have suffered ills.
   These, on the contrary, who have hurled their sacrilegious blasphemies
   towards heaven will be reduced to silence and to hide themselves till
   the face of the world changes. A rain of burning fire shall descend
   from heaven, and men shall no longer gather in the sweet fruits of the
   earth; there shall be no more sowing, no more labour, till mortals
   recognise the supreme, immortal, eternal God, and till they leave off
   honouring mortals, dogs, and vultures, to which Egypt wishes men to
   offer the homage of profane mouths and foolish lips. Only the sacred
   soil of the Hebrews will bear those things that are refused to other
   men; brooks of honey shall burst from the rocks and springs, and milk
   like ambrosia shall flow for the just, because they have hoped, with
   ardent piety and lively faith, in one only God, the Father of all
   things, One and Supreme.

   At last the runaway parricide, who has been announced three times,
   enters upon the scene again. The monster inundates the earth with
   blood, and captures Rome, causing such a conflagration as has never
   been seen. There is a universal overturning of everything in the world;
   all kings and aristocrats perish, in order to prepare peace for just
   men--that is to say, for Jews and Christians, and the author's joy at
   the destruction of Rome breaks out a third time.:--

   Parricides, leave your pride and your culpable haughtiness, for you
   have reserved your shameful embraces for children and placed young
   girls, who were pure up till that time, in houses of ill-fame where
   they have been subjected to the vilest outrages . . . Keep silence,
   wicked and unhappy city, thou that wast formerly full of laughter. In
   thy bosom the sacred virgins will no longer find again the holy fire
   that they kept alive, for that fire, which was so preciously preserved,
   went out of its own accord, when I saw for the second time another
   temple fall to the ground, given up to the flames by impure hands, a
   temple which flourishes still, a permanent sanctuary of God, built by
   the saints, and incorruptible throughout eternity . . . It is not,
   indeed, a god made of common clay that this race adores; amongst them
   the skilful workman does not shape marble; and gold, which is so often
   employed to seduce men's souls, is no object of their worship, but by
   their sacrifices and their holy hecatombs they honour the great God
   whose breath animates every living thing.

   A chosen man, the Messiah, descends from heaven, carries off the
   victory over the Pagans, builds the city beloved of God, which springs
   up again more brilliant than the sun, and founds within it an incarnate
   temple, a tower with a frontage of several stadii, which reaches up to
   the clouds, so that all the faithful may see the glory of God. The
   seats of ancient civilisation--Babylon, Egypt, Greece, Rome--disappear
   one after the other; above all, the giant monuments of Egypt fall over
   and cover the earth; but a linen-clad priest converts his compatriots,
   persuades them to abandon their ancient rites, and to build a temple to
   the true God. That, however, does not arrest the destruction of the
   ancient world, for the constellations come in contact with each other,
   the celestial bodies fall to the earth, and the heavens remain
   starless.

   Thus we see that under Hadrian there existed in Egypt a body of pious
   monotheists for whom the Jews were still pre-eminently the just and
   holy people, in whose eyes the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem
   was an unpardonable crime, and the real cause of the fall of the Roman
   Empire; who entertained a cause for hatred and calumny against Flavius;
   who hoped for the restoration of the Temple and of Jerusalem; who
   looked on the Messiah as a man chosen of God; who saw that Messiah in
   Jesus, and who read the Apocalypse of St John. Since then, Egypt has
   for a long time made us grow accustomed to great singularities in all
   that concerns Jewish and Christian history, and its religious
   development did not proceed pari passu with that of the rest of the
   world. Accents such as we have just beard could hardly find an echo
   either in pure Judaism or in the Churches of St Paul. Judea, above all,
   would never have consented, even for an hour, either to regard Hadrian
   as the best of men, or to found such hopes upon him.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER II.

  THE RE-BUILDING OF JERUSALEM.

   During his peregrinations in Syria, Hadrian saw the site where
   Jerusalem had stood. For fifty-two years the city remained in its state
   of desolation, and offered to the eye nothing but a heap of immense
   blocks of stone lying one on another. Only a few groups of miserable
   houses, belonging to Christians for the most part, stood out from the
   top of Mount Sion, and the site of the Temple was full of jackals. One
   day, when Rabbi Aquiba came on a pilgrimage to the spot with some
   companions, a jackal rushed out of the place where the Holy of Holies
   had stood. The pilgrims burst into tears, and said to each other:
   "What! is this the place of which it is written that any profane person
   who approaches it shall be put to death, and here are jackals roaming
   about in it!" Aquiba, however, burst out laughing, and proved to them
   the connexion between the various prophecies so clearly, that they all
   exclaimed: "Aquiba, thou hast consoled us! Aquiba, thou has consoled
   us!"

   These ruins inspired Hadrian with the thought with which all ruins
   inspired him, namely, the desire to rebuild the ruined city, to
   colonise it, and to give it his name or that of his family Thus Judea
   would become once more restored to cultivation, and Jerusalem, raised
   to the rank of a fortified place in the hands of the Romans, would
   serve as a check upon the Jewish population. All the towns of Syria,
   moreover,--Gerasae, Damascus, Gaza, Peah,--were being rebuilt in the
   Roman manner, and were inaugurating new eras. Jerusalem was too
   celebrated to be an exception to this movement of historical
   dilettantism and of general restoration.

   It is very probable that if the Jews had been less unanimous in their
   views, if some Philo of Byblos had existed amongst them to represent to
   him the Jewish past as nothing but a glorious and interesting variety
   amongst the different literatures, religions, and philosophies of
   humanity, the curious and intelligent Hadrian would have been
   delighted, and re-built the Temple, not exactly as the Doctors of the
   Law would have wished it, but in his ecclectic manner, like the great
   amateur of ancient religions that he was. The Talmud is full of
   conversations between Hadrian and celebrated rabbis, which of course
   are fictitious, but which correspond very well with the character of
   this Emperor, who had a great mind, and was a great talker, very fond
   of asking questions, curious about strange matters, anxious to know
   everything, that he might make fun of it afterwards. But the greatest
   insult that can be shown to absolutists is to be tolerant towards them,
   and in this respect the Jews resembled exactly the enthusiastic
   Catholics of our days. Men of such convictions will not be satisfied
   with their reasonable share; they want to be everything. It is the
   highest indignity for a religion which looks upon itself as the only
   true one to be treated like a sect amongst many others; they would
   rather be outside the pale of the law, and be persecuted; and this
   violent situation appears to them a mark of divinity. The faithful are
   pleased at persecution, for in the very fact that men hate them, they
   see a mark of their prerogative, for the wickedness of men, according
   to them, is naturally an enemy to truth.

   There is nothing to prove that when Hadrian wished to rebuild
   Jerusalem, be consulted the Jews, or wished to come to any agreement
   with them. Nothing either leads us to believe that he entered into any
   relations with the Christians of Palestine, who, externally, had less
   to distinguish them from the Jews than Christians of other countries.
   In the eyes of the Christians, all the prophecies of Jesus would have
   been overthrown if the Temple had been rebuilt, whilst amongst the Jews
   there was a general expectation that it would be rebuilt. The Judaism
   of Jabneh, without Temple, without worship, had appeared as a short
   interregnum, and all uses which presupposed a still existing Temple,
   were preserved. The priests continued to receive the tithe, and the
   precepts of Levitical purity were still strictly observed. The
   obligatory sacrifices were adjourned till the Temple should be rebuilt,
   but Jews alone could rebuild it; the slightest deviation from any
   injunction of the Law, would have been quite enough to cause the cry of
   Sacrilege to be raised. It was better in the eyes of pious Jews, to see
   the sanctuary inhabited by beasts of prey, than to owe its re-building
   to a profane jester, who afterwards would not have failed to utter some
   epigram about those extraordinary gods whose altars he nevertheless
   restored.

   For the Jews, Jerusalem was something almost as sacred as the Temple
   itself. In fact, they did not distinguish one from the other, and at
   that time they already called the city by the name of Beth hammigdas.
   The only feeling which the hasidim felt when they heard that the city
   of God was going to be rebuilt without them, was one of rage. It was
   very shortly after the extermination which Quietus and Turbo had
   carried out, and Judea was weighed down by an extraordinary terror. It
   was impossible to move, but from that time forward it was allowable to
   foresee in the future a revolution that should be even more terrible
   than those which had preceded it,

   About 122, probably, Hadrian issued his orders, and the reconstruction
   commenced. The population consisted chiefly of veterans and strangers,
   and no doubt it was not necessary to keep out the Jews, as their own
   feelings would have been enough to have caused them to flee. It seems
   that, on the other hand, the Christians returned to the city with a
   certain amount of eagerness, as soon as it was habitable. It was
   divided into seven quarters or groups of houses, each with an
   amphodarch over it. As the immense foundations of the Temple were still
   in existence, that seemed the fittest spot on which to place the
   principal sanctuary of the new city. Hadrian took care that the temples
   which be erected in the Eastern Provinces should call to mind the Roman
   religion, and the connection between the provinces and the metropolis.
   In order to point out the victory of Rome over a local religion, the
   temple was dedicated to Jupiter Capitolinus, the god of Rome, above all
   others a god whose attitude and grave demeanour recalled Jehovah, and
   to whom, since the time of Vespasian, the Jews had paid tribute. It was
   a tetrastyle building, and like in most of the temples erected by
   Hadrian, the entablature of the pediment was broken by an arch, under
   which was placed a colossal figure of the god.

   The worship of Venus was no less intended than that of Jupiter by the
   choice of the founder of the colony. Everywhere Hadrian built temples
   to her, the protectress of Rome, and the most important of his personal
   edifices was that great temple of Venus and Rome, the remains of which
   can still be seen near the Coliseum, and so it was only natural that
   Jerusalem should have, by the side of its temple of Jupiter Capitolinus
   its temple of Venus and Rome. It happened that this second temple was
   not far from Golgotha, and this fact gave rise, later on, to singular
   reflections on the part of the Christians. In this close approximation
   they thought that they discerned an insult to Christianity, of which
   Hadrian certainly never thought. The works proceeded but slowly, and
   when, two years later, Hadrian retraced his steps towards the West, the
   new Colonia Ælia Capitolina was still more a project than a reality.

   For a long time a strange story went about amongst the Christians, to
   the effect that a Greek of Sinope, called Aquila, who was nominated
   overseer of the works for the rebuilding of Ælia by Hadrian, knew the
   disciples of the Apostles at Jerusalem, and that, struck by their piety
   and their miracles, he was baptised. But no change in his morals
   followed on his change of religion. He was given to the follies of
   astrology; every day he cast his horoscope, and was looked upon as a
   learned man of the first order in such matters. The Christians regarded
   all such practices with an unfavourable eye, and the heads of the
   Church addressed remonstrances to their new brother, who took no notice
   of them, and set himself up against the views of the Church. Astrology
   led him into grave errors on fatalism and man's destiny, and his
   incoherent mind tried to associate together things which were utterly
   opposed to each other.

   The Church saw that he could not possibly merit salvation, and he was
   driven outside the pale, in consequence of which he always entertained
   a profound hatred for her. His relations with Adrian may have been the
   reason why that Emperor seems to have had such an intimate acquaintance
   with the Christians.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER III.

  THE RELATIVE TOLERANCE OF HADRIAN--THE FIRST APOLOGISTS.

   The period was one of toleration. Colleges and religious societies were
   on the increase everywhere. In A.D. 124, the Emperor received a letter
   from Quintus Licinus Silvanus Granianus, Pro-consul of Asia, which was
   written in a spirit very much the same as that which dictated to Pliny
   that beautiful letter of his, so worthy of an upright man. Roman
   functionaries of any weight all objected to a procedure which admitted
   implicit crimes that individuals were supposed to have committed,
   because of the mere name they bore. Granianus showed how unjust it was
   to condemn Christians on the strength of vague rumours, which were the
   fruit of popular imagination, without being able to convict them of any
   distinct crime, except that of their Christian profession. The drawing
   by lot for the appointments to the Consular Provinces having taken
   place a short time afterwards, Caius Minutius Fundanus, a philosopher
   and distinguished man of letters, a friend of Pliny and of Plutarch,
   who introduces him as asking questions in one of his philosophic
   dialogues, succeeded Granianus, and Hadrian answered Fundanus by the
   following rescript

   Hadrian to Minicius Fundanus. I have received the letter which Licinius
   Granianus, an illustrious man whom you have succeeded, wrote to me. The
   matter seemed to me to demand inquiry, for fear lest people who are
   otherwise peacefully disposed may be disquieted, and so a free field be
   opened to calumniators. If therefore the people of your province have,
   as they say, any weighty accusations to bring against the Christians,
   and if they can maintain their accusation before the tribunals, I do
   not forbid them to take legal steps; but I will not allow them to go on
   sending petitions and raising tumultuous cries. In such a case, the
   best thing is for you yourself to hear the matter. Therefore if anyone
   comes forward as an accuser, and proves that the Christians break the
   laws, sentence them to punishments commensurate to the gravity of the
   offence. But, by Hercules, if anybody denounces one of them
   calumniously, punish the libeller still more severely according to the
   degree of his malice.

   It would seem that Hadrian gave similar replies to other questions of
   the same nature. Libels against the Christians were multiplying
   everywhere, and they paid very well, for the informer got part of the
   property of the accused if he were found guilty. Above all, in Asia the
   provincial meetings, accompanied by public games, almost invariably
   ended in executions. To crown the festivities, the crowd would demand
   the execution of some unfortunate creatures. The redoubtable cry:--The
   Christians to the lions, became quite common in the theatres, and it
   was a very rare occurrence when the authorities did not yield to the
   clamour of the assembled people. As has been seen, the Emperor opposed
   such wickedness as far as he could; the laws of the Empire were really
   alone to blame for giving substance to vague accusations which the
   caprice of the multitude interpreted according to its own pleasure.

   Hadrian spent the winter of 125-126 at Athens. In this meeting-place
   for all men of culture he always experienced the greatest enjoyment.
   Greece had become the plaything to amuse all Roman men of letters.
   Quite reassured as to the political consequences, they adopted, the
   easy liberalism of restoring the Pnyx, the popular assemblies, the
   Areopagus; of raising statues to the great men of the past, of giving
   the ancient constitutions another trial, and of setting up
   Pan-hellenism--the confederation of the so-called free states-- again.
   Athens was the centre of all this childish folly. Enlightened
   Mæcenases--especially Herod Atticus, one of the most distinguished
   spirits of the age, and those Philopappuses, the last descendants of
   the Kings of Commagene and of the Seleucidæ, who about this time raised
   a monument on the hill of the Museum, which still exists,--had taken up
   their abode there.

   This world of professors, of philosophers, and of men of enlightenment,
   was Hadrian's real element. His vanity, his talent, his taste for
   brilliant conversation, were quite at their ease amongst colleagues
   whom he honoured by making himself their equal, without, however, the
   least yielding his royal prerogative. He was a clever arguer, and
   thought that he only owed the advantage, which of course always
   remained with him, to his own personal talent. It was an unlucky thing
   for those who hurt his feelings or who got the better of him in an
   argument. Then the Nero whom, though carefully hidden, he always had in
   him, suddenly woke up. The number of new professorial chairs that he
   founded, or of literary, pensions that he bestowed, is incalculable. He
   took his titles of archon and agonothetes quite seriously. He himself
   drew up a constitution for Athens, by combining in equal proportions
   the laws of Draco and of Solon, and wished to see whether they would
   work satisfactorily. The whole city was restored. The temple of the
   Olympian Jupiter, near the river Ilisus, begun by Pisistratus, and one
   of the wonders of the world, was finished, and the Emperor took the
   title of Olympian. Within the city, a vast square, surrounded by
   temples, porticos, gymnasia, establishments for public instruction,
   dated from him. All that is certainly very far from possessing the
   perfection of the Acropolis, but these buildings excelled anything that
   had ever been seen, by the rarity of their marbles and the richness of
   their decorations. A central Pantheon contained a catalogue of the
   temples which the Emperor had built, repaired or ornamented, and of the
   gilts which he had bestowed on Greek or barbarian cities; and a
   library, open to every Athenian citizen, occupied a special wing. On an
   arch, which remains to our day, Hadrian was made equal to Theseus, and
   one of the Athenian quarters was called Hadrianopolis.

   Hadrian's intellectual activity was sincere, but he lacked a scientific
   mind. In those meetings of sophists all questions, human and divine,
   were discussed, but none were settled, nor does it seem that they went
   so far as complete rationalism. In Greece the Emperor was looked upon
   as a very religious and even as a superstitious man. He wished to be
   initiated into the mysteries of Eleusis, and, on the whole, Paganism
   was the only thing that gained by all this. As, however, liberty of
   discussion is a good thing, good always results from it. Phlegon,
   Hadrian's secretary, knew a little about the legend concerning Jesus,
   and the wide expansion which the spirit of controversy assumed under
   Hadrian gave rise to an altogether new species of Christian literature,
   the apologetic, which sheds so much brightness over the century of the
   Antonines.

   Christianity, preached at Athens seventy-two years previously, had
   borne its fruit. The Church at Athens had never had the adherents nor
   the stability of certain others; its peculiar character was to produce
   individual Christian thinkers, and so apologetic literature naturally
   sprang from it.

   Several persons, who were specially called philosophers, had adhered to
   the doctrine of Jesus. The name philosopher implied severity of morals,
   and a distinguishing dress,--a sort of cloak, which sometimes made the
   wearer the subject of the jokes, but more often, the respect, of the
   passers by. When they embraced Christianity, the philosophers took care
   neither to repudiate their name nor their dress, and from that there
   proceeded a category of Christians unknown till then. Writers and
   talkers by profession, these converted philosophers became, from the
   very first outset, the doctors and polemical members of the sect.
   Initiated into Greek culture, they were far greater dialecticians, and
   had greater aptitude for controversy, than purely apostolic preachers,
   and from that moment Christianity had its advocates. They disputed, and
   others disputed with them. In the eyes of the government they were much
   more likely to be taken seriously than those good people without any
   education who were initiated into an eastern superstition. Up till then
   Christianity had never ventured to address a direct demand to the Roman
   authorities to have the false position in which it found itself
   rectified. Certainly the characters of some of the preceding Emperors
   did not by any means invite any such explanations, and any petition
   would have been rejected unread. Hadrian's curiosity, his facile mind,
   the idea that he was pleased when some new fact or argument was
   presented to him, now encouraged overtures which would have had no
   object under Trajan. To this was added an aristocratic feeling, which
   was alike flattering to the sovereign and the apologist. Christianity
   was already beginning to let the policy be seen which it was to follow
   from the beginning of the fourth century, and which consisted, above
   all, in treating with sovereigns over the heads of the people. "We will
   dispute with you, but it is too much honour for the common herd to give
   it our reasons."

   The first attempt of this sort was the work of a certain Quadratus, an
   important personage of the third Christian generation, and of whom it
   was said that he had even been a disciple of the Apostles. He sent an
   apology for Christianity to the Emperor, which has been lost, but which
   was very highly thought of during the first centuries. He complained of
   the annoyances to which wicked people subjected the faithful, and
   proved the harmlessness of the Christian faith. He went still further,
   and tried to convert Hadrian by arguments drawn from the miracles of
   Jesus. Quadratus alleged that even in his time some of those whom the
   Saviour had healed or raised from the dead were known to be alive.
   Hadrian would certainly have been very much amused to see one of those
   venerable centenarians, and his freedman Phlegon would have embellished
   his treatise on cases of longevity with the fact, but it would not have
   convinced him. He had witnessed so many other miracles, and the only
   conclusion he drew from them was that the number of incredible things
   in this world is infinite. In his teratological collections, Phlegon
   had introduced several of the miracles of Jesus, and certainly Hadrian
   had conversed with him more than once on this subject.

   Another apology, written by a certain Aristides, an Athenian
   philosopher and a convert to Christianity, was also presented to
   Hadrian. Nothing is known about it, except that amongst the Christians
   it was held in as high repute as the one of which Quadratus was the
   author. Those who had the opportunity of reading it, admired its
   eloquence, the author's intellect, and the good use he made of passages
   from heathen philosophers to prove the truth of the doctrines of Jesus.

   These writings, striking as they were by their novelty, could not be
   without their effect upon the Emperor. Singular ideas with regard to
   religion crossed his mind, and it seems that more than once he showed
   Christianity marks of true respect. He had a large number of temples or
   basilicas built, which bore no inscription, nor had they any known
   purpose. Most of them were unfinished or not dedicated, and they were
   called hadrianea, and these empty, statueless temples lead us to
   believe that Hadrian bad them built so purposely. In the third century,
   after Alexander Severus had really wished to build a temple to Christ,
   the Christians spread the idea that Hadrian had determined to do the
   same, and that the hadrianea were to have served to introduce the new
   religion. They said that Hadrian had been stopped because, on
   consulting the sacred oracles, it was found that if such a temple were
   built the whole world would turn Christian, so that all the other
   temples would be abandoned. Several of these hadrianea, especially
   those of the Tiberiad and Alexandria, became, in fact, churches in the
   fourth century.

   Even the follies of Hadrian with Antinous possessed an element of the
   Christian apology. Such a monstrosity seems the culminating point of
   the reign of the devil. That recent God, whom all the world knew, was
   made great use of to beat down the other gods, who were more ancient
   and so easy to lay hold of. The Church triumphed, and later the period
   of Hadrian was looked upon as the luminous point in a splendid epoch in
   which the truths of Christianity shone without any obstacle in all
   eyes. They owed some thanks to a sovereign whose defects and good
   qualities had had such favourable results. His immorality, his
   superstitions, his empty initiation into impure mysteries were not
   forgotten; but in spite of all, Hadrian remained, at any rate in the
   opinion of part of Christianity, a serious man, endowed with rare
   virtues, who gave to the world the last of its beautiful days.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IV.

  THE JOHANNINE WRITINGS.

   It would appear that about this time a mystical book was heard of, of
   which the faithful thought a great deal; it was a new Gospel, far
   superior, as was said, to those which were already known; a really
   spiritual Gospel, as much above St Mark and St Matthew as mind is above
   matter. That Gospel was the production of that disciple whom Jesus
   loved,--of St John, who, having been his most intimate friend,
   naturally knew much that others were ignorant of, so as even to be able
   on many points to rectify the manner in which they had represented
   matters. The text in question was a great contrast to the simplicity of
   the first Evangelical narratives; it put forward much higher
   pretensions, and certainly it was the intention of those who propagated
   it that it should replace those humble accounts of the life of Jesus
   with which men had been contented hitherto. The writer, who was still
   spoken of in a mysterious manner, had leant upon the Master's breast,
   and alone knew the divine secrets of his heart.

   This new work came from Ephesus, that is to say, from one of the
   principal homes of the dogmatic elaboration of the Christian religion.
   It is quite possible that John may have passed his old age and finished
   his days in that city. It is at least quite certain that in the early
   ages of Christianity there were those at Ephesus who claimed St John as
   their own, and did all they could for his aggrandisement. St Paul had
   his Churches which ardently cherished his memory, and St Peter and St
   James had also their families by spiritual adoption. The adherents of
   St John, therefore, wished that he should be in the same position; they
   desired to make him St Peter's equal; and it was maintained, to the
   detriment of the latter, that he had held the first rank in the Gospel
   history, and as the existing accounts did not bear out these
   pretensions sufficiently, recourse was had to one of those pious frauds
   which, in those days, caused nobody any scruples. Thus it may be
   explained how, shortly after the apostolic age, there emerged obscurely
   from Ephesus a class of books which were destined to obtain in later
   times a higher rank than all the other inspired writings in the system
   of Christian theology.

   It can never be admitted that St John himself wrote these words, and it
   is even very doubtful whether they were written with his consent in his
   old age, and by any one of his own immediate surroundings. It seems
   most probable that one of the Apostle's disciples who was a depository
   of many of his reminiscences, thought himself authorised to speak and
   to write in his name--some twenty-five or thirty years after his
   death--what he had not, to his followers' great regret, authoritatively
   put down during his lifetime. Certainly Ephesus had its own traditions
   about the life of Jesus, and, if I may venture to say so, a life of
   Jesus for its own particular use. These traditions dwelt especially in
   the memory of two persons who were looked upon, in those parts, as the
   two highest authorities with regard to Gospel history, namely, one man
   who bore the same name as the Apostle John, and who was called
   Presbeteros Johannes, and a certain Aristion, who knew many of the
   Lord's discourses by heart. At about this time Papias consulted these
   two men as oracles, and carefully noted their traditions, which he
   intended to insert into his great work, The Discourses of the Lord. One
   remarkable feature in the Presbuteros was the opinion which he gave
   regarding St Mark's Gospel. He considered it altogether insufficient,
   and written in complete ignorance of the exact order of the events of
   the life of Jesus. Presbuteros Johannes evidently thought that he knew
   the real facts much better, and, if he really wrote it, his tradition
   must altogether differ from the plan of that of Mark.

   We are inclined to think that the fourth Gospel represents the
   traditions of this Presbuteros and of Aristion, which might go back as
   far as the Apostle John. It seems, moreover, that to prepare the way
   for this pious fraud a preliminary Catholic Epistle, attributed to
   John, was published preliminarily, which was intended to accustom the
   people of Asia to the style which it was intended to make them receive
   as that of the Apostle. In it the attack against the Docetæ--who at
   that time formed the great danger to Christianity in Asia--was opened.
   An ostentatious stress was laid on the value of the Apostle's
   testimony, as he had been an eye-witness of the Gospel facts. The
   author, who is a skilful writer after his own fashion, has very likely
   imitated the style of St John's conversation, and that small work is
   conceived in a grand and lofty spirit, in spite of some Elcesaitic
   peculiarities. Its doctrine is excellent, and it inculcates mutual
   charity, love for mankind, and hatred for a corrupt world; and its
   touching, vehement, and penetrating style is absolutely the same as
   that of the Gospel; and its faults--its prolixity, and dryness--the
   results of interminable discourses full of abstruse metaphysics and
   personal allegations, are far less striking in the Epistle.

   'The style of the pseudo-Johannic writings is something quite by
   itself, no model for which existed before the Presbuteros. It has been
   too much admired; for whilst it is ardent and occasionally even
   sublime, it is somewhat inflated, false, and obscure, and it altogether
   lacks simplicity. The author relates nothing, he merely demonstrates
   dogmatically, and his long account of miracles, and of those
   discussions which turn on misapprehensions, and in which the opponents
   of Jesus are made to play the parts of idiots, are most fatiguing. How
   preferable to all this verbiose pathos is the charming style,
   altogether Hebrew as it is, of the Sermon on the Mount, and that
   clearness of narrative which constitutes the charm of the first
   Evangelists. No need for them to repeat continually that they that saw
   it bear record, and that their record is true; for their sincerity,
   unconscious of any possible objection, has not that feverish thirst for
   those repeated attestations which go to prove that incredulity and
   doubt have already sprung up. One might almost say, from the slightly
   exalted style of this new narrator, that he feared that he might not be
   believed, and that he sought to dupe the religious belief of his
   readers by his own emphatic assertions.

   Whilst insisting strongly on his qualities as an eye-witness, and on
   the value of his own testimony, the author of the fourth Gospel never
   once says I, John, for his name does not appear in the whole course of
   the work, but only figures as its title; but there is not the slightest
   doubt that John is the disciple intended or designated in a hidden
   manner in different passages of the book, nor is there any doubt that
   the forger intended to cause it to be believed that that mysterious
   personage was the author of the book. It was merely one of those small
   literary artifices such as Plato is so fond of affecting, and the
   result is that the recital is often very elaborate, and contains
   investigations, observations, and literary pranks which are totally
   unworthy of an Apostle. Thus John mentions himself without mentioning
   his own name, and praises himself without doing it openly, and he does
   not debar himself from that literary method which consists in showing,
   in a very carefully-managed semi-light, those secrets which one keeps
   to oneself without revealing them to every chance corner. How pleasant
   it is to be guessed at, and to allow others to draw conclusions
   favourable to oneself, to which oneself only gives a half expression.

   The two objects which the author had in view were to prove the divinity
   of Jesus to those who did not believe in Him, but, even more than that,
   to make a new system of Christianity prevail. As miracles were the
   proofs, above all others, of His divine mission, he improves on the
   accounts of the wonders that disfigure the earlier Gospels. It seems on
   the other hand that Cerinthus was one of the manufacturers of these
   strange books. He had become almost like John's spectre, and the
   versatility of his mind now attracted him to, and then repelled him
   from, those ideas which were agitating religious circles at Ephesus, so
   that at the same time he was regarded as the adversary whom the
   Johannine writings were striving to combat, and as the veritable author
   of those writings; and the obscurity that reigns over the Johannine
   question is so dense that it cannot be said that it must be wrong to
   attribute the authorship to him. If it be a fact, it would correspond
   very well to what we know of Cerinthus, who was in the habit of
   covering his thoughts under the cloak of an apostolic name, and it
   would explain the mystery as to what became of that book for nearly
   fifty years, and the vehement opposition which it encountered. The
   ardour with which Epphianius combats this opinion would lead us to
   believe that it is not without foundation, for in those dark days
   everything was possible; and if the Church, when it venerates the
   fourth Gospel as the work of St John, is the dupe of him whom she looks
   upon as one of her most dangerous enemies, it is not, after all, any
   stranger than so many other errors which make up the web of the
   religious history of humanity.

   It is quite certain, however, that the author is at the same time the
   father and the adversary of Gnosticism, the enemy of those who allowed
   the real human nature of Jesus to evaporate in a cloudy Docetism, and
   the accomplice of those who would make him a mere divine abstraction.
   Dogmatic minds are never more severe than they are towards those from
   whom they are divided by a mere shade of difference. That Anti-Christ
   whom the pseudo-John represents as already in existence, that monster
   who is the very negation of Jesus, and whom he cannot distinguish from
   the errors of Docetism, is almost he himself. How often in cursing
   others, does one curse oneself! and thus in the bosom of the Church,
   the personality of Jesus became the object of fierce strife. On the one
   hand there was no checking the torrent which carried away every one to
   the most exaggerated ideas as to the divinity of the founder of
   Christianity, and on the other hand it was of the highest importance to
   uphold the true character of Jesus, and to oppose the tendency which so
   many Christians had towards that sickly idealism which was soon to end
   in Gnosticism. Many spoke of the Eon Christos as of a being that was
   quite distinct from the man called Jesus, to whom it was united for a
   time, and whom it abandoned at the moment of the crucifixion. Cerinthus
   had maintained this, and so did Basilides, and to such heresy a
   tangible Word must be opposed, and this was just what the new Gospel
   did. The Jesus whom it preaches is in some respects more historical
   than the Jesus of the other evangelists, and yet he is only a
   metaphysical first principle, a pure conception of transcendental
   theosophy. This may shock our tastes, but theology has not the same
   requirements as æsthetics, and the conscience of Christianity, after
   trying in vain for a hundred years to settle what right conception it
   should make to itself of Jesus, at last found rest.

   In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
   was God.

   The same was in the beginning with God.

   All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that
   was made.

   In loin was life; and the life was the light of men.

   And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it
   not.

   There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

   The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men
   through him might believe.

   He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.

   That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the
   world.

   He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew
   him not.

   He came unto his own, and his own received him not.

   But as many as received him, to them gave he power to became the sons
   of God, even to them that believe on his name Which were born, not of
   blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
   God.

   And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his
   glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father), full of grace
   and truth.--St John, I. 1-14.

   What follows is not less surprising. We have before us a life of Jesus
   which is very different to that which the writings of Mark, Luke. or
   the pseudo-Matthew have put before us. It is evident that those three
   Gospels, and others of the same sort, were but little known in Asia, or
   at any rate had very little authority there. During his lifetime, John
   no doubt, was in the habit of relating the life of Jesus on a totally
   different plan to that slight Galilean outline which the traditionists
   of Batanea had created, and which served as a model after them. He knew
   that Jerusalem had been one of the chief centres for Jesus' activity,
   and he drew persons and details which the first narrators were
   unacquainted with, or had neglected. As to Jesus' discourses as given
   in the Galilean tradition, the Church at Ephesus, supposing that they
   were known there, allowed them to fall into oblivion. According to the
   spirit of the age, there was no more difficulty in putting discourses
   into Jesus' mouth which were intended to found such and such doctrines,
   than the authors of the Thora and the prophets of old found in making
   God speak according to their own prejudices.

   Thus the fourth Gospel came to be produced, and though it is of no
   value if we wish to know how Jesus spoke, it is superior to the
   synoptic Gospels in the order of facts. The various visits of Jesus to
   Jerusalem, the institution of the eucharist, his anticipated agony, a
   number of circumstances relating to the Passion, the Resurrection and
   his life after he had risen; certain minute details, e. g., concerning
   Cana, the apostle Philip, the brothers of Jesus, the mention of Cleopas
   as a member of his family, are so many features, which assure to the
   pseudo-John an historical superiority over Mark and pseudo-Matthew.
   Many of these details might be drawn from John's own accounts of events
   which had been preserved, whilst others sprang from traditions which
   neither Mark nor he who amplified his narrative under the name of
   Matthew, knew anything about. In several cases in fact, where
   pseudo-John deviates from the arrangement of the synoptic narrative, he
   presents singular features of agreement with Luke, and the Gospel
   according to the Hebrews. Moreover, several features of the fourth
   Gospel are to be found in Justin, and in the pseudo-Clementine romance,
   although neither Justin nor the author of the romance knew the fourth
   Gospel. It is clear, therefore, that, besides the synoptists, there
   existed a collection of traditions, and of ready-made expressions,
   which were, so to speak, scattered about in the atmosphere, which the
   fourth Gospel partially represents to us; and to treat this Gospel as
   an artificial composition with no traditional basis is to mistake its
   character just as seriously as when it is looked upon as a document at
   first hand, and original from beginning to end.

   The discourses which are put into the mouth of Jesus in the fourth
   Gospel are certainly artificial, and without any traditional basis, and
   criticism ought to put them on the same footing as the discourses with
   which Plato honours Socrates. There are two striking omissions in it;
   it does not contain a single parable, nor a single apocalyptic
   discourse about the end of the world, and the appearance of the
   Messiah; and one feels that the hopes of an approaching manifestation
   in the clouds had partly lost their force. According to the fourth
   Gospel, Jesus' real return after he had left the world, would be the
   sending of the Paraclete, his other self, who would comfort his
   disciples for his departure. The author takes refuge in metaphysics,
   because material hopes, already at times appear to him mere chimeras,
   and the same thing seems to have happened to St Paul. The taste for
   abstraction was the reason why then little weight was attached to what
   is regarded as the most really divine in Jesus. Instead of that refined
   feeling of the poetry of the earth which fills the Galilean Gospels, we
   find here nothing but a dry system of metaphysics and dialectics, which
   turn on the ambiguity between the literal and the figurative sense. In
   the fourth Gospel, indeed, Jesus speaks for himself, for he makes use
   of language which no one could be expected to understand, as he uses
   words in a different sense to their general acceptation, and then is
   angry because he is not understood. This false situation produces an
   impression of fatigue in the end, and at last one thinks that the Jews
   were excusable for not comprehending those new mysteries which were
   presented to them in such an obscure fashion.

   These defects are the consequence of the exaggerated attitude which the
   author has given to Jesus, for it is one which naturally excludes
   anything natural. He declares Himself to be the Truth and the Life, and
   that he is God, and that no one can come to the Father but by him. Such
   weighty and solemn assertions could not be made without an air of
   shocking presumption. In the synoptic Gospels, he does not assert that
   he is God, but reveals himself by the charm of his impersonal
   discourses, whereas, in this one, the Deity argues in order that he may
   prove its Divinity. It is as if the rose were to dispute in order to
   prove that it is fragrant. The author, in such a case, cares so little
   for probabilities that at times there is nothing to indicate where the
   discourses of Jesus finish and the dissertations of the narrator begin.
   At other times he reports conversations at which nobody could have been
   present, and one feels that his true object is not to relate words
   which were really spoken, but that above all he wishes to impress the
   mark of authority on some cherished ideas of his own, by putting them
   into the mouth of the Divine Master.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER V.

  THE BEGINNING OF A SYSTEM OF CHRISTIAN
  PHILOSOPHY.

   That religious philosophy which serves as the basis for all those
   exemplications which were so foreign to the mind of Jesus, is by no
   means original. Philo had expounded its essential principles more
   harmoniously and logically. Both Philo and the author of the fourth
   Gospel attach very little importance to the fulfilment of the words of
   the Messiah or to apocalyptic belief. All the imagination of popular
   Judaism is replaced by metaphysics in the structure of which Egyptian
   theology and Greek philosophy had their full share. The idea of
   Incarnate Reason, i.e., of Divine Reason assuming a finite shape, is
   quite Egyptian. From the earliest ages down to the Hermes Trismegistos
   books, Egypt proclaimed a God, living alone in substance, but eternally
   begetting his own likeness, one, and yet twofold at the same time. The
   Sun is that firstborn, proceeding eternally from the Father, that Word
   who made everything that exists, and without whom nothing has been
   made. On the other hand, it had for a long time been the tendency of
   Judaism, in order to escape from its somewhat dry system of theology,
   to create a variety of the Deity by personifying abstract attributes,
   such as Wisdom, the Divine Word, Majesty, the Presence. Already in the
   ancient books of wisdom, in the Proverbs and in Job, Wisdom personified
   plays the part of an assessor to the Divinity. Metaphysics and
   Theology, so severely restrained by the Mosaic law, took their revenge,
   and would soon invade everything.

   The expression dabar, in Chaldean, memara, i.e., "the Word," become
   especially fruitful. Ancient texts made God speak on all solemn
   occasions, which justified such phrases as: "God does everything by His
   word; God created everything by His word." Thus people were led to
   regard "the Word" as a divine minister, as an intermediary by whom God
   works on the outer world. By degrees this intermediary was substituted
   for God in visible manifestations in apparitions, in all relations of
   the Deity with man. That mode of expression had much greater
   consequences amongst the Egyptian Jews who spoke Greek. The word Logos,
   corresponding to the Hebrew dabar, and the Chaldean memara, and having
   the twofold meaning of The Word, and also of Reason, enabled them to
   enter into a whole world of ideas in which they reunited, on the one
   hand, the symbols of Egyptian theology which are mentioned above, and
   on the other, certain Platonic speculations. The Alexandrine Book of
   Wisdom, which is attributed to Solomon, already delights in those
   theories. There the Logos appears as the metationos, the assessor of
   the Deity, and it soon became usual to attribute to the Logos all that
   ancient Jewish philosophy, said of the Divine Wisdom. The Breath of God
   (rouah), which is mentioned at the beginning of Genesis as life giving,
   becomes a sort of Demiurge by the side of dabar.

   Philo combined such forms of expression with his notions of Greek
   philosophy. His Logos is the Divine in the universe--it is an
   exteriorised God; it is the legislator, the revealer, the organ of God
   as regards spiritual man. It is the Spirit of God,--the wisdom of Holy
   Scripture. Philo has no idea of the Messiah, and establishes no
   connection between his Logos and the divine being which was dreamt of
   by his compatriots in Palestine. He never departs from the abstract,
   and for him the Logos is the place of spirits just as space is the
   place of bodies; and he goes so far as to call it "a second God," or
   "the man of God;" that is to say, God, considered as anthropomorphous.
   The end of man is to know the Logos, to contemplate reason; that is to
   say, God and the universe. By that knowledge man finds life, the true
   manna that nourishes.

   Although such ideas were, by their origin, as far as possible, removed
   from Messianic ideas, one can see that a sort of effusion might be
   brought about between them. The possibility of a full incarnation of
   the Logos is quite in accordance with Philo's ideas. It was a generally
   received opinion, that in all the various divine manifestations in
   which God wished to make Himself visible, it was the Logos who assumed
   the human form. These ideas were favoured by numerous passages in the
   most ancient historical books, where "the Angel of Jehovah," Maleak
   Jehovah, indicates the divine appearance which shows itself to men,
   when God, who is ordinarily hidden, reveals Himself to their eyes. This
   Maleak Jehovah frequently does not differ at all from Jehovah himself,
   and it is a habit with translators of a certain period to substitute
   that word for Jehovah, whenever God is supposed to have appeared on
   earth, and thus the Logos came to play the part of an anthropomorphous
   God. It was therefore natural that the appearance of the Messiah should
   he attributed to the Logos, and that Messiah should be considered as
   the incarnate Logos.

   Certainly the author of the book of Daniel had no idea that his Son of
   Man had anything in common with the Divine Wisdom, whom, in his time,
   some Jewish thinkers were already elevating into a personality; but
   with the Christians the two ideas were very easily reconciled. Already,
   in the Apocalypse the triumphant Messiah is called "the Word of God,"
   and in St Paul's later Epistles, Jesus is separated almost altogether
   from his human nature. In the fourth Gospel, the identification of
   Christ and the Word is an accomplished fact, and the national avenger
   of the Jews has totally disappeared under a metaphysical conception;
   henceforth, Jesus is the Son of God, not by virtue of a simple Hebrew
   metaphor, but in a strictly theological sense. The very slight
   reputation in which the writings of Philo were held in Palestine, and
   amongst the popular classes of Jews, must be the only explanation why
   Christianity did not bring about such a necessary evolution till such a
   late period, but this evolution took effect in several directions
   simultaneously, for St Justin has a theory which is very similar to
   that of pseudo-John, and yet he did not take it from the gospel that
   bears his name.

   Side by side with the theory of the Logos and of the Holy Spirit was
   developed that of the Paraclete, who was not kept very distinct from
   the former. In Philo's philosophy, Paraclete was an epithet of, or an
   equivalent for, Logos. For Christians he became a sort of substitute
   for Jesus, proceeding from the Father as he did, and who was to console
   the disciples for the absence of their Master when he should have left
   them. That Spirit of Truth, which the world does not know, is to
   inspire the Church throughout all time. Such a manner of raising
   abstract ideas into personalities was quite in keeping with the fashion
   of the time. Allius Aristides, who was a contemporary and a compatriot
   of the author of the fourth Gospel, expresses himself in his sermon on
   Athene, in a manner which is hardly distinguishable from that of the
   Christians:--

   She dwells in her father, closely united to his essence; she breathes
   in him, and is his companion and counsellor. She sits at his right hand
   and is the supreme minister of his orders, and their wills are so
   conjoined that to her may be attributed all her father's acts.

   It is well known that Isis played the same part with regard to Ammon.

   The profound revolution which each idea must introduce into the manner
   of looking at the life of Jesus is self-evident. For the future he was
   to have no more human qualities, and would know neither temptation nor
   weakness. In him everything existed before it happened; everything was
   settled a priori, nothing happened naturally; He knew his life in
   advance, and did not pray to God to save him from that fatal hour. One
   fails to see why he lived this life which was forced upon him, gone
   through merely as a part, without any sincerity about it. But, however
   revolting such a change may be to our feelings, it was necessary. The
   Christian conscience desired more and more that everything in the life
   of their founder should be supernatural. Marcion, without knowing the
   writings of pseudo-John, did exactly the same thing as he did, for he
   manipulated St Luke's Gospel till he had got rid of every trace of
   Judaism or reality from it. Gnosticism was to go even further, for that
   school Jesus was to become a mere entity, an won, an eternal
   intelligence that had never lived. Valentine and Basilides really only
   go a step further along the road on which the author of the fourth
   Gospel had gone. They all use the same specific terms: Father (in the
   metaphysical sense), Word, Arche, Life, Truth, Grace, Paraclete,
   Fulness, Only Son. The origins of Gnosticism and that of the fourth
   Gospel meet in the far distance; they both start from the same point in
   the horizon without our being able, on account of the distance, to
   point out more precisely the circumstances which attended their common
   appearance, for in such a thick atmosphere the visual rays of criticism
   are apt to become confused.

   Naturally, the conditions under which a book became known, were so
   different then to what they are now, that we must not be surprised at
   singularities which would be inexplicable in these days. Nothing is
   more deceiving than to imagine to ourselves writings of that date, as a
   printed book, offered to everybody's reading, with newspapers to review
   the new work, favourably or otherwise. All the Gospels were written for
   restricted circles of readers, and no edition aspired to being the last
   and final one. It was a species of literature which could be practised
   at will, like the legends of Hasan and Hossein amongst the modern
   Persians. The fourth Gospel was a composition of the same order. In the
   first instance the author may have written it for himself and a few
   friends as his conception of the life of Jesus. There is no doubt that
   he communicated his work with great reserve to those who knew that such
   a work could not have originated with John, and up till the end of the
   second century the work encountered nothing but indifference and
   opposition. During that time the Gospels which are called synoptic give
   the outlines of the life of Jesus, and the tone of the discourses
   attributed to him is that of Matthew and Luke. Towards the end of the
   second century, however, the idea of a fourth Gospel was accepted, and
   pious legends and mystic reasons were discovered to support this
   tetrad.

   To sum up, it seems most probable that, several years after the Apostle
   John's death, somebody or other determined to write in his name, and to
   his honour a gospel that should represent, or should be supposed to
   represent, his traditions. The definite success of the book was just as
   brilliant as its beginning had been obscure. This fourth Gospel, the
   last to appear, which had been manipulated in so many respects, where
   Philonian tirades were substituted for the actual discourses of Jesus,
   took more than half a century to assume its place, but then it
   triumphed all along the line. It was very convenient for the
   theological and apologetic requirements of the time, to have a sort of
   metaphysical drama which could escape from the objections which a
   Celsus was already preparing, instead of a small, very human history of
   a Jewish prophet in Galilee. The Divine Word in the bosom of God; the
   Word creating all things; the Word made flesh, dwelling amongst men, so
   that certain privileged mortals had the happiness of seeing and even
   touching him! flaying regard to the especial turn of the Greek
   intellect, which seized upon Christianity at a very early date, this
   seemed most sublime, and a whole system of theology after the manner of
   Plotinus might be extracted from it. The freshness of the Galilean
   idyl, illuminated by the sun of the kingdom of God, was but little to
   the taste of true Greeks. They naturally preferred a gospel in which
   they were transported to abstract dreams, and from which the belief in
   the approaching end of the world was banished. In the present instance,
   there was no mention of a material appearance in the clouds, no more
   parables, no persons possessed of devils, nothing about the kingdom of
   God or of the Jewish Messiah, no millennium, not even any more Judaism.
   It was forgotten and condemned; the Jews are held up to reprobation as
   enemies of the truth, for they would not receive the Word which came
   amongst them. The author will know nothing of them, except that they
   killed Jesus; just as amongst the modern Persian Shiies, the name of
   Arab is synonymous with an impious man and a miscreant, as Arabs slew
   the holiest amongst the founders of Islam.

   The literary faults of the fourth Gospel thus make up its general
   character. It frees Christianity from a number of its original chains,
   and gives it free scope for that which is essential for any innovation,
   i.e., ingratitude towards what has preceded it. The author seriously
   believes that no prophet ever came out of Galilee. Christian
   metaphysics already sketched out in the Epistle to the Colossians, and
   in that which is called the Epistle to the Ephesians, are fully
   developed in the fourth Gospel. It would be dear to all those who,
   humiliated at the fact that Jesus was a Jew, would neither hear of
   Judeo-Christianity, nor of the millennium, and who would have liked to
   have burnt the Apocalypse. Thus the fourth Gospel takes its stand, in
   the great work of separating Judaism from Christianity, far above St
   Paul. He wished that Jesus had abrogated the Law, but he never denies
   that he lived under the Law. His disciple St Luke, by a certain devout
   improvement, presents Jesus to our view as fulfilling all the precepts
   of the Law. St Paul thought that the prerogatives of the Jews were
   still very great; whilst, on the other hand, the fourth Gospel shows a
   great antipathy to the Jews, both as a nation and as a religious
   society. Jesus, speaking to them, says: "Your law," and there is no
   question now of justification by faith or by works, for the problem has
   gone far beyond the bounds of those simple terms. The knowledge of the
   truth and science have now become essential, and men are to be saved by
   their gnosis, their initiation into certain secret mysteries, so that
   Christianity has become a sort of hidden philosophy which certainly
   neither Paul nor Peter ever dreamt of.

   The future belonged altogether to transcendental idealism. This Gospel,
   attributed to the well-beloved disciple, which transports us at first
   into the pure atmosphere of the Spirit and of Love, which substitutes
   the love of truth for everything else, and proclaims the sway of Mount
   Gerizim and of Jerusalem equally at an end, was bound in time to become
   the fundamental Gospel of Christianity. No doubt it will be said that
   this was a great historical and literary error; but it was also a
   theological and political necessity of the first order. The idealist is
   always the worst revolutionary, and a definite rupture with Judaism was
   the indispensable condition of the foundation of a new religious
   system. The only chance of success that Christianity had was, that it
   should be a perfectly pure form of worship, independent of any material
   creed. "God is a spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in
   spirit and in truth." If Jesus is understood in such a manner, he is no
   longer a prophet, and Christianity under that aspect is no longer a
   sect of Judaism; it becomes the Religion of Reason, and thus it came
   about that the fourth Gospel imparted consistency and stability to the
   Apostolic work. Whoever its author was, he was the cleverest of all the
   apologists. He was, successful in bringing Christianity out of its old
   beaten tracks that had got too narrow for it; which all the Christian
   orators of our time have attempted in vain. He betrayed Jesus in order
   to save him, just as those preachers do who put on a pretence of
   liberalism, and even of socialism, to win over those who may possibly
   be seduced by those words through a pious fraud. The author of the
   fourth Gospel has withdrawn Jesus from the Jewish reality in which he
   was lost, and has launched him boldly into metaphysics. That purely
   spiritual philosophical manner of understanding Christianity, to the
   detriment of facts, and to the profit of the mind, found in this
   singular book an example to encourage, and authority to justify it.

   Only those who are not well acquainted with religious history will be
   surprised to see such a part filled by an anonymous writer in the
   history of Christianity. The editors of the Thora, most of the
   Psalmists, the author of the book of Daniel, the first editor of the
   Hebrew Gospel, the author of the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, which
   are attributed to St Paul, gave works of the greatest importance to the
   world, and yet they are anonymous. If it is admitted that the Gospel
   and the Epistle which is so closely connected with it are the work of
   Presbuteros Johannes, it might be thought that it would be all the less
   difficult to accept those writings as the works of St John, since the
   forger's name was John, and he appears often to have been confounded
   with the apostle. He was merely called Presbuteros, and after the
   falsely so-called Epistle of John, there are two short letters by some
   one who seems to call himself "The Elder." The style, the thoughts, and
   the doctrine are very nearly the same as in the Gospel and Epistle said
   to be written by St John. We believe that Presbuteros was also the
   author of them; but this time he did not wish to pass off his slight
   works as those of John; and, like the letters to Timothy and Titus,
   they ought rather to be called specimens of the pastoral style than
   Epistles. Thus, in the first, the name of the person for whom it is
   intended is left a blank, and is filled up with the formula: "To the
   Elect Lady;" In the second, the person to whom it is written is given
   as Gaius, which was often the equivalent for our So and so. In these
   short letters some resemblance to the pseudo-Johannine Epistle, and to
   those of St Paul, has been discovered, and it is probable that our
   Presbuteros has sometimes concealed his identity behind these anonymous
   presbuteroi who had seen the Apostles, and whose traditions Irenæus so
   mysteriously reproduces.

   At the end of the third century two tombs were mentioned at Ephesus,
   which were held in the highest veneration, and to both of which the
   name of John was given. In the fourth century when, from the passage in
   Papias, the idea of the distinct existence of Presbuteros Johannes was
   being firmly established, one of these tombs was allotted to the
   Apostle and the other to the Presbuteros. We shall never know the exact
   truth of those extraordinary combinations in which history, legends,
   fable, and, up to a certain point, pious fraud were all united in
   proportions which we cannot separate now. An Ephesian called
   Polycrates, who was destined to become, one day, with his whole family,
   the centre of Asiatic Christianity, was converted A.D. 131, and this
   Polycrates fully admitted the pseudo-Johannine tradition, and cited it
   most confidently in his old age.

   Everybody allows that the last chapter of the fourth Epistle is an
   appendix which was added after the work had been written, though
   possibly it was added by the author himself; in any case, the source
   from which it was drawn is the same. It was desirable to complete all
   that had to do with the relations between Peter, and John by some
   touching feature, and the author shows that he is a great partisan of
   Peter, and does his best to pay homage to him in his rank as supreme
   pastor which was attributed to him in various degrees. He also makes a
   point of explaining the views that prevailed about the long life of
   John, and of showing how the aged Apostle might die without the edifice
   of the promises of Jesus and of Christian hopes falling into ruins at
   his decease. Men began to fear that the unequalled privilege of those
   who had seen the Word during his life on earth might discourage future
   generations, and already that profound saying, which was attributed to
   Jesus, "Blessed are those that have not seen and yet have believed,"
   was incorporated into a Gospel anecdote.

   With the Johannine writings begins the era of Christian philosophy and
   of abstract speculation, which had hitherto found but little room in
   the world, whilst at the same time dogmatic intolerance increased most
   lamentably. The more fact of saluting a heretic was represented as an
   act of communion with him. How far we are from Jesus here! He wished us
   to salute everybody, even at the risk of saluting the unworthy, in
   imitation of our Heavenly Father, who looks on all with a paternal eye,
   but yet how it was to be obligatory to ascertain the opinions of anyone
   before saluting him. The essence of Christianity was transferred to the
   realm of dogma; gnosis was every thing, and salvation consisted in
   knowing Jesus and knowing him in a certain manner. Theology, that is to
   say, a rather unwholesome application of the intellect, was the result
   of the fourth Gospel, and the Byzantine world, from the beginning of
   the fourth century, wore itself out by this study, which would have had
   just as fatal consequences for the West if the demon of subtility had
   not found firmer muscles and less volatile brains to deal with.

   In this matter Christianity decidedly turned its back on Judaism; and
   Gnosticism, which is the highest expression of speculative
   Christianity, had some reason for pushing its hatred of Judaism to the
   highest point. The latter made religion consist in outward observances,
   and left everything that bordered on philosophic dogma as a matter of
   private opinion, and the Cabala and Pantheism would naturally find an
   easy development by the side of observances which were carried to the
   minutest details. A Jewish friend of mine, as liberal a thinker as can
   be found, and at the same time a scrupulous Talmudist, said to me, "One
   makes up for the other. Close observances are a compensation for
   wideness of ideas, and our poor humanity has not enough intelligence to
   support liberty in two directions at the same time. You Christians did
   wrong in insisting that the bonds of communion should consist in
   certain beliefs, for a man does what he pleases, but he believes what
   he can, and I would rather go without pork all my life, than be obliged
   to believe in the dogmas of the Trinity and of the Incarnation."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI.

  PROGRESS OF THE EPISCOPATE.

   The progress of the Church in discipline and in her hierarchy was in
   proportion to her progress in dogma. Like every living body she
   developed an astonishing instinctive cleverness in completing all that
   was still wanting for her solid foundation and her perfect equilibrium.
   As the hopes for the end of the world, and of the reappearance of
   Messiah become fainter, Christianity obeyed two natural tendencies; the
   one to reconcile itself with the empire as well as it could, and then
   to organise itself so that it might become lasting. The first church at
   Jerusalem, the first churches of St Paul, were not established with any
   view to their endurance, for they were only so many assemblies of the
   saints at the end of the world, who were preparing themselves by prayer
   and divine rapture for the coming of God. The Church felt that now the
   time had come for her to be an abiding city and a real society.

   The strangest movement that ever took place in a democracy took place
   within the Church. The ecclesia, the voluntary reunion of persons
   meeting on a footing of equality amongst themselves, is the most
   democratic thing that can be imagined; but the ecclesia, the club has
   that fatal defect which causes every association of that kind to fall
   to pieces, and that defect is anarchy, the ease with which schisms
   arise. But more fatal still are the contentions for pre-eminence in the
   midst of small confraternities which have been founded on an altogether
   spontaneous vocation. That seeking after the highest place was the
   principal evil which affected the Christian churches, and which caused
   the greatest trouble to the simple and faithful members of the flock.
   It was thought that this danger might be prevented by supposing that
   Jesus, in a similar case, could have taken a child and said to the
   contending parties, "This is the greatest." On different occasions the
   Master had, as was said, opposed the ecclesiastical primacy, brotherly
   as it was, to that of the depositories of worldly authority who were
   given to assume a masterful manner. But that was not enough, and the
   association of Christians would soon be menaced by a great danger, if
   some salutary institution did not rescue it from its own internal
   abuses.

   Every ecclesia presupposes a small hierarchy of its own,--what we call
   in these days a committee, a president, assessors, and a small body of
   assistants. Democratic clubs take care that these functions shall be as
   limited as possible both as to time and privileges, but there is
   something precarious in that, and the result has been that no club has
   outlived the circumstances which called it into existence. The
   synagogues had a much longer continuance, although the personnel was
   never a clerical body. The reason for that is, the subordinate position
   which Judiasm held for centuries, so that the pressure from without
   counterbalanced the unwholesome effects of internal divisions. If the
   Christian Church had suffered from the same want of discretion, she
   would no doubt have missed her destinies; and if ecclesiastical powers
   had continued to be regarded as emanating from the Church itself, she
   would have lost all her hieretic and theocratic character; but, on the
   other hand, it was fated that the clergy should monpolise the Christian
   Church, and should substitute itself in her place. Speaking in her
   name, representing itself in everything as her sole authorised agents,
   that clergy would constitute her strength, but would at the same time
   be her canker-worm, and the chief cause of her future decline.

   History has no example of a more wonderful transformation. What
   happened in the Christian Church is just what would happen in a club,
   if the members were to abdicate all their powers into the hands of the
   committee, and the committee to abdicate theirs into the hands of the
   president, so that neither those who were present, nor the seniors in
   office, would have any deliberative voice; no influence, no control
   over the management of the funds, so that the president might be able
   to say "I, alone, am the club." The presbutoroi (the elders), the
   episcopi (the officers, overseers), very soon became the only
   representatives of the church, and very shortly after another and even
   more important revolution took place. Amongst the presbutoroi and the
   episcopi there was one, who, because he habitually took the principal
   seat, became presbuteros, or episcopos par excellence. The form of
   worship contributed very powerfully towards this. Only one priest could
   be celebrant of the eucharist at the same time, and he obtained an
   extreme importance; and that episcopos became, with surprising
   rapidity, the chief amongst the presbyterate and those of the whole
   church. His seat, placed apart from the others, assumed the shape of an
   arm-chair, and became the seat of honour--the sign of the Primacy, and
   from that time such church had only one chief presbyter, who called
   himself episcopos, to the exclusion of all the rest. By his side were
   to be seen a number of deacons, widows, a council of presbutoroi, but
   the great step had been taken; the bishop had become the sole successor
   of the apostles, the professor of the true religion was altogether
   thrust aside. The apostolic authority, which was supposed to be
   transmitted by the imposition of hands, had altogether destroyed the
   authority of the community, and then, the bishops of the different
   churches coming to an understanding amongst themselves, will, as we
   shall see, constitute the universal church into a sort of oligarchy,
   which will hold synods, censure its own members, decide questions of
   faith, and, in herself, constitute a real sovereign power.

   Within a hundred years the change was almost accomplished. When
   Hegesippus, during the second half of the second century, travelled
   throughout the whole of Christendom, he remarked nothing but the
   bishops; everything for him resolves itself into a question of
   canonical succession, and the living sentiment of the churches exists
   no longer. We shall show that that revolution was not accomplished
   without protest, and that the author of the Pastor, for example, still
   tried, in opposition to the growing influence of the bishops to
   maintain the equal authority of the presbutoroi. But aristocratic
   tendency carried the day; on the one side were the shepherds, on the
   other, the flocks. The primitive equality existed no longer, and,
   henceforth the Church was to be nothing but an instrument in the hands
   of those who directed her; and they held their authority, not from the
   community in general, but from a spiritual heredity from a pretended
   transmission which went back in a continuous line to the apostles
   themselves. It will be seen at once that the representative system
   could not even in the slightest degree become the system of the
   Christian Church.

   In one sense it may be said that this was a falling off, a diminution
   of that spontaneity which had hitherto been such a creative power. It
   was evident that ecclesiastical forms were about to absorb and to
   destroy the work of Jesus, and that all free manifestations of
   Christian life would soon be stopped. Under episcopal censorship, the
   glossolalia, prophecy, the creation of legends, and the production of
   new sacred books, would be withered-up faculties, and the Christian
   graces would be reduced to official sacraments. In another sense,
   however, such a transformation was an essential condition of the
   strength of Christianity. In the first place, the concentration of
   their forces became necessary, as soon as the churches became at all
   numerous, for relations between these small religious societies would
   have been quite impossible, unless they had an accredited
   representative who was entitled to act for them. It is, moreover, an
   incontestable fact that, without episcopacy, the churches which were
   momentarily drawn together by the recollections of Jesus would have
   been dispersed again. The divergencies of doctrine, the different turns
   of thought, and, above all, rivalries and unsatisfied self-love, would
   have had a vast influence on disunion and dismemberment, and, at the
   end of three or four centuries, Christianity would have come to an end
   like the worship of Nithras, or, like so many sects, have ended, being
   unable to withstand the force of time. Democracy is at times eminently
   creative, but only on the conditions that conservative and aristocratic
   institutions spring from it, which prevent the revolutionary fever to
   be prolonged indefinitely.

   That is the real miracle of infant Christianity. It produced order, a
   hierarchy, authority, obedience from the ready subjection of men's
   wits; it organised the crowd and disciplined anarchy, and it was the
   spirit of Jesus with which his disciples were so deeply imbued, that
   spirit of meekness, of self-denial, of forgetfulness of the present,
   the pursuit of spiritual joys which destroys ambition, that preference
   for a childlike mind, these words of Jesus, "Let him who would be first
   among you become as he that serveth," that worked this miracle. The
   impression which the apostles left behind them also did its share. They
   and their immediate vicars had an uncontested power over all the
   churches, and as episcopacy was supposed to have inherited apostolic
   powers, the apostles governed even after their death. The idea that the
   chief officer of the Church holds his mandate from the members of that
   Church who have appointed does not appear once in the literature of
   that time, and thus the Church escaped, by the supernatural origin of
   her power, from anything that is defective in delegated authority.
   Legislative and executive authority can come from the majority, but the
   sacraments and the dispensations of divine grace have nothing to do
   with universal suffrage, for such privileges come only from heaven, or,
   according to the Christian formularies, from Jesus Christ, who is
   himself the source of all grace and of all good.

   Properly speaking, the bishops had never been nominated by the whole
   community. It was quite sufficient for the spontaneous enthusiasm of
   the first churches that he should be designated by the Holy Ghost, that
   is to say, that electoral means should be employed which extreme
   simplicity alone could excuse. After the apostolic age, and when it
   became necessary that that sort of divine right with which the apostles
   and their immediate disciples were supposed to be invested, should be
   supplemented by some ecclesiastical decision, the elders chose their
   president from among themselves, and submitted his name to popular
   approval. As this choice was never made without the people's opinion
   having been consulted in the first instance, this approval, or rather
   the vote by raising the hand, was nothing more than a mere formality,
   but it was enough to preserve the recollection of the gospel ideal,
   according to which the spirit of Jesus essentially dwelt in the
   community, The election of deacons was also of a double nature, for
   they were nominated by the bishop, but they had to be approved by the
   community before the choice could be valid. It is a general law of the
   Church that the inferior never nominates his superior, and this is one
   of the reasons which still gives to the Church, in spite of the totally
   different tendency of modern democracy, such a great power of reaction.

   In the churches of St Paul this movement towards a hierarchy and an
   episcopate was particularly felt. The Jewish Christian churches, which
   had less life in them, remained synagogues, and did not land so
   immediately in clericalism, and thus, by writings attributed to St
   Paul, arguments for the doctrine which it was sought to inculcate were
   created. There was no controverting an epistle of St Paul, and several
   passages of the authentic epistles of that apostle already taught the
   doctrine of a hierarchy and of the authority of the elders. For the
   sake of even more decisive arguments, three short epistles were forged,
   which were supposed to have been written by Paul to his disciples
   Timothy and Titus. The author of these apocryphal epistles had not got
   the Acts of the Apostles, and he only knew the apostolical journeys of
   St Paul vaguely and not in detail. As very few people had any more
   precise notions about them, he was not gravely compromised, and,
   besides, at that period, there was such a lack of critical feeling,
   that it did not strike any one that texts must necessarily agree. Some
   passages in those three epistles are also so beautiful, that the
   question might be asked, whether the forger had not some authentic
   letters of St Paul in his possession which he embodied in his
   apocryphal compositions?

   These three short works, evidently the production of the same pen, and
   written most likely at Rome, are a sort of treatise on ecclesiastical
   duties, a first attempt at false decretals, a code for the use of
   churchmen. Episcopacy is a grand thing, and the bishop is a sort of
   model of perfection, set up before his subordinates. He must,
   therefore, be irreprehensible in the eyes of the faithful and of
   others; he must be sober, chaste, amiable, kind, just, not proud, given
   to hospitality, moderate, inoffensive, free from avarice, and earning
   his livelihood honestly. He may drink a little wine for his health's
   sake, but he must not marry more than once. His family must be grave
   like himself, and his sons submissive, respectful and free from any
   suspicion of dissolute morals. If anyone cannot rule his own house, how
   can he take care of the Church of God? Orthodox above everything;
   attached to the true faith, the sworn enemy of error, and he is to
   preach and to teach. For such functions neither a novice must be taken,
   lest such a rapid elevation should make him be lifted up with pride,
   nor a man capable of a sudden attack of rage, nor anyone exercising a
   calling that is looked down upon, for even unbelievers ought to respect
   a bishop, and not have anything to say against him.

   The deacons must be as perfect as the bishops; serious, not
   double-tongued, drinking little wine, not given to filthy lucre,
   holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. So must their
   wives be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things. They
   must be husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own
   houses well, and as a trial is necessary for such difficult functions,
   no one is to be raised to them till after a kind of noviciate.

   Widows were an order in the Church, and their first duty was to perform
   their household duties, if they had any to fulfil. They who were widows
   indeed, and desolate, ought to trust in God, and continue in
   supplications and prayers night and day, but such as live in pleasure
   are dead whilst they live. These interesting but feeble persons were
   subject to a certain rule; they had a female superior, and every Church
   had side by side with its deacon also its widow, whose duty it was to
   watch over the younger widows, and to exercise a sort of female
   diaconate. The author of the false epistles to Timothy and Titus wishes
   that the widow thus chosen should not be less than sixty years of age,
   having been the wife of one man, well reported of for good works, if
   she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she have
   washed the saints' feet. But he instructs Timothy to refuse the younger
   widows, for they will wax wanton against Christ and marry, and withal
   they learn to be idle, wandering about front house to house, and not
   only idle, but tattlers also, and busybodies, speaking things that they
   ought not. "I will therefore that the younger widows marry, bear
   children, guide the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak
   reproachfully. For some are already turned aside from Satan." (1 Tim.
   v. passim.) Widows who are without means are to be relieved by the
   Church, whereas those who have relations are to be kept at their
   expense.

   From all this may be seen what a complete society the church already
   was. Every class had its own particular functions in it, and
   represented a member of the social body; all had their duties, were it
   only slaves, the power of the precepts of Jesus was to be admired by
   their virtuous life. As examples of this, slaves were particularly
   relied upon, and they are reminded that none can honour the new
   doctrine mere than they. If their master were a heathen, they were to
   be counted worthy of all honour, that the name of God and His doctrine
   might not be blasphemed; and if they had believing masters, they were
   not to be despised because they were brethren, but they were to be
   served because they were faithful and beloved, partakers of the
   benefit. Of course there was no word of emancipation. The aged men were
   to be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith; the aged women, in
   behaviour such as becometh holiness, not false accusers, not given to
   much wine, teachers of good things, for they should be like catechists
   and teach the young women to be sober and love their husbands and their
   children; to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to
   their own husbands, that the word of God might not be blasphemed. The
   young men were to he exhorted to be sober minded.

   The married women's part is humble indeed, but still a beautiful one.

   In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel,
   with shame-facedness and sobriety, not with plaited hair, or gold or
   pearls or costly array; but (which becometh women professing godliness)
   with good works. Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.
   But I suffer not a woman to teach nor to usurp authority over the man,
   but to be in silence. For Adam was first formed, then Eve, and Adam was
   not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression.
   Nevertheless she shall be saved in childbearing, if she continue in
   faith and charity and holiness with sobriety." (1 Tim. ii. 9-15.)

   All should be submissive, as subjects, obedient, gentle, inoffensive,
   enemies to revolution, interested in the preservation of public peace,
   which alone would allow them to lead their usual holy life. They need
   not be surprised if they were persecuted, that was the natural lot of
   Christians. They ought to be the very opposite to the heathen. A man
   who only follows the dictates of nature is the slave of his desires,
   carried away by sensuality, wicked, envious, hating and hateful. The
   transformation which makes the natural man one of the elect is not the
   fruit of his own merits, but of the compassion of Jesus Christ, and of
   the efficacy of his sacraments.

   This short Epistle, which is already quite Catholic, is a true type of
   the ecclesiastical spirit, and for seventeen centuries has been the
   manual of the clergy, the gospel of seminaries, the rule of that
   spiritual policy as it is carried out by the Church. Piety, which is
   the soul of the priest, the secret of his resignation and of his
   authority, is the foundation of this spirit. But the pious priest has
   his rights; those of reprimanding and correcting--respectfully, indeed,
   in the case of old people, but always with firmness. "Preach the word,
   be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with
   all long-suffering and doctrine" (2 Tim. iv. 2). Simple in his life,
   asking only for food and raiment, the "Man of God," as our author calls
   him, was sure to be an austere man, often an imperious ruler. "Rebuke
   not an elder, but intreat him as a father, and the younger men as
   brethren; the elder women as mothers, the younger as sisters, in all
   purity." After that one feels that the Christian society cannot be a
   free one, for every individual member of it will be watched and
   censured, and will not have the right to say to his fellow citizen,
   "What business is my belief or my conduct to you? I am doing you no
   wrong." The believer will say that in believing differently to what he
   does, he is being wronged, and that he has the right of protesting.
   Against such an idea, so totally opposed to liberty, princes and laymen
   must rightly soon revolt. "A man that is an heretic after a first and
   second admonition reject." (Titus iii. 10.) Nothing could be less in
   keeping with the maxims of a man of liberal education. The heretic has
   his opinions as well as you, and he may be right, and politeness
   certainly requires you to pretend to believe so in his presence. The
   world is no monastery, and the advantages, which, as is alleged, are
   obtained by censure and accusation, bring more evils in their train
   than they hoped to avoid.

   In the Epistles to Timothy and Titus orthodoxy has made as much
   progress as episcopacy. Already there is a rule of faith, a Catholic
   centre in existence, which excludes everything that does not receive
   its life from the parent stem as dead branches. The heretic is a guilty
   man, a dangerous being, who must be avoided. He has every vice, is
   capable of every crime, and acts which are even laudable in the
   Christian priest, such as a wish to direct women on certain matters of
   internal government, are acts of usurpation on his part. The heretics
   of whom the author is thinking seem to be the Essenes, the Elkasaites,
   Jewish Christian sectaries, who occupied their minds with genealogies
   of æons, who insisted on certain acts of abstinence and on a rigorous
   distinction between things pure and impure, who condemned marriage, and
   who yet were great seducers of women, whom they overcame by holding out
   to them the bait of an easy way of expiating their sins, whilst at the
   same time they might procure sensual pleasure for themselves. One feels
   that this is approaching very near to Gnosticism and Montanism, and the
   proposition, that the resurrection was already an accomplished fact
   reminds us of Marcion. The expressions concerning Christ's Divinity
   gain in vigour, though still surrounded by some difficulties. A
   wonderful amount of good practical sense rules everything, however. The
   ardent pietist who composed these Epistles, does not for a moment lose
   himself in the dangerous paths of quietism. He repeats almost ad
   nauseam that the woman has no right to devote herself to the spiritual
   life, except when she has no family duties to fulfil; that her
   principal duty is to bear and bring up children, and that it is a
   mistake to pretend to serve the Church if everything is not well
   ordered at home. Besides that, the piety which our author preaches is
   one of an altogether spiritual kind, and is one of feeling in which
   bodily exercise (1 Tim. iv. 8) and abstinence profit little. St Paul's
   influence is felt, a sort of mystic sobriety, and, amidst the strangest
   aberrations of faith in a supernatural direction, these writings
   contain a large amount of what is upright and sincere.

   The composition of the Epistles to Timothy and Titus most likely
   coincided with what may be called the publication of St Paul's
   Epistles. Up till that time those letters had been scattered, and each
   church had kept those which had been addressed to them, whilst several
   had been lost. At about the period of which we are now speaking they
   were collected, and the three short epistles, which were looked upon as
   a necessary complement of St Paul's writings, were embodied with them.
   They were most likely published at Rome, and the order which the first
   editor adopted has always been preserved. They were divided into two
   categories, Epistles to churches and to individuals, and in each of
   these categories the epistles were arranged according to stichometry,
   that is, according to the number of lines in the manuscript. Certain
   copies soon contained the Epistle to the Hebrews, and its very place at
   the end of the volume, out of all order as regards its length, ought to
   suffice to prove that it was incorporated into St Paul's Epistles at
   some later period.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VII.

  FORGED APOSTOLICAL WRITINGS.--THE CHRISTIAN BIBLE.

   Meanwhile, however, the world would persist in not coming to an end,
   and it required all that inexhaustible measure of patience, self-denial
   and gentleness which formed the basis of the character of every
   Christian, when they saw how slowly the prophecies of' Jesus were being
   accomplished. The years went by, and the vast Northern glorious light
   in the centre of which, it was believed, the Son of Man would appear
   did not yet begin to dawn in the clouds. Men grew weary of seeking for
   the cause of this delay, and whilst some grew discouraged, others
   murmured. St Luke, in his Gospel, announced that he would avenge his
   Elect speedily, that the long-suffering of God would come to an end,
   and that, by praying day and night under their persecution, the elect
   would obtain justice like the importunate widow did over the unjust
   judge. Nevertheless, they began to be tired of waiting. That generation
   which was not to have passed away before the appearance of Christ in
   His Glory must all have been dead. More than fifty years had passed
   since those events had taken place, which were only to precede the
   accomplishment of the prophecies of Jesus by a very little. All the
   towns in Judea had heard Christian preachers, and malicious men began
   to make this the occasion of mocking. The reply of the faithful was
   that the first rule of the true believer was not to calculate dates.
   "He will come like a thief in the night," said the wise; "The appearing
   of our Lord Jesus Christ, which in his own times he shall show," says
   the author of the Epistle to Timothy; and, meanwhile, that good and
   practical pastor laid down rules which, admitting the approaching end
   of the world, did not contain much sense, and men aspired to escape
   from that provisional state in which those who believed in the hourly
   appearance of the Messiah would always have remained enthralled.

   Then it was that a pious writer, in order to make these doubts cease,
   had the idea of disseminating amongst the faithful an epistle that was
   attributed to Peter. The Churches of St Paul had just collected their
   master's works, and made important additions to them. It appears that a
   Christian of Rome, who belonged to that group which wished to reconcile
   St Peter and St Paul at any price, wished to enlarge the very slight
   literary legacy which the Galilean apostle had left behind him. Already
   there was one epistle which bore the name of the chief of the apostles,
   and by taking it for a foundation, and embodying in it phrases borrowed
   from all sides, there resulted a "Second Epistle of Peter" which, it
   was hoped, would circulate on the same footing as the former.

   Nothing was neglected in the composition of the second epistle to make
   it coextensive in authority with the first. Whilst composing this
   little work, the author certainly had before him the short letter of
   the Apostle Jude, and, no doubt, supposing that it was very little
   known, he did not scruple to incorporate it almost wholly into his own
   writing. He was penetrated by the spirit of St Paul's Epistles, of
   which he possessed the complete edition; and he also made use of the
   Apocalypse of Esdras or of Baruch. He even attributed to Peter
   expressions and direct allusions to gospel facts, and to an allegation
   in St Paul's Epistles, which certainly never found place in anything
   that Cyphus dictated. The pious forger's object was to reassure the
   faithful about the long delay of Messiah's second coming, to show that
   Peter and Paul were agreed on this fundamental mystery of the Christian
   faith, and to combat the errors of Gnosticism. In several churches his
   Epistle was favourably received, but protests were also raised against
   it, which the orthodox canon of Scripture did not put an end to for a
   long time.

   The teaching of the Epistle, however, is quite worthy of the apostolic
   age, by its purity and loftiness of thought. The Elect become
   participators of the divine nature because they renounce the
   corruptions of the world. Patience, sobriety, piety, paternal love,
   horror of heresy, to wait, to be always waiting and expecting, is the
   whole Christian life (2 Peter iii. 1, et seq.).

   With the Second Epistle of Peter ended, about a hundred years after the
   death of Jesus, the cycle of writings, which were called, later on, the
   New Testament, in contradiction to the Old. This second Bible, which
   was inspired by Jesus, although there is not a single line of his in
   it, was far from admitting any settled canon; many small works, all
   more or less pseudo-epigraphs, were admitted by some and discarded by
   others. The new writings were, as yet, very little circulated, and very
   unequally read, and the list was not looked upon as final; and we shall
   see that other works, such as the Pastor of Hermas, take their place by
   the side of writings which were already sacred, almost on a footing of
   equality. Yet the idea of a new revelation was already fully accepted.
   In the so-called "Second Epistle of St Peter," St Paul's Epistles are
   ranked amongst the Scriptures, and this was not the first time that
   such an expression had been used. Christianity had thus its sacred
   book, an admirable collection, which would be sure to make its fortune
   in those far ages when the immediate recollection of its origin was
   lost, and no religions were worth anything except by their written
   texts.

   Of course the Jewish Bible maintained all its authority, and continued
   to be looked upon as the direct revelation of God. That ancient Canon
   and the apocryphal writings that had been appended to it (such as the
   Book of Enoch, the Assumption of Moses, etc., etc.) were looked upon,
   above all, as the immediate revelation of God. It was not touched;
   whereas, with regard to the new Scriptures, neither additions nor
   suppressions, nor arbitrary manipulations were forbidden. Nobody had
   any scruple in attributing to the Apostles and Christ himself such
   words and writings as they thought good, useful, and worthy of such a
   divine origin. If they had not said all those beautiful things, they
   could have said them, and that was enough. An ecclesiastical usage,
   that of reading aloud in churches, was an incentive to these sort of
   frauds, and made them almost necessary. In their meetings, the reading
   of the prophetical and apostolical writings was to take up all the time
   that was not occupied by the mysteries and the sacraments. The
   prophetical and the genuine apostolical writings were soon exhausted,
   and so something fresh was required: and to provide for the constantly
   occurring requirements of these readings, any edifying work was eagerly
   welcomed, as long as it had the slightest appearance of apostolicity,
   or bore the most distant resemblance to the writings of the ancient
   prophets.

   Thus Christianity had accomplished the first duty of a religion, which
   is to introduce a new sacred book to the world. Another Bible had been
   added to the old one, which was much inferior to it in classic beauty,
   but was very efficacious for the conversion of the world. The old
   Hebrew language, that venerable aristocratic instrument of poetry, of
   the feelings of the soul and of passion, had been dead for centuries.
   The Semetic-Aramean patois of Palestine, and that popular Greek, which
   the Macedonian conquest had introduced into the East, and which the
   Alexandrian translators of the Bible raised to the height of a sacred
   language, could not act as the organs for those literary master-pieces;
   but although it lacked genius, it possessed goodness; and though it had
   no great writers, it had men who were filled with Jesus, and who have
   given us the reflex of his spirit. The New Testament introduced a new
   idea into the world, that of popular beauty, and in any case there is
   no book which has dried so many tears and soothed so many hearts as it
   has.

   We cannot speak in a general manner of the style of the New Testament,
   because its writings are divided into four or five different styles.
   All these various parts, however, have something in common, and it is
   just that something which imparts their power and success to them.
   Though written in Greek, their conception is Semetic. Such phrases,
   without any circumlocution, that language whose everything is black or
   white, sunshine or darkness, as, "Jacob have I loved; but Esau have I
   hated," to express "I preferred Jacob to Esau," have carried away the
   world by their rugged grandeur. Our races were not used to Oriental
   fulness, to such energetic partiality, to this manner of procedure, all
   at once used, as it were, by bounds; and so they were overcome and
   crushed, and even at this present time that style constitutes the great
   power of Christianity which fascinates souls and wins them over to
   Jesus.

   The canon of Old Testament Scripture, which the Christians admitted,
   was, as far as regarded the essential works, the same as that of the
   Jews. Christians who were ignorant of Hebrew read these ancient
   writings in the Alexandrine version, which is called the Septuagint,
   and which they reverenced as equal to the Hebrew text, and where the
   Greek version adds expansions to the original, as is the case in Esther
   and Daniel, these additions were accepted. Less severely guarded than
   the Jewish canon, the Christian admitted besides such books as Judith,
   Tobias, Baruch, the Fourth Book of Esdras, the assumption of Moses,
   Enoch, and the Wisdom of Solomon, which the Jewish rabbis excluded from
   the sacred volume and even systematically destroyed; whilst such books
   as Job, the Song of Solomon, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, were very little
   read by people who looked, above all things, for edification, on
   account of their bold or altogether profane character. The books of the
   Maccabees were preserved rather as instructive or pious books, than as
   sources of inspiration.

   The Old Testament, which has been mauled in different ways, and been
   interpreted with all the latitude that a text without vowels allows of,
   was the storehouse for the arguments of Christian apologists and Jewish
   polemics. Most frequently these disputes took place in Greek, and
   though the Alexandrine versions were used, they daily became more and
   more insufficient. The advantages which the Christians gained from them
   made the Jews suspicious of them, and a saying was disseminated, which
   was reputed to be prophetic, in which some wise men of old had
   announced all the evil that should some day spring from those accursed
   versions. The day on which the Septuagint version was made was compared
   to that on which the golden calf was cast, and it was even asserted
   that that day was followed by three days of darkness. On the other
   hand, the Christians admitted the legends which represented this
   version as having been miraculously revealed. Rabbi Aquiba and his
   school had invented the absurd principle, that nothing in the whole
   Bible is insignificant, that every letter was written with some
   particular purpose, and has some influence on the sense. From
   thenceforward the Alexandrine translators who had done their work by
   human means, like philologists and not like cabalists, did not seem as
   if they could be of any use in the controversies of the time;
   unreasonable objections to grammatical peculiarities were brought
   forward, and they wished for translations of the Bible, in which every
   Hebrew word, or rather root, should be rendered by a Greek word, even
   if the translation had no sense in consequence.

   Aquila was the most celebrated of those who were devoted to a senseless
   literal translation. His work dates from the twelfth year of Hadrian's
   reign. Although he was a mere proselyte, he had very likely been
   educated by Aquiba, and, in fact, his exegesis is an exact pendant to
   the rabbi's casuistry. A Greek word corresponds exactly to every Hebrew
   word, even when nothing but nonsense is the result.

   The Christians soon got to know Aquila's translation, and they were
   much vexed at it, for, as they were accustomed to depend on the
   Septuagint for their texts, they saw that this new translation would
   overthrow all their methods and their apologetic system. One passage
   especially troubled them very much. The churches wished at any price to
   see the prophetic announcement of the birth of Jesus from a virgin from
   Isaiah 7, xiv., which indeed means something quite different, but where
   the word parthenos, employed for the Hebrew alma, and applied to the
   mother of the symbolical Emmanuel, God with us, is rather peculiar.
   Aquila overthrew this little scaffolding by translating alma by neanis.
   They declared that it was pure wickedness on his part, and a system of
   pious calumnies was invented to explain how, having been a Christian,
   he learned Hebrew and devoted himself to that tremendous work merely
   for the sake of contradicting the Septuagint, and to do away with the
   passages that proved that Jesus was the Messiah.

   The Jews, on the other hand, delighted at the apparent exactness of the
   new version, openly proclaimed their preference for it over the
   Septuagint. The Ebionites or Nazarenes also frequently used it, for the
   manner in which Aquila had rendered the passage of Isaiah enabled them
   to prove that Jesus was merely the son of Joseph.

   However, Aquila was not the only one who translated Hebrew after Rabbi
   Aquiba's method. The Greek version of Ecclesiastes, which forms part of
   the Greek Vulgate, presents the very same peculiarities which Rabbi
   Aquiba caused the translators of his school to adopt, and yet that
   version is not by Aquiba.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VIII.

  MILLENARIANISM--PAPIAS.

   The most different tendencies were apparent in the Church of Jesus,
   which demonstrated the wonderful fecundity of the newly-awakened
   conscience in the bosom of humanity; but which at the same time created
   an immense danger for that newly-born institution. Thousands of hands,
   so to say, were tearing the new religion to pieces, some wishing to
   keep it within the Jewish pale, whilst others wished to sever every
   bond between it and that Judaism from which it had sprung. The second
   coming of Jesus, and the idea of his rule for a thousand years, were
   the two questions which brought these two contrary feelings most
   prominently forward. The Gnostics, and, up to a certain point, the
   author of the Epistle of St John, no longer paid any regard to the
   fundamental doctrines of the first century. They did not any longer
   trouble themselves much about the end of the world: it was relegated to
   the background, where it had scarcely any meaning, and these lofty
   dreams ought now to be forgotten by every one. In Asia Minor the
   greater number of Christians lived upon that idea, and refused to go
   any further in search of the truth as to the meaning of Jesus; and in
   close approximation to that school where, it would seem, the
   Johannistic writings were being thought out, a man who might have some
   intercourse with the authors of these writings was working on a totally
   different, or rather I should say on a totally opposite, line of
   thought.

   But we must speak of Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis, the most striking
   personality at a period when two Christians could still differ from
   each other to an extent which we cannot picture to ourselves now. It
   has often been thought that Papias was one of St John's disciples, but
   this must certainly be a mistake. He never saw any of the Apostles, as
   he belongs to the third generation of Christians, but no doubt he
   consulted those who had seen them. He was a very careful man, a
   searcher after truth in his own fashion, and one who knew the
   Scriptures thoroughly. He made it his occupation zealously to collect
   the words of Jesus, to comment on those words in their most literal
   sense, to classify them according to their matter, and, in a word, to
   gather together all the traditions of the apostolic age which had
   already disappeared. He therefore undertook an investigation of vast
   extent, which he carried on according to rules such as a sound judgment
   would prescribe. Dissatisfied with the small books which were said to
   be an exact picture of the life of Jesus, he thought he could do
   better, and laid claim to giving the true interpretation of Jesus'
   doctrine. He only believed in original teaching, and so he spent his
   life in questioning those who might know something about primitive
   tradition.

   "I am not," he says, in his preface, "like most of those who allow
   themselves to be captivated by a flow of words; all I cared for were
   those which teach the truth. Full of mistrust for the extraordinary
   precepts which have got about, I only wish to know those that the
   Saviour had entrusted to his disciples, and which spring from truth
   itself. If, for example, I were to meet any one who had been a follower
   of the elders, I should ask him, What did Andrew say? What did Peter
   say? What did Philip, Thomas, James, John, or any other of the
   disciples of our Lord say? What do Aristion and Presbuteros Johannes,
   disciples of the Saviour, say? For I did not think that all the books
   could bring me so much profit as data collected from living and
   permanent tradition."

   No Apostle had been alive for some time when Papias conceived this
   project, but there were still persons living who had known some of the
   members of that first upper chamber. The daughters of Philip, who had
   reached an extreme old age, and who were not quite in their right mind,
   filled Hierapolis with their wonderful stories, and Papias had seen
   them. At Ephesus and at Smyrna Presbuteros Johannes and Aristion both
   asserted that they were the depositants of precious traditions which it
   seems they said they had received from the Apostle John. Papias did not
   belong to that school which was attached to John, and from which it is
   said the fourth Gospel proceeded, though it is probable that he knew
   Aristion and Presbuteros. His was composed, in a great part, of
   quotations borrowed from conversations of these two persons who in his
   eyes were evidently the best representatives of the apostolic chain and
   of the authentic doctrine of Jesus. It is needless to say that the
   Jewish Christian Papias does not mention the Apostle St Paul, either
   directly or indirectly.

   This attempt to reconstruct the teaching of Jesus by mere oral
   tradition a hundred years after his death would have been a paradox if
   Papias had refused to make use of the written texts, and in this
   respect his method was not so exclusive as he seems to imply in his
   preface. Whilst preferring oral tradition, and whilst, perhaps, not
   assigning any absolute value to any of the texts which were in
   circulation, he read the Gospels of which copies came into his
   possession. It is certainly vexing that we cannot judge for ourselves
   how much he knew in this respect. But here Eusebius appears to have
   been very far-sighted. According to his usual custom, he read the works
   of Papias pen in hand, to note his quotations from the canonical
   writings, and he only found two of our Gospels--that of St Mark and of
   St Matthew--mentioned. Papias noticed a curious opinion of Presbuteros
   on Mark's Gospel, and the citations by which this latter traditionalist
   excused, as he imagined, the disorder and the fragmentary character of
   the compilation of the said Evangelist. As to the Gospel attributed to
   St Matthew, Papias looked upon it as a free and tolerably faithful
   translation of the Hebrew work written by the Apostle of that name, and
   he valued it especially on account of the authentic words of Jesus
   which were to be found in it. Besides this, he met with an anecdote in
   Papias, which formed part of the Gospel according to the Hebrews, but
   he is not sure that the Bishop of Hierapolis took them from that
   Gospel.

   Thus it will be seen that this learned man who was so well acquainted
   with the Scriptures, who had been in the habit of associating, so it
   was said, with the disciples of John, and had learnt from them the
   words of Jesus, did not yet know St John's Gospel, a work which appears
   to have been produced only a few miles from the town in which he was
   living. Certainly if Eusebius had found any traces of it in the
   writings of the Bishop of Hierapolis, he would have mentioned it, just
   as he tells us that he found quotations from the first Epistle of John.
   It is a singular fact that Papias, who does not know St John's Gospel,
   knows the Epistle attributed to him, and which is, in a manner,
   intended to prepare the way for the Gospel. Perhaps the forgers
   communicated this Epistle to him, but not the Gospel, as they feared
   his stringent criticism, or perhaps some time elapsed between the
   Epistle and the Gospel. One can never touch on this question of the
   writings said to be John's without meeting with contradictions and
   anomalies.

   From this mass of conscientious research Papias composed five books
   which he called Exegeses or "Expositions of the Words of the Saviour,"
   and which he certainly looked upon as a correct representation of the
   teachings of Jesus. The disappearance of this work is the most
   regrettable loss which the field of primitive Christian literature has
   ever sustained. If we had Papias' book, no doubt a large number of
   difficulties which confront us in that obscure history would be
   removed, and most likely that is the very reason why we do not possess
   it. His work was written from so personal a point of view that it
   became a scandal for orthodoxy. The four Gospels had an authority which
   excluded every other, and in fifty years we shall find mystical reasons
   why there should be four and why there could not be more than four. No
   author who declared that he did not think much of those holy texts
   could possibly be looked upon with favour.

   Besides this, Papias, although he seems to be a very severe critic, was
   really extremely credulous. He added things to the Gospels which, not
   being protected by the authority of inspiration, seemed shocking and
   absurd. St Mark, with his ponderous thaumaturgy, appears reasonable
   beside the extravagant wonders which he alleges. The teaching and the
   parables which he attributes to Jesus are, to say the least of it.
   extraordinary and absurd, and the whole had that fabulous character
   which the Gospel accounts, or at least those of the first three,
   avoided so carefully. The miracles that he attributed to Philip, on the
   authority of his old, half-crazy daughters, exceeded everything, and
   those which he alleged Justus Barsabbas worked, went beyond tradition,
   whilst his account of the death of St John, and especially that of
   Judas, was such as nobody had ever heard before. He even seemed to be
   versed in the dreams of Gnosticism when he asserts that God gave the
   government of the world to angels, who acquitted themselves badly of
   their duty.

   But his wild millenarianism damaged Papias more than anything else in
   the mind of all the orthodox. His mistake was that he accepted the
   apocalypse of the year 68 in the sense that its author meant. With the
   Seer of Patmos he admitted that after the first resurrection of the
   dead Christ would reign personally on earth for a thousand years. This
   is what he makes Jesus say, according to a tradition that had been
   handed down by the presbuteroi:--

   A day will come in which vines shall grow, each of which shall contain
   ten thousand stems; and each stem shall have ten thousand branches; and
   each branch, ten thousand shoots; and on each shoot there shall be ten
   thousand grapes; and each grape, when pressed, shall produce
   twenty-five thousand hogsheads of wine. And when one of the saints
   shall seize one of the bunches of grapes, another bunch will cry out,
   "Take me for I am better; and bless God for me." And each grain of
   wheat shall produce ten thousand ears; and each ear shall produce ten
   thousand grains; and each grain, ten thousand pounds of flour. And it
   shall be the same with the fruit trees as with all cereals, with herbs,
   according to their different properties. And all animals that live on
   the simple fruits of the earth shall be peaceful and kind towards each
   other, obedient and respectful towards men.

   It was added that Judas refused to believe all these fine things, and
   from the day that he heard his Master speak thus he became a
   semi-unbeliever.

   Besides this, Papias did not make use of any great amount of
   discernment in his choice of the words of Jesus when he attributed to
   him such which appear to have been scattered about in the Jewish
   apocalypses, and which may be seen more particularly in the Apocalypse
   of Baruch. His book was directly opposed to the proposition which the
   other held so dear, and proved how valuable the written Gospels were,
   by checking the manner in which the traditional words of Jesus were
   degraded. Already Montanist ideas, with their simple materialism, were
   making themselves felt, and, like certain Gnostics, Papias could not
   understand any perfect innocence of life without a total abstention
   from animal food. The relative good sense of the Galilean dreams had
   disappeared to make way for the extravagancies of the far East, and so
   the impossible was sought after, and a sort of subversive gentleness of
   humanity, such as India alone, as the price of her political
   annihilation, has been able to realise in life.

   The orthodox Church perceived the danger of these chimeras very
   quickly, and the millenium, above all, became an object of repugnance
   for every Christian of common sense. Minds who, like Origen, Dionysius
   of Alexandria, Eusebius, and the Hellenistic Fathers, saw nothing but a
   revealed philosophy in Jesus, made it their chief business not to
   attribute to him or to the apostles an opinion which daily became more
   self-evidently absurd, and to remove from the very threshold of
   Christianity that fatal objection that the dominant idea of its
   founders was a manifest dream. Every possible means were sought for to
   get rid of the apocalypse, and the fidelity of Papias, who was most
   strongly imbued of all the ecclesiastical writers with the primitive
   ideas to tradition, was fatal to him. Men strove to forget him, his
   works were not copied, and only curious readers cared for his writings:
   and Eusebius, whilst respecting him, says clearly that he was a man of
   small mind, without any judgment.

   Papias' mistake was that of being too conservative, and by being the
   friend of tradition he seemed to be behind everybody else. The progress
   of Christianity would naturally make of him an inconvenient man, and a
   witness to be suppressed, whilst in his own time he certainly responded
   to the state of many men's minds. The millennists looked upon him as
   their principal authority; Irenæus esteems him openly, and places him
   immediately after the Apostles, on the same footing as Polycarp, and
   calls him by a name which is very appropriate to his character: "A
   Father of the Church." [1] The Bishop of Lyon thought that his
   discourses on the vines of the kingdom of David were beautiful and
   authentic. Irenæus allows these dreams of a concrete idealism, coarse
   as they may be, whilst Justin has heard of them, and Tertullian and
   Commodian exceed the materialism of Papias himself. St Hippolytus,
   Methodius, Nepos, Bishop of Arsinoe in Egypt, Victorinus Pettavius,
   Lanctantius, the Apollinarists, St Ambrose, Sulpicius-Severus--or St
   Martin--believe the old tradition in this respect. Up to the fifth
   century the faithful who were most oxthodox Christians maintained that
   after the coming of Antichrist, and the destruction of all the nations,
   there would be a resurrection of the just only; that those who were
   then on the earth, good and bad, would be preserved alive: the good to
   obey the just who had been raised as their princes, and the bad to be
   altogether subject to them. A Jerusalem, consisting altogether of gold,
   cypress, and cedar, rebuilt by the nations, who should come, led by
   their kings, to work at the re-erection of its walls,--a restored
   Temple, which should become the centre of the world,--crowds of victims
   around the altar,--the gates of the city open day and night in order to
   receive the tribute of the people,--pilgrims coming in their due order
   according as they were allowed to come every week, every month, or
   every year,--the saints, the patriarchs, and the prophets passing a
   thousand years in one perpetual Sabbath in perfect agreement with the
   Messiah, who would give them a hundred fold all that they have given up
   for him--this was the essentially Jewish Paradise of which many
   dreamed, even in the times of St Jerome and St Augustine. Orthodoxy
   fought against these ideas; but as they were openly expressed in many
   passages of the Fathers, they were never strictly qualified as
   heresies. St Epiphanius, who was a man of most strict research, who
   tried to enlarge his catalogue of heresies by making two or three sects
   out of one, has not devoted a special chapter to the millenarians--and
   to be consistent he must first of all have got rid of the Apocalypse of
   the received Canon of Scripture; and so, in spite of the most ingenious
   attempts of the Greek Fathers, every attempt to do so was unsuccessful.

   Besides this there were degrees in the materialism of those simple
   believers. Some, like Irenæus, saw in the first resurrection nothing
   but a beginning of incorruption, a means of becoming accustomed to the
   sight of God, a period during which the saints would enjoy the
   conversation and the companionship of the angels, and would treat about
   spiritual matters with them. Others only dreamt of a gross paradise of
   eating and drinking. They asserted that the saints would spend all that
   time in feasts of carnal pleasure, and that children would be born
   during Messiah's reign; that the lords of that new world would wallow
   in gold and precious stones, and that every creature would immediately
   obey their slightest desire.

   The ideas of the infinite, of the immortality of the soul, were so far
   absent from these Jewish dreams that a thousand years seemed enough for
   the most exacting minds. A man must have been very greedy of life if at
   the end of that time he had not been surfeited with it. In our eyes, a
   paradise of a thousand years seems only a small thing, as every year
   would bring us nearer to the time when everything would vanish. The
   last years which preceded annihilation would seem to us to be a hell,
   and the thought of the year 999, would be quite enough to poison the
   happiness of the foregoing years. But it is no good to ask for logic to
   try and solve the intolerable destiny which falls to the lot of man.
   Carried away irresistibly to believe in what is right, and cast into a
   world that is injustice itself, requiring an eternity to make good his
   claims, and stopped short by the grave, what can he do? He clings to
   the coffin and yields his flesh to his fleshless bones, his life to the
   brain full of rottenness, light to the closed eye, and pictures to
   himself chimeras that he would laugh at in a child, so that he may not
   have to avow that God has been able to mock his own creatures to the
   extent of laying upon them the burden of duty without any future
   recompense.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Archaios aner (vide Liddell and Scott in verb:)--Translator.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IX.

  THE COMMENCEMENT OF GNOSTICISM.

   At this period Christianity was a newborn child, and when it emerged
   from its swaddling-clothes, a most dangerous sort of croup threatened
   to choke it. The root of this illness was partly internal, partly
   external, and in some respects the child had been born with the germs
   of it. In a great measure, however, the illness came from without, and
   the unhealthy locality in which the young Church dwelt caused it a sort
   of poisoning to which it very nearly succumbed.

   As the Church grew more numerous and began to develop a hierarchy, the
   docility and self-denial of the faithful began to have its merit. It
   seemed to be irksome to walk like a lost sheep amongst the close ranks
   of the whole herd, and so men wished to leave the crowd and have rules
   for themselves: the universal law seemed to be a very commonplace
   matter. In all directions small aristocracies were formed in the Church
   which threatened to rend the seamless robe of Christ, and two of them
   were marked by rare originality. One was the aristocracy of piety,
   Montanism; the other, the aristocracy of science, was Gnosticism.

   This latter was the first to develop itself. To minds that were
   initiated into the philosophical subtleties of the times, the ideas and
   the government of the Church must have appeared very humble, for the
   via media of relative good sense to which orthodoxy adhered did not
   suit all men's minds, and refined intellects asserted that they had
   loftier ideas about the dogmas and the life of Jesus than the vulgar
   herd who took matters literally, and gave themselves up without
   reasoning to the direction of their pastors; and sublimity of doctrine
   was sought, whereas it ought to have been received with the
   cheerfulness of a pure heart, and embraced with a simple faith.

   Jesus and his immediate disciples had altogether neglected that part of
   the human intellect which desires to know; with knowledge they had
   nothing to do, and they only addressed themselves to the heart and the
   imagination. Cosmology, psychology, and even lofty theological
   speculations, were a blank page for them, and very likely they were
   right. It was not the part of Christianity to satisfy any vain
   curiosity; it came to console those who suffer, to touch the fibres of
   moral sense, and to bring man into relation not with some one or
   abstract logos, but with a heavenly Father full of kindness, who is the
   author of all the harmonies and of all the joys of the universe.
   Especially towards the end of his life St Paul felt the want of a
   speculative theology, and his ideas became assimilated to those of
   Philo, who a century before had striven to impart a rationalistic turn
   of mind to Judaism. About the same time the Churches of Asia Minor
   launched forth into a sort of cabala which connected the part of Jesus
   with a chimerical ontology and an indefinite series of avatars. The
   school from which the fourth Gospel sprung felt the same need of
   explaining the miracles of Galilee by theology, and so Jesus became the
   Divine logos made flesh, and the altogether Jewish idea of the future
   appearing of the Messiah was replaced by the theory of the Paraclete.
   Cerinthus obeyed an analogous tendency. At Alexandria this thirst for
   metaphysics was even more pronounced, and produced strange results,
   which it is time for us to study now.

   In that city a crude and unwholesome mass of all theologies and all
   cosmogonies had been formed, which, however, was often traversed by
   rays of genius, and which was a doctrine that set up the pretension of
   having discovered the formula of the absolute, and gave himself the
   ambiguous title of Gnosis--"perfect science." The man who was initiated
   into the chimerical doctrine was called Gnosticos--the man of perfect
   knowledge. At that time, Alexandria was, after Rome, the spot where
   men's minds were in the most unsettled state. Frivolity and superficial
   eclecticism produced altogether unforeseen effects, and everything got
   mixed up together in those wild and fantastic brains. Thanks to an
   often unconscious charlatanism, the weightiest problems of life were
   turned into mere cases of filching, and every question about God and
   the world were solved by juggling with words and hollow formulas, and
   real science was dispensed with by tricks of legerdemain. It must be
   remembered that the great scientific institutions founded by the
   Ptolomies had disappeared or fallen into complete decay, and the only
   guide which can prevent mankind from talking nonsense--that is, exact
   science--existed no longer.

   Philosophy did exist still, and was trying to raise its head again, but
   great minds were scarce. Platonism had gained the upper hand over all
   the other Greek systems in Egypt, and in Syria, which was a great
   misfortune, for Platonism is always dangerous, unless corrected by a
   scientific education. There were no more any men of taste refined
   enough to appreciate the wonderful art in Plato's Dialogues, for most
   received those charming philosophical fancies in a clumsy spirit; but
   instruction such as they conveyed, which rather satisfied the
   imagination than the reason, would please Eastern ideas. The germ of
   mysticism which they contained made its impress on those races who
   could not receive pure and simple rationalism. Christianity followed
   the general fashion, and already Philo had sought to make Platonism the
   philosophy of Judaism, and those Fathers of the Church who had any
   weight were Platonists.

   To accommodate itself to this unnatural fusion, Greek genius, healthy
   and intelligible as it was, had to make many sacrifices. Philosophers
   were to believe in ecstasies, in miracles, in supernatural relations
   between God and man. Plato becomes a theosophist and a mystagogue, and
   the invocation of good spirits is taken as a serious matter, and whilst
   the scientific spirit disappears altogether, that habit of mind which
   was fortified by mysteries begins to gain the upper hand. In those
   small religious assemblies of Eleusius and Thrace, where men were in
   the habit of throwing dust into their own eyes so as to imagine that
   they knew the unknowable, it was already asserted that the body was the
   prison of the soul, that the actual world was a decadence from the
   divine world; teaching was divided into esoteric and exoteric, and men
   into spiritual, animal, and material beings. The habit of clothing
   doctrine in a mythical form after the manner of Plato, and of
   explaining ancient texts allegorically after the manner of Philo,
   became general. The highest bliss was to be initiated into pretended
   secrets, into a superior gnosis. These ideas of a chimerical
   intellectual aristocracy daily gained ground. and the truth was looked
   upon as a privilege reserved for a small number of the initiated, and
   thus every master became a charlatan who sought to increase the number
   of his customers by selling them the secret of the absolute.

   The fields of the propaganda of the gnosis and of Christianity in
   Alexandria were very closely allied. Gnostics and Christians resembled
   each other in their ardent wish to penetrate into religious mysteries
   without any positive science, of which they were both equally ignorant,
   and this brought about their sublime amalgamation. On the one hand, the
   Gnostics, who alleged that they embraced every belief, and accustomed
   as they were to look upon the gods of the nations as divine æons much
   inferior to the supreme God, wished to understand Christianity, and
   received Jesus enthusiastically as an incarnate æon to be placed side
   by side with so many others, giving him a chief place in their formulae
   of the philosophies of history. On the other hand, Christians who had
   any intellectual requirements, and who wished to attach the Gospel to
   some system of philosophy, found what they required in the obscure
   metaphysics of the Gnostics. Then there happened something quite
   analogous to what happened about fifty years ago, when a certain
   philosophical system, whose programme, like that of Gnosticism, was to
   explain everything, and to understand everything, adopted Christianity,
   and proclaimed itself to be Christian in a superior sense, and Catholic
   and Protestant theologians might be seen at the same time adopting a
   number of philosophical ideas which they thought were compatible with
   their theology, because they did not wish to appear strange to their
   century.

   The Fathers of the Church insist upon it that all this rank and
   poisonous growth had its origin in the Samaritan sects which sprang
   from Simon of Gitto (Simon Magus), and he certainly seems already to
   have presented most of the features which characterise Gnosticism. The
   Great Announcement, which he certainly did not write himself, but which
   most likely represents his doctrines, is an altogether Gnostic work.
   His followers Menander, Cleobius, and Dosistheus seem to have had the
   same views, and all Catholic writers make Menander to be the father of
   all the great Gnostics of Hadrian's time. If we are to believe Plotinus
   on the other hand, a travestied and disfigured Platonic philosophy was
   the only origin of Gnosticism. Such explanations appear to be
   altogether insufficient to account for such a complicated fact. There
   were Christian, Jewish, Samaritan Gnostics, but there were also
   non-Christian Gnostics. Plotinus, who wrote a whole book against them,
   never imagined that he had anything to do with a Christian sect. The
   systems of the Samaritan Gnostics, those of Basilides, of Valentinus,
   of Saturninus, present such shrinking similarities that one must
   suppose that they have a common origin, though they do not seem to have
   borrowed from each other. They must therefore have dipped into an
   earlier source, to which Philo, Apollos, and St Paul, when he wrote his
   Epistle to the Colossians, contributed, and from which the Jewish
   cabala also seems to have proceeded.

   It is an impossible task to unravel all that contributed to the
   formation of that strange religious philosophy. Neo-platonism, a tissue
   of poetical dreams, the ideas that men had in consequence of apocryphal
   traditions about Pythagorism, already supplied models for a mythical
   philosophy bordering on religion. About the very time when Basilides,
   Valentinus, and Saturninus were developing their dreams, one of
   Hadrian's pensioned orators, Philo of Byblos, gave to the world the old
   Phoenician theogonies, mixed up as it seems with the Jewish cabala,
   under a form of divine genealogies which were very analogous to those
   of the first Gnostics. The Egyptian religion, which was still in a very
   flourishing state, with its mysterious ceremonies and its striking
   symbols, Greek mysteries and classical polytheism interpreted in an
   allegorical sense. Orphism, with its empty formulas; Brahminism, which
   had become a theory of endless emanations; Buddhism, oppressed by the
   dream of an expiatory existence, and by its myriads of Buddhas; ancient
   Persian Dualism, which was so contagious, and to which perhaps the
   ideas of the Messiah and of the millenium owed their first existence,
   all these in turn appeared as profound and seductive dogmas to the
   imaginations of men who were beside themselves between hopes and fears.
   India, and, above all, Buddhism, were known in Alexandria, and from
   them the Egyptians borrowed the doctrine of metampsychosis, learning to
   look on life as the imprisonment of the soul in the body, and the
   theory of successive deliverances. Gnosticos has the same meaning as
   Buddha--"he who knows." Following the Persian view, they took the dogma
   of two principles independent one of the other,--the identification of
   matter with evil, the belief that the passions which corrupt the soul
   are emanations from the body, the division of the world into
   ministeries or adminstrations which have been entrusted to genii.
   Judaism and Christianity were mixed up together in this farrago of
   nonsense, and more than one believer in Jesus thought that he could
   graft the Gospels on to a ludicrous system of theology which seemed to
   say something without explaining anything in reality, whilst more than
   one Israelite was already playing a prelude to the follies of the
   cabala, which is, as a matter of fact, nothing but Jewish Gnosticism.

   As we have said, the Church of Alexandria was soon tinged with these
   chimeras. Philo and Plato already had many readers amongst the faithful
   who had any education. Many joined the Church, already imbued with
   philosophy, and found Christian teaching poor and meagre, whilst the
   Jewish Bible seemed to them to be still more feeble, and, in imitation
   of Philo, they saw in it nothing but an allegory. They applied the same
   method to the Gospel, and in some fashion remodelled it, to which it
   lent itself easily, on account of its plastic character. All the
   peculiarities of the life of Jesus regained something sublime,
   according to these new evangelists; all his miracles became symbolical,
   and the follies of the Jewish ghemetria were heightened and aggravated.
   Like Cerinthus, these new doctors treated the Old Testament as a
   secondary revelation, and could not understand why Christianity should
   maintain any bond of union with that particular God, Jehovah, who is no
   absolute being. Could there be any stronger proof of his weakness than
   the state of ruin and desolation in which he had left his own city,
   Jerusalem? Certainly, they said, Jesus could see further and higher
   than the founders of Judaism, but his apostles did not comprehend him,
   and the texts which were supposed to represent his doctrine had been
   falsified. The gnosis alone, thanks to secret tradition, was in
   possession of the truth, and a vast system of successive emanations
   contains the whole secret of philosophy and history. Christianity,
   which was the last act of the tragedy that the universe is constantly
   playing, was the work of the æon Christos, who, by his intimate union
   with the man Jesus, saved everything that could be saved in humanity.

   It will be seen that the Christianity of those sectaries was that of
   Cerinthus and the Ebionites. Their Gospel conformed to the Hebrew
   Gospel, and they described the scene of the baptism of Jesus as it was
   related in that Gospel, and believed, with the Docetm, that Jesus had
   nothing human but his appearance. The Galilean accounts appeared to
   them nothing but childish nonsense, altogether unworthy of the Deity,
   and which must be explained allegorically. For them the man Jesus was
   nothing, the æon Christos was everything; and his earthly life, far
   from being the basis of doctrine, was nothing but a difficulty to be
   got rid of at any price.

   The ideas of the first Christians about the appearance of the Messiah
   in the heavens, about the Resurrection, and the Last Judgment, were
   looked upon as antiquated. The moment of the Resurrection for every
   individual was that at which he became a gnosticos. A certain
   relaxation of morals was the consequence of these false aristocratic
   ideas; mysticism has always been a moral danger, for it too easily
   gives rise to the idea that by initiation man is dispensed from the
   obligation of ordinary duties. "Gold," said these false Christians,
   "can be dragged through the mire without becoming soiled." They smiled
   when scruples about meats offered to idols were mentioned to them; they
   were present at plays and at gladiatorial games; and they were accused
   of speaking lightly of offences against chastity, and of saying,--"What
   is of the flesh is flesh, and what is of the spirit is spirit;" and
   they expressed their antipathy for martyrdom in terms that must have
   hurt the feelings of real Christians most profoundly. As Christ had not
   suffered, why should they suffer for him?" The real testimony which
   they ought to render to God," they said, "was to know him as he is, it
   is an act of suicide for a man to confess God by his death." According
   to them, the martyrs were nearly always wrong, and the pains that they
   suffered were the just chastisement for crimes that would have merited
   death, and which remained hidden. Far from complaining, they ought to
   be thankful to the law which transformed their just punishment into an
   act of heroism, and if there were a few rare cases of innocent martyrs,
   they were analogous to the sufferings of childhood, and fate only was
   to be blamed for it.

   The sources of piety, however, were not yet corrupted by a proud
   rationalism, which generally frees itself from material practices. A
   liturgy, veiled in secrecy, offered abundant sacramental consolation to
   the faithful of those singular Churches, and life became a mystery,
   each one of whose acts was sacred. Baptism was a solemn ceremony, and
   recalled the worship of Mithra. The formula which the officiating
   minister pronounced was in Hebrew, and immersion there followed the
   anointing, which the Church adopted later. Extreme unction for the
   dying was also administered in a manner which would naturally create a
   great effect, and which the Catholic Church has imitated. Amongst the
   sectaries, worship, like dogma, was further removed from Jewish
   simplicity than in the churches of Peter and Paul, and the Gnostics
   admitted several Pagan rites, chants, hymns, and painted or sculptured
   representations of Christ.

   In this respect their influence on the history of Christianity was of
   the highest order, arid they formed the bridge by which a number of
   Pagan practices were introduced into the Church. In the Christian
   propaganda they played a principal part, for, by means of Gnosticism,
   Christianity first of all proclaimed itself as a new religion which was
   destined to endure, and which possessed a form of worship and
   sacraments, and which could produce an art of its own. By means of
   Gnosticism, the Church effected a juncture with the ancient mysteries,
   and appropriated to herself all that they possessed that satisfied
   popular requirements. Thanks to it, in the fourth century, the world
   could pass from Paganism to Christianity without noticing it, and,
   above all, without guessing that it was becoming Jewish. The
   eclecticism and the ingratitude of the Catholic Church are here shown
   in a wonderful manner. Whilst repudiating and anathematising the
   chimeras of the Gnostics, orthodoxy received a number of happy popular
   devotional inspirations from them, and from the theurgical the Church
   advanced to the sacramental view. Her feasts, her sacraments, her art
   were in a great measure taken from those sects which she condemned.
   Christianity, pure and simple, has not left any material object, for
   primitive Christian archeology is Gnostic. In those small, free, and
   inventive sects life was without rule but full of vitality. Their very
   metaphysics already made themselves felt, and faith was obliged to
   reason. By the side of the Church there was henceforth to be found the
   school; by the side of the elder, the teacher.

   Moreover, some men of rare talent, making themselves the organs of
   those doctrines which had hitherto been without authority, withdrew
   them from that state of individual speculation in which they might have
   remained indefinitely, and raised them to the height of a real event in
   the history of humanity.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER X.

  BASILIDES, VALENTINUS, SATURNINUS, CARPOCRATES.

   Basilides, who seems to have come from Syria to live at Alexandria, in
   Lower Egypt. and in the adjacent departments, was the first of those
   foreign dogmatisers to whom one hesitates at times to give the name of
   Christian. He is said to have been a disciple of Menander, and seems to
   have had two courses of instruction: the one, which was intended for
   the initiated, was restricted to religions of abstract metaphysics
   which were more in keeping with those of Aristotle than those of
   Christ, and the other was a sort of mythology, founded, like the Jewish
   cabala, on abstractions, which men took for realities. The metaphysics
   of Basilides remind us of those of Hegel, because of their unhealthy
   grandeur. His system owed much to the Stoic cosmogony. Universal life
   is a development of a pansperma. Just as the seed contains the trunk,
   the roots, the flowers, and the fruits of the future plant, so the
   future of the universe is only an evolution. Filiation is the secret of
   everything; the species is the child of the genius, and is only an
   expansion of it.The aspiration of creatures is towards the good.
   Progress is made by that mind which stops between two boundaries
   (Methorion pneuma),--which, having, as it were, one foot in the ideal
   and the other in the material world, makes the ideal circulate amongst
   the material, and continually raises it. A sort of universal groaning
   of nature, a melancholy feeling of the universe, calls us to final
   repose, which will consist in the general unconsciousness of
   individuals in the bosom of God, and in the absolute extinction of
   every desire. "The good tidings" of progress were brought into the
   world by Jesus, the son of Mary. Already, before him, chosen heathens
   and Jews had caused the spiritual element to triumph over the material;
   but Jesus completely separated these two elements, so that only the
   spiritual element remained. Thus death could take nothing from him. All
   men ought to imitate him, to attain the same end. They will do so by
   receiving the "glad tidings," that is to say, the transcendent gnosis,
   eagerly.

   In order to make these ideas more accessible, Basilides gave them a
   cosmogonic form analogous to those which were common in the religions
   of Phoenicia, Persia, and Assyria. It was a sort of divine epopæia,
   having for its heroes divine attributes personified, and whose diverse
   episodes represented the strife between good and evil. The good is the
   supreme god, ineffable and lost in himself. His name is Abraxas. That
   eternal being develops himself in seven perfections, which form with
   the Being himself the divine ogdoade. The seven perfections, Nous,
   Logos, Sophia, etc., by pairing together, have produced the orders of
   inferior angels (æons, worlds), to the number of three hundred and
   sixty-five, That number is made up by the letters of the word Abraxas
   added together according to their numerical value.

   The angels of the last heaven, whose prince is Jehovah, created the
   earth, which is the most mediocre of the worlds, the most sullied by
   matter, on the model furnished by Sophia, but under the empire of
   necessities, which made a mixture of good and evil out of it. Jehovah
   and the demiurges divided the government of this world between them,
   and distributed the provinces and the nations amongst themselves. Those
   are the local gods of the different countries. Jehovah chose the Jews:
   he is an invading and a conquering God. The Law, his work, is a mixture
   of material and spiritual views. The other local gods were obliged to
   coalesce against this aggressive neighbour, who, in spite of the
   division that had been agreed upon, wished to subjugate all nations to
   his own.

   To put an end to this war of the gods, the supreme God sent the prince
   of the æons, the Nous, his first son, with the mission to deliver men
   from the power of the demiurge angels. The Nous did not exactly become
   incarnate. At the moment of baptism the Nous attached to itself the
   person of the man Jesus, and did not leave it till the moment of the
   Passion. According to some disciples of Basilides, a substitution took
   place at that moment, and Simon of Cyrene was crucified in Jesus'
   stead. The persecutions to which Jesus and the apostles were subjected
   by the Jews arose from the anger of Jehovah, who, seeing that his rule
   was threatened, made a last effort to avert the dangers of the future.

   The place which Basilides attributed to Jesus in the economy of the
   world's history does not differ essentially from that which is
   attributed to him in the Epistle to the Colossians and in the
   pseudo-Johannine Gospel. Basilides knew some words of Hebrew, and had
   certainly taken his Christianity from the Ebionites. He gave a
   so-called Glaucias, St Peter's interpreter, as his master. He made use
   of the New Testament very nearly as it had been formed by general
   consent, excluding certain books, particularly the epistles to the
   Hebrews, to Titus and to Timothy, admitting St John's Gospel. He wrote
   twenty-four books of allegorical Expositions of the Gospel, without our
   being able to tell exactly what texts he made use of. After the example
   of all the sects that surrounded the Church, and, in a measure, sucked
   her, Basilides composed apocryphal books,--esoteric traditions
   attributed to Matthias; revelations borrowed from chimerical people,
   Barcabban and Barcoph; prophecies of Cham. Like Valentinus, he seems to
   have composed sacred psalms or canticles. Lastly, besides the
   commentary on the received Gospels that he had edited, there was a
   gospel analogous to that of the Hebrews, of the Egyptians, and of the
   Ebionites, which differed little from that of Matthew, which bore the
   name of Basilides. His son, Isidore, carried on his teaching, wrote
   commentaries on the apocryphal prophets, and developed his myths. Weak
   Christians easily allowed themselves to be seduced by these dreams. A
   learned and esteemed Christian writer, Agrippa Castor, constituted
   himself its ardent adversary as soon as it appeared.

   Theurgy is generally the ordinary companion of religious intemperance.
   The disciples of Basilides did not invent, but they adopted, the magic
   virtues of the word Abraxas. They were also reproached with a very lax
   state of morals. It is certain that when so much importance is attached
   to metaphysical formulas, simple and good morality seems to be a humble
   and almost indifferent matter. A man who has become perfect by gnosis
   can allow himself anything. It seems that Basilides did not say that,
   but he was made to say it, and that was to a certain point the
   consequence of his theosophy. The saying which was attributed to
   him,--"We are men, the others are only swine and dogs," was, after all,
   only the brutal translation of the more acceptable saying,--"I am
   speaking for one in a thousand." The taste for mystery which that sect
   had, its habit of avoiding the light and hiding itself from the eyes of
   the multitude, the silence that was exacted from the initiated, gave
   rise to those rumours. Many calumnies were mixed up with all that. Thus
   Basilides was accused of having maintained, like all the Gnostics, that
   it was no crime to renounce apparently the beliefs for which one was
   persecuted; to lend oneself to acts indifferent in themselves, which
   the civil law exacted; even to go so far as to curse Christ, so long as
   in one's mind one distinguished between the aeon Nous and the man
   Jesus. Now we have the original text of Basilides, and we find in it a
   much more moderate criticism of martyrdom than that which his opponents
   attribute to him. It is true that, attributing no importance whatever
   to the real Jesus, the Gnostics had no reason to die for him. On the
   whole they were only semi-Christians. Perhaps the superstitions which
   sprang from the sect were not the faults of Basilides. Some of his
   maxims were very beautiful, but his style, from the fragments which we
   possess, appears to have been obscure and pretentious.

   Valentinus was certainly superior to him. Something sorrowful, a gloomy
   and icy resignation makes a sort of bad dream out of the system of
   Basilides. Valentinus penetrates everything with love and pity. The
   redemption of Christ has for him a feeling of joy; his doctrine was a
   consolation for many, and real Christians adopted, or at least admired
   him.

   That celebrated, enlightened man, born, as it seems, in Lower Egypt,
   was educated in the schools of Alexandria, and first taught there. He
   would also appear to have dogmatised in Cyprus. Even his enemies allow
   that he had genius, a vast amount of knowledge, and rare eloquence.
   Gained over by the great seductions of Christianity, and attached to
   the Church, but nourished on Plato, and full of the recollections of
   profane learning, he was not satisfied with the spiritual nourishment
   which the pastors gave to the simple: he wanting something higher. He
   conceived a sort of Christian rationalism, a general system of the
   world, in which Christianity would have a place in the first rank, but
   would not be everything. Enlightened and tolerant, he admitted a
   heathen as well as a Jewish revelation. A number of things in the
   Church's teaching appeared to him coarse and inadmissible by a
   cultivated mind. He called the orthodox "Galileans," not without a
   shade of irony. With nearly all the Gnostics, he denied the
   resurrection of the body, or rather maintained that, as far as regards
   those who are perfect, the resurrection is accomplished already,--that
   it consists in the knowledge of the truth,--that the soul alone can be
   saved.

   If Valentinus had limited himself to cherishing these thoughts
   internally, to speaking about them to his friends, and to not
   frequenting the Church except in so far as it answered to his feelings,
   his position would have been altogether correct. But he wanted more:
   with his ideas, he wished to have a place of importance in the Church;
   and he was wrong, for the order of speculation in which he delighted
   was not one which the Church could encourage. The Church's object was
   the amelioration of morals and the diminution of the people's
   sufferings, not science or philosophy. Valentinus ought to have been
   satisfied with being a philosopher. Far from that, he tried to make
   disciples, like the ecclesiastics. When he had insinuated himself into
   any one's confidence, he proposed different questions to him, in order
   to prove the absurdity of orthodoxy. At the same time, he tried to
   persuade him that there was something better than that: he expounded
   that superior wisdom with mystery. If objections were made to him, he
   would let the discussion drop with an air that seemed to say, " You
   will never be anything but a simple believer." His disciples showed
   themselves equally unconceivable. When they were asked questions, they
   wrinkled their brows, contracted their faces, and slipped away, saying,
   "O depth" If they were pressed, they affirmed the common faith amidst a
   thousand ambiguities, then returned to their avowal, baffled their
   opponent, and escaped, saying, "You do not understand anything about
   the matter."

   Already it was the essence of Catholicism not to suffer any
   aristocracy,--that of elevated philosophy no more than that of
   pretentious piety. Valentinus's position was a very false one. In order
   to make himself acceptable to the people, he conformed his discourses
   to those of the Church; but the bishops were on their guard, and
   excluded him. The simple believers allowed themselves to be caught;
   they even murmured because the bishops drove such good Catholics out of
   their communion. Useless sympathy! for already the Episcopate had
   restricted the Church on all sides. Valentinus thus remained in the
   state of an unfortunate candidate for the pastoral ministry. He wrote
   letters, homilies, and hymns of a lofty moral tone. The fragments by
   him that have been preserved have vigour and brilliancy, but their
   phraseology is eccentric. It resembles the mania which the Saint
   Simonians had of building up great theories in abstract language to
   express realities which were almost paltry. His general system had not
   that appearance of good sense that succeeds with the masses. The
   pretended Gospel of St John, with its far simpler combinations of the
   Logos and the Paraclete, had far greater success.

   Valentines starts, like all the Gnostics, from a system of metaphysics
   whose fundamental principle is that God manifests himself by successive
   emanations, of which the world is the most humble. The world is a work
   which is too imperfect for an infinite workman t it is the miserable
   copy of a divine model at the beginning. The Abyss (Bythos),
   inaccessible, unfathomable, which is also called Proarché, Propator,
   Silence (Sigè) is its eternal companion. After centuries of solitude
   and of dumb contemplation of its being, the Abyss wishes at length to
   appear in the outer world, and with his companion begets a syzygia,
   Nous or Monogenes and Alethia (Truth); they beget Logos and Zoe, who in
   their turn beget Anthropos and Ecclesia. Together with the primordial
   couple those three syzygias form the ogdoade, and with other syzygias
   emanated from Logos and Zoe, from Anthropos and Ecclesia the divine
   Pleroma, the plenitude of the divinity which for the future is
   conscious of its own existence. These couples fall from perfection in
   measure as they get further and further from the first source; at the
   same time, the love of perfection, the regret, the desire to return to
   their first principle, are awakened in them. Sophia especially makes a
   bold attempt to embrace the invisible Bythos, who only reveals himself
   by his Monogenes (only son). She continually wears herself out, extends
   herself to embrace the invisible; drawn away by the sweetness of her
   love, she is on the point of being absorbed by Bythos, of being
   annihilated. The whole Pleroma is in confusion. In order to
   re-establish harmony, Nous or Monogenes engender Christos and Pneuma,
   who pacify the æons, and make equality reign amongst them. Then, out of
   gratitude for Bythos, who has pacified them, the moons bring together
   all their perfections, and form the æon Jesus, the firstborn of
   creation, as Monogenes had been the firstborn of the emanation. Thus
   Jesus becomes in the inferior world what Christos had been in the
   divine Pleroma.

   In consequence of the ardour of her insensate passion, Sophia had
   produced by herself a sort of hermaphrodite abortion without
   consciousness, Hakamoth, also called Sophia Prunicos, or Prunice, who,
   driven from the Pleroma, moved about in the void and the night. Moved
   by compassion for this unfortunate being, Christos, leaning on Stauros
   (the cross), comes to her aid, gives the erring æon a determinate form
   and consciousness; but he does not give her knowledge, and Hakamoth,
   again rejected from the Pleroma, is cast into space. Given up to all
   the violence of her desires, she brings forth, on the one hand, the
   soul of the world, and all psychic substances; and on the other,
   matter. In her, anguish alternates with hope. At one time she feared
   her annihilation; at other times the recollection of her lost past
   filled her with joy. Her tears formed the moist element; her smile was
   the light; her sadness, opaque matter. At last the æon Jesus came to
   save her, and, in her delight, the poor delivered creature gave birth
   to the spiritual element,--the third of the elements that constitute
   the world. Hakamoth, or Prunice, nevertheless does not rest; agitation
   is her essence; there is a work of God going on in her; she endures a
   continual flow of blood. The bad part of her activity is concentrated
   on the demons; the other part, re-united to matter, implants in it the
   germ of a fire which shall devour it some day.

   With the psychic element Hakamoth creates the demiurge, which serves
   her as an instrument for organising the remaining beings. The demiurge
   creates the seven worlds, and man in the last of these worlds. But the
   surprising thing is that a superior and altogether divine principle is
   revealed in man, and that is the spiritual element, which Hakamoth had
   imparted to her work from oversight. The creator is jealous of his own
   creature; he lays a snare for him (the prohibition to eat the fruit of
   Paradise); man falls into it. He would have been eternally lost except
   for the love which his mother Hakamoth bore him. The redemption of each
   world has been accomplished by a special saviour. The saviour of men
   was the son Jesus, clothed by Hakamoth with the spiritual principle;
   with the psychic principle by the demiurge; with the material principle
   by Mary; identified lastly with Christos, who, on the day of his
   baptism, descended on to him in the form of a dove, and did not leave
   him again till after his condemnation by Pilate. The spiritual
   principle will persevere in Jesus till the agony on the cross. The
   psychic and the material principles alone will suffer, and will rise to
   heaven through the ascension. There were Gnostics before Jesus, but he
   came to reunite them and to form them into a Church by the Holy Spirit.
   The Church is made up neither of bodies nor of souls, but of spirits:
   the Gnostics alone form her component parts. At the end of the world
   matter will be devoured by the internal fire which she hides within
   herself; Christ will reign instead of the demiurge, and Hakamoth will
   definitely enter into the Pleroma, which will, thenceforward, be
   pacified.

   Men by their very nature, and independently of their efforts, are
   divided into three categories, according as the material element, the
   psychic or animal element, and the spiritual element predominate in
   them. The heathen are the material men who are irrevocably devoted to
   the works of the flesh. The simple faithful, the generality of
   Christians, are the psychic men; in virtue of their intermediate
   essence, they can rise or fall, lose themselves in matter, or be
   absorbed into the spirit. The Gnostics are the spiritual men, whether
   they be Christians, whether they be Jews, like the prophets, or
   heathens, like the sages of Greece. The spiritual men will some day be
   joined to the Pleroma. The material men will die altogether; the
   psychic men will be damned or saved according to their works. External
   worship is only a symbol, which, though it is good for the psychic
   mind, is altogether useless for men who give themselves up to pure
   contemplation. It is an eternal error of the mystic sects who put into
   their chimeras the initiation above good works, which they leave to the
   simple. That is the reason why every gnosis, whatever it may do,
   arrives at indifference to works and contempt for practical virtue,
   that is to say, at immorality.

   There is certainly something grand in these strange myths. When it is a
   question of the infinite, of things which can only be known partially
   and secretly, which cannot be expressed without being strained, pathos
   itself has its charms; one takes pleasure in it, like in those somewhat
   unhealthy poems whose taste one blames, though one cannot help liking
   them. The history of the world, conceived like an embryo which is
   seeking for life, which painfully attains consciousness, which troubles
   everything by its movements, whilst those movements themselves become
   the cause of progress and end in the full realisation of the vague
   instincts of the ideal, such are the ideas which are not very far
   removed from those which we choose at times to express our views about
   the development of the infinite. But all that could not be reconciled
   to Christianity. Those metaphysics of dreamers, that system of morality
   thought out by recluses, that brahminical pride which would have
   brought back the rule of castes had it been allowed its own way, would
   have killed the Church, if the Church had not taken the initiative. It
   was not without reason that orthodoxy kept a middle position between
   the Nazarenes, who only saw the human side of Jesus, and the Gnostics,
   who saw nothing but his divine nature. Valentinus made fun of the
   simple eclecticism which induced the Church to wish to join two
   contrary elements together. The Church was right. There is no medium
   between regulated faith and free thought. Whoever does not admit
   authority puts himself outside the pale of the Church, and ought to
   turn philosopher. "They speak like the Church," Irenæus said, "but they
   think differently." It was a sad game to play. Valentinus was led to
   hypocrisy and fraud by the same reasons as Basilides was. To free
   himself from apostolic chains, he claimed to attach himself to secret
   traditions and to an esoteric teaching which Jesus was said not to have
   imparted to any except the most spiritually-minded of his disciples.
   Valentinus said that he had received that hidden doctrine from a
   pretended Theodades or Theodas, a disciple of St Paul. He appears to
   have called this the Gospel of Truth. Valentinus' Gospel, at any rate,
   approximated very closely to that of the Ebionites. In it the duration
   of the appearances of the risen Jesus was extended over eighteen
   months.

   These despairing efforts to reconcile God and man in Jesus, resulted
   from difficulties that were inherent in the nature of Christianity. In
   fact, the travail which was agitating the Christian conscience in Egypt
   manifested itself also in Syria. Gnosticism appeared in Antioch almost
   at the same time as it did in Alexandria. Saturninus, or Satorniles,
   who was said to have been a pupil of Menander, like Basilides was, put
   forth views which were analogous to those of the latter, though they
   bore an even stronger impress of Persian dualism. The Pleroma and
   matter--Bythos and Satan--are the two poles of the universe. The
   kingdoms of good and evil are the two confines on which they meet. Near
   those confines the world came into existence, and it was the work of
   the seven last Eons or demiurges who were wandering in the realms of
   Satan. Those æons (Jehovah is one of them) divide the government of
   their work between them, and each appropriates a planet. They do not
   know the inaccessible Bythos; but Bythos is favourable to them, reveals
   himself to them by a ray of his beauty, and then hides himself from
   their admiration. The divine image ceaselessly haunts them, and they
   create man in the likeness of that image.

   Man, as he left the hand of the demiurges, was pure matter. He crawled
   on the earth like a worm, and had no intelligence. A spark from the
   Pleroma gives him true life. He thinks, and rises to his feet. Then
   Satan is filled with rage, and dreams of nothing but of opposing this
   regenerate man, the mixed work of the demiurges and of God, a man who
   shall spring entirely from himself. Side by side with divine humanity
   there is for the future the satanic humanity. To crown the evil, the
   demiurges revolt against God, and separate creation from that superior
   principle from which it ought to draw its life. The divine spark no
   longer circulates between the Pleroma and humanity--between humanity
   and the Pleroma. Man is devoted to evil and to error. Christ saves him
   by suppressing the action of the God of the Jews, but the strife
   between the good and evil men continues. The former are the Gnostics;
   the soul is entirely in them, and consequently they live eternally. On
   the other hand, the body cannot rise again: it is condemned to perish.
   Whatever propagates the body propagates the empire of Satan, and,
   consequently, marriage is an evil. It weakens the divine principle in
   man, by subdividing that principle to infinity.

   It will be seen that all those sects were equally incapable of giving a
   serious basis to morality. They even had difficulty in avoiding the
   breakers of secret debauches and accusations of infamy. Alexandria
   could not stop on that slippery ground. That extraordinary city was
   destined to see, at its most brilliant period, all the evils of the age
   burst forth within it in all their energy. Carpocrates drew from it the
   deductions of an unwholesome philosophy, which carried the
   exaggerations of an intemperate supernaturalism amongst all orders, and
   tossed men to and fro between asceticism and immorality, rarely leaving
   him in the golden mean of reason. Carpocrates and his son Epiphanes did
   not recoil before any of the excesses of sensual mysticism, as they
   proclaimed the indifference of actions, the community of women, the
   holiness of all perversions, as means of delivering the spirit from the
   flesh. That deliverance of the spiritual man which wrests souls from
   the wicked demiurges to reunite them to the supreme God, was the work
   of the sages Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Jesus, etc. The statues of
   those sages were adored,--they were crowned,--incense and even
   sacrifices were offered to them. According to Carpocrates, Jesus, the
   son of Joseph, had been the justest man of his time. After having
   practised Judaism, he recognised its vanity, and by that act of disdain
   he merited deliverance. Nowhere is it forbidden to aspire to equal and
   even to surpass him in holiness. His resurrection is an impossibility;
   his soul alone has been received into heaven; his body remained on
   earth. The apostles--Peter, Paul, and the others--were not inferior to
   Jesus, but if any one could arrive at a more perfect contempt for the
   world of the demiurges, that is to say, for reality, he would surpass
   him. The Carpocratians claimed to exercise that power by magical
   operations, by philtres, by witchcraft. It is clear that they were not
   true members of the Church of Jesus. Nevertheless, the sectaries took
   the name of Christians, and the orthodox were in despair at it. As a
   matter of fact, in their conventicles, abominations, such as the
   calumniators of the Christians reproached the faithful with, took
   place, and this usurpation of the name caused deplorable prejudices to
   take deep root amongst the multitude.

   Far from exhibiting the slightest complaisance towards the culpable
   mysteries, the Church only held them in abhorrence and visited them
   with the most violent anathemas which she could find in her sacred
   texts. What was said of the Nicolaitanes at the beginning of the
   Apocalypse was brought to mind. By the name Nicolaitanes, the Seer of
   Patmos most likely intends to designate St Paul's partisans: at any
   rate such a designation has nothing at all to do with the Deacon
   Nicholas, who was one of the Seven in the Primitive Church of
   Jerusalem. But that false identification was soon accredited.
   Scandalous stories were told against the alleged heresiarch which very
   much resembled those which were told about the Carpocratians. Many
   aberrations took place on all sides, and no paradox was without its
   defender. People were found who took the part of Cain, of Esau, of
   Korah, of the Sodomites, of Judas himself. Jehovah was the evil,--a
   tyrant filled with hatred, and it had been right to brave his laws.
   These were kinds of literary paradoxes; just as thirty or forty years
   ago it was the fashion to set up criminals as heroes, because they were
   supposed to be in revolt against bad social order. There was a Gospel
   of Judas. In excuse for this latter, it was said that he had betrayed
   Jesus with a good intention, because he had found out that his master
   wished to ruin the truth. The traitor's conduct was also explained by a
   motive of interest for humanity. The powers of the world (that is to
   say, Satan and his agents) wished to stop the work of salvation, by
   preventing Jesus from dying. Judas, who knew that the death of Jesus on
   the cross was beneficial, broke the charm, by giving him up to his
   enemies. Thus he was the purest of spiritual men. These singular
   Christians were called Cainites. Like Carpocrates, they taught that, in
   order to be saved, it was necessary to have done all sorts of actions,
   and, in some manner, to have exhausted all the experiences of life: it
   is said that they placed the perfection of enlightenment in the
   commission of the darkest deeds. Every act has an angel who presides
   over it, and they invoked that angel whilst they were doing the act.
   Their books were worthy of their morals. They had the Gospel of Judas,
   and some other writings which were made to exhort men to destroy the
   work of the Creator; one book in particular, called The Ascension of St
   Paul, into which they seem to have introduced horrible abominations.

   These were aberrations without any real object, and which certainly the
   serious-minded Gnostics rejected just as much as the orthodox
   Christians. The really grave part about it was the destruction of
   Christianity, which was at the bottom of all these speculations. In
   reality the living Jesus was suppressed, and only a phantom Jesus,
   without any efficacy for the conversion of the heart, was left. Moral
   effort was replaced by so-called science; dreams took the place of
   Christian realities, and every man arrogated to himself the right to
   carve out as he chose a Christianity according to his fancy, from the
   dogmas and earlier books. This was no longer Christianity, it was a
   strange parasite which was trying to pass for a branch of the tree of
   life. Jesus was no longer a fact without analogy; he was one of the
   apparitions of the divine spirit. Docetism, which reduced all the human
   life of Jesus to a mere appearance, was the basis of all these errors.
   Still, moderate with Basilides and Valentinus, it becomes absolute with
   Saturninus, and with Marcion we shall see that the whole of the
   Saviour's earthly career is reduced to a pure appearance.

   Orthodoxy will be able to resist these dangerous ideas, whilst at times
   allowing itself to be drawn away by their seductive qualities. Gospels,
   deeply tinged with new ideas, were spread abroad. The "Gospel of Peter"
   was the expression of pure Docetism. The "Gospel according to the
   Egyptians" was a remodelling, after the Alexandrine ideas, of the
   Gospel according to the Hebrews. The union of the sexes was forbidden
   in it. The Saviour, on being questioned by Salome when his kingdom
   would come, answered, "When you tread under foot the garment of shame;
   when two shall make one; when that which is outside shall be like that
   which is inside, and the male joined to a female shall be neither male
   nor female." Interpreted according to the rules of the vocabulary of
   Philo, these strange words signify that when humanity is no more, the
   body will be spiritualised and enter into the soul, so that man will be
   nothing but a pure spirit. The "coats of skins" with which God covered
   Adam will then be useless; primitive innocence will reign again.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XI.

  THE LAST REVOLT OF THE JEWS.

   After staying in Jerusalem for two years, Hadrian got tired of doing
   nothing, and again began to think of his travels. First of all he paid
   a visit to Mauritania, and then directed his course for the second time
   to Greece and the East. He stayed at Athens for nearly a year, and
   consecrated the edifices that he had ordered to be erected during his
   first journey; and Greece had one long festival, and seemed but to live
   in him. In every direction classic recollections revived, and Hadrian
   made them durable by monuments and columns, and founded temples,
   libraries, and professorial chairs. The ancient world before dying made
   its pilgrimage to the places from which it had sprung, and seemed as if
   it were uttering its last eulogy. The Emperor presided like a pontiff
   at these innocent solemnities, which hardly amused anybody now but
   those who were empty-headed and idle.

   The august traveller then continued his journey through the East, and
   visited Armenia, Asia Minor, Syria, and Judea. As far as outward
   appearances went, he was everywhere received as a guardian spirit, and
   medals which were struck for the occasion bade him welcome in every
   province. That of Judea is still in existence. Alas; what a falsehood.
   Below the inscription ADVENTVI AVG. IVDAEAE is to be seen the Emperor
   in a noble and worthy attitude receiving Judea with kindness, and she
   is presenting her sons to him. Already the Emperor has the handsome and
   gentle look of the Antonines, and seems to be the impersonification of
   calm civilisation educating fanaticism. Children go before him bearing
   palms, whilst in the middle a Pagan altar and a bull symbolise
   religious reconciliation; and Judea, a patera in her hand, seems to
   share in the sacrifice that is being prepared. This is how official
   optimism instructs sovereigns. The opposition between the East and the
   West was actually getting more and more accentuated, and the signs of
   this were so certain that the Emperor could not doubt them--his
   benevolent eclecticism was, however, at times singularly unsettled.

   From Syria Hadrian went to Egypt by way of Petra. His discontent and
   his ill temper with the peoples of the East increased daily. A short
   time before Egypt had been in a state of great agitation. The ancient
   worships, which were springing into life again, caused a certain amount
   of fermentation, for it was so long since an Apis had been seen that
   these ancient chimeras were beginning to be forgotten, when suddenly a
   clamour arose; that miraculous animal had been found, and as everybody
   wished to possess it, all tried to get it from the others. The hold of
   Christianity over Egypt was not so strong as it was elsewhere, for many
   heathen superstitions were mixed up with it. All these follies only
   served to amuse Hadrian, and a letter which be wrote about that time to
   his brother-in-law Servian, has been preserved to us:--

   I have found that Egypt, my dear Servian, which you praised to me, to
   be a very flighty country, hanging by a thread, turning round with
   every breath of fashion. There, those who adore Serapis are Christians
   at the same time, and men who call themselves bishops of Christ are
   devoted to Serapis. There is not a president of a synagogue, not a
   Samaritan, not a Christian priest, who does not supplement his
   functions by those of the astrologer, of the diviner, and the
   charlatan. The patriarch himself, when he comes to Egypt, is forced by
   some to adore Serapis, and by the others to adore Christ. It is a
   seditious, futile, and irrelevant education, and a rich and productive
   city, where nobody lives in idleness. Some are glassblowers, others
   papermakers, others again dyers, and all understand and practise some
   trade. The gouty can find something to do, the shortsighted can obtain
   employment, the blind are not without occupation, and even the
   one-armed are not idle. Money is their only god, the divinity which
   Christians, Jews, people of all sorts, adore. One regrets to find such
   a low state of morals in a city which by its manufactures and its
   grandeur is worthy of being the capital of Egypt. I have granted it
   everything; I have restored its ancient privileges, and given it new
   ones, and I forced them to thank me whilst I was there; but I had
   scarcely left when they began to talk about my son Verus, and to say,
   what no doubt you know, about Antinous. The only revenge that I wish to
   have is that they may always be forced to eat their own fowls,
   fecundated in a manner that I do not like to mention. I have sent you
   some glasses of prismatic colours, which the priests of the temple
   offered me: they are specially dedicated to you and to my sister. Have
   them used on festive occasions, only take care that our Africanus does
   not make too good use of them.

   From Egypt Hadrian returned to Syria, and there he found the people
   very badly disposed. They were getting bolder. Antioch gave him an
   unfavourable reception, and so he went to Athens, where be was
   worshipped. There he heard of some very serious events, for the Jews
   were having recourse to arms for the third time. Their attack of
   furious madness of the year 117 seemed as if it were about to
   recommence, and Israel disliked the Roman government more than ever.
   Every malefactor who revolted against the State was a saint, and every
   brigand became a patriot. It was looked upon as an act of treason to
   arrest a robber. "Vinegar, off-spring of wine," said a rabbi to a Jew,
   whose business it was to arrest evil-doers, "why do you denounce God's
   people?" Elijah also met this worthy public officer and exhorted him to
   give up his odious trade.

   It seems that the Roman authority also committed more than one mistake.
   Hadrian's administration became more and more intolerant towards the
   Eastern sects, whom the Emperor made fun of. Several lawyers thought
   that circumcision, like castration, was punishable ill-usage, and so it
   was forbidden. The cases in which those who had practised epispasm, and
   had been forced by fanatics to be circumcised over again, would more
   especially give rise to these prosecutions; and we do not know how far
   imperial justice advanced along this difficult road which was so
   opposed to liberty of conscience. Hadrian was certainly not a man given
   to excessive measures, and in Jewish tradition all the odium of these
   measures rests on Tineius Rufus, who was the Legate Proprætor of the
   Province of Judea, and whose name the malcontents changed into Tyrannus
   Rufus.

   These annoyances, which were so easily avoided in the only cases which
   were of any importance to pious families, namely, the cases relative to
   the circumcision of infants, were not the chief cause of the war. What
   really raised the Israelites to revolt, was the horror that they felt
   at seeing the transformation of Jerusalem, or, in other words, the
   progress that the construction of Ælia Capitolina was making. The sight
   of a Pagan city rising on the ruins of the holy city, the rebuilding of
   the profaned temple, those heathen sacrifices, those theatres raised
   with the very stones of that venerated building, those foreigners
   dwelling in the city which God had loved, all this appeared to them to
   be the very height of sacrilege and of defiance.

   Far from wishing to return to this profaned Jerusalem, they fled from
   it like an abomination, whilst the south of Judea was more than ever a
   Jewish country. A number of large places had sprung up there which
   could defend themselves, thanks to the position of their houses, which
   were massed together on the summit of low hills. For the Jews of that
   district, Bether had become another holy city, and equivalent to Zion.
   The fanatics procured arms by a singular stratagem. They were bound to
   furnish the Romans with a certain number of implements of war, and so
   they manufactured them badly, on purpose that the rejected weapons
   might come to them. Instead of visible fortifications, they constructed
   immense tunnels; and the fortifications of Bether were completed by
   advanced works of broken stone, and all the Jews who remained in Egypt
   and Libya hastened to swell the number of the rebels.

   We must do that justice to the clear-sighted portion of the nation that
   they took no part in a movement that presupposed enormous ignorance of
   the world, and complete blindness as to what they were doing. As a
   general rule, the Pharisees were defiant and reserved, and many of the
   doctors of the law fled into Galilee, and into Greece, to avoid the
   coming storm. Several did not conceal the fact that they were faithful
   to the Empire, and even attributed a certain legitimacy to it. Rabbi
   Joshua Ben Hanania seems to have acted in a conciliatory spirit up to
   his extreme old age; and after him, the Talmudists say, all prudent
   counsels were lost. Under these circumstances was seen again what had
   been continually seen for the last hundred years: a nation, which was
   easily duped at the slightest breath of Messianic hope, would go on in
   spite of the doctors; they only thought of their casuistry; and if they
   died, they did not die fighting, but in defending themselves from
   breaking the law.

   The Christians resisted the temptation even better. Although revolt
   might gratify the hatred of some of them for the Roman Empire, a
   distinct distrust for all that proceeded from fanatical Israel stopped
   them on the dangerous descent. They had already chosen their part, and
   the form of their resistance to the Empire was not revolt but
   martyrdom. They were tolerably numerous in Judea, and, contrary to the
   orthodox Jews, they might even live in Ælia. Of course the Jews tried
   to gain over their quasi-compatriots, but the disciples of Jesus were
   already very far from all earthly politics, for he had buried for ever
   the hopes of a material patriotism and Messiah. Hadrian's reign was far
   from being unfavourable to the Churches, and so they did not move; and
   some voices were even raised to foretell to the Jews the consequences
   of their obstinacy, and the extermination that awaited them.

   Every Jewish revolt had, more or less, to do with Messianic hopes, but
   never before had any one given himself out for the Messiah; but this
   took place now. No doubt under the influence of Christian ideas, and in
   imitation of Jesus, a man gave himself out for the long-expected
   heavenly messenger, and succeeded in seducing the people. We have no
   clear history of that strange episode, for the Jews, who alone could
   have informed us what were the secret thoughts and the motive secret of
   these agitators, have left us nothing but confused pictures of them,
   like those of a man who has been mad. There was no Josephus then, and
   Barcochebas, as the Christians called him, remains an insoluable
   problem, and one on which even imagination cannot hope to exercise
   itself with any hope of reading the truth.

   The name of his father, or of the place where he was born, was Coziba,
   and he was always called "the son of Coziba" (Bar or Ben-Coziba), but
   his real name is unknown. Perhaps his partisans were induced to conceal
   his name, and that of his family, purposely in the interests of his
   part as Messiah. He seems to have been a nephew of Rabbi Eleazar of
   Modin, an Agadist of the highest renown, who had lived very much with
   Rabbi Gamaliel II. and his companions. One asks oneself whether the
   recollection of the Maccabees, who were still living at Modin, did not
   excite Bar-Coziba's patriotic enthusiasm. There can be no doubt as to
   his courage, but the scantiness of historical information prevents us
   from saying more than that. Was he serious? Was he a religious
   enthusiast or a fanatic? Was he one of those sincere believers in the
   Messiah who came on to the scene too late? Or are we only to see in
   this equivocal person a charlatan, an imitator of Jesus, with a totally
   different object, a common impostor, even a criminal, as Eusebius and
   St Jerome assert? We cannot tell, for the only circumstance in his
   favour is that the principal Jewish Doctor of the Law at that period
   was in his favour, a man who, from his habit of thought, would be far
   removed from the dreams of an impostor, and that was the Rabbi Aquiba.

   For many years he had been the chief authority amongst the Jews, and he
   was compared to Esdras and even to Moses. As a general rule, the
   doctors were not at all favourable to popular agitators. Taken up with
   their own discussions, they thought that the destinies of Israel,
   dependent on the observance of the Law and Messianic dreams, were
   limited for them to the Mosaic ideal which those who were scrupulously
   devout realised. How could Aquiba incite the people, whose confidence
   he enjoyed, to commit a veritable act of folly? Perhaps the fact of his
   having sprung from the people, and his democratic tendency to
   contradict the traditions of the Sadducees, may have helped to lead him
   astray, and perhaps also the absurdity of his exegesis deprived him of
   all practical rectitude. One can never with impunity play with common
   sense, or put such pressure on the springs of the intellect as may
   threaten to snap them. At any rate the fact appears certain, though it
   is difficult to believe it, that Aquiba recognised Bar-Coziba's
   Messianic character. After a fashion he invested him with it before the
   people when he gave him the commander's baton and held his stirrup for
   him when he mounted his war-horse to inaugurate his reign as Messiah.
   His name of Bar-Coziba was an unhappy one, and lent itself to all kinds
   of unfortunate allusions. Looking on the bearer of it as the
   predestined Saviour of Israel, it is said that Aquiba applied the verse
   from Numbers xxiv. 17: "A star shall arise out of Jacob," a verse which
   was supposed to have a Messianic sense to him, and so his name of
   Bar-Coziba was changed into Bar-Kokaba, "the son of the star."

   Bar-Coziba being thus recognised as the man who, without any official
   title, it is true, but in virtue of a sort of universal acceptance,
   passed as the religious guide of the people of Israel, became the chief
   of the revolution, and war was decided on. At first the Romans
   neglected the foolish popular agitations. Bether, in its isolated
   position, far from the great highroads, did not attract their
   attention; but when the movement had invaded the whole of Judea, and
   the Jews began to form threatening bands in all directions, they were
   obliged to open their eyes. They began to attack the Roman forces, and
   to lie in ambush for them in a murderous fashion. Besides this, the
   movement, as happened in 68 and in 117, had a tendency to spread over
   the rest of the East. Arab brigands who lived near the Jordan and the
   Dead Sea, who were in a state of anarchy through the destruction of the
   Nabatæan kingdom of Petra, thought they saw a chance of pillage in
   Syria and Egypt. The confusion was general. Those who had practised
   epispasm to escape the capitation tax, submitted anew to a painful
   operation, so that they might not be excluded from the hopes of Israel;
   and some thought so surely that the time of Messiah had arrived, that
   they thought themselves authorised to pronounce the name of Jehovah as
   it is written.

   As long as Hadrian was in Egypt and Syria, the conspirators did not let
   their plans be seen, but as soon as he had gone to Athens the revolt
   broke out. It appears that the report was spread that the Emperor was
   ill and attacked by leprosy. Ælia, with its Roman colony, was strongly
   guarded. The Legio Decima Fratensis was still in garrison there, and no
   doubt the road between Ælia and Cæsarea, the city which was the centre
   of the Roman authority, also remained open, and thus ælia was never
   surrounded by the insurrection. It was easy to keep communications
   open, thanks to a circle of colonies which were established in the east
   and north of the city, and especially owing to such places as Nicopolis
   and Lydda, which were assured to the Romans.

   It is therefore probable that the revolt in its northward progress did
   not go beyond Bether, and did not reach Jerusalem, but all the smaller
   towns of Judea which had no garrisons proclaimed the independence of
   Israel. Bether, in particular, became a sort of small capital, a
   prospective second Jerusalem side by side with the great Jerusalem
   which they hoped to conquer soon. Its situation was very strong, as it
   commanded all the valleys of the revolted country, and was made almost
   impregnable by means of tremendous outworks, the remains of which may
   be seen even to this day.

   The first case of the insurgents was the monetary question. One of the
   greatest punishments of the faithful Jews was to be obliged to handle
   money bearing the effigy of the Emperor, and idolatrous figures. For
   religious purposes, above all, they either sought for coins of the
   Asmonean princes, which were still current in the country, or else
   those of the first rebellion, when the Asmonean coinage had been
   imitated. The new insurrection was too poor and too badly provided with
   machinery to issue coins of a new mould. They were satisfied with
   withdrawing the coins bearing the stamp of Flavius and Trajan, and
   impressing them anew with an orthodox stamp which the people knew, and
   which had a national meaning for them; and perhaps some ancient coins
   had been found which facilitated the operation. For this imitation, the
   handsome coins of Simon Maccabæus, the first Jewish prince who coined
   money, were especially selected. From their date, which was that of the
   liberty of Israel or of Jerusalem, those coins seemed to have been
   struck for the very purpose, and those on which was to be seen a temple
   surmounted by a star, and those which bore only the impress of the two
   trumpets which were destined, according to the Law, to summon Israel to
   the Holy War, were more appropriate still. The stamp upon stamp was
   done very roughly, and on a great number of coins the first Roman
   impress is still visible. This coinage was called the money of Coziba,
   or the money of the revolt, and as it was partly fictitious it lost
   much of its value later on.

   It was a long and terrible war, and lasted for over two years, whilst
   the best generals seem to have worn themselves out in it. Tineius
   Rufus, seeing that he was outnumbered, asked for assistance, and though
   his colleague Publicius Marcellus, Legate of Syria, hastened to bring
   it him, both failed. In order to crush the revolt, it was necessary to
   summon the first captain of his period, Sextus Julius Severus, from
   Britain. He received the title of Legate of the Province of Judea, in
   the place of Tineius Rufus, and Quintus Lollias Urbicus was his second
   in command as Hadrian's legate.

   The rebels never showed themselves in the open country, but they were
   masters of the heights, on which they built fortifications, and between
   their embattled towns they dug out covered ways, subterranean
   communications, which were lighted from above by air-holes, which gave
   air as well as light. The secret passages were places of refuge for
   them when they were driven back, and enabled them to go and defend
   another point. Unhappy race! Driven from its own soil, it seemed as if
   it preferred to bury itself in its bowels rather than leave it, or
   allow it to be profaned. This war of moles was extremely murderous, and
   fanaticism reached the same height as in 70. Nowhere did Julius Severus
   venture to come to an engagement with his adversaries, for, seeing
   their number and despair, he feared to expose the heavy masses of the
   Romans to the danger of a war of barricades and of fortified hill tops.
   He attacked the rebels separately, and, thanks to the number of his
   soldiers, and to the skill of his lieutenants, he nearly always
   succeeded in starving them out, by surrounding them in their trenches.

   Bar-Coziba, driven into a corner by impossibilities, became more
   violent every day, and his rule was that of a king. He ravaged the
   surrounding country, and did not recoil before the grossest imposture
   in order to sustain his part as Messiah. The refusal of the Christians
   to receive him as such, and to make common cause with him, irritated
   him greatly, and so he resorted to the most cruel persecutions against
   them. The Messianic character of Jesus was the denial of his own and
   the principal obstacle to his plans. Those who refused to deny or to
   blaspheme the name of Jesus were put to death, scourged, tortured.
   Jude, who seems to have been Bishop of Jerusalem at that time, may have
   been one of the victims. Enthusiasts looked upon the political
   indifference of the Christians, and their loyal fidelity to the Empire,
   as a want of patriotism; but it seems that the more sensible among the
   Jews openly gave vent to their displeasure. One day when Aquiba, seeing
   Bar-Coziba, cried out, "Here is the Messiah!" the Rabbi Johaman ben
   Torta replied, "Aquiba, the grass will be growing between your jaws
   before the son of David comes."

   As usual, Rome prevailed in the end, and in turn each centre of
   resistance fell. Fifty improvised fortresses, which the rebels had
   built, and nine hundred and fifty-five market towns were taken, and
   turned into ruins. Beth-Rimmon, on the Idumæan frontier, was the scene
   of a terrible slaughter of fugitives. The siege of Bether was
   particularly long and difficult; the besieged endured the last
   extremities of hunger and thirst, and Bar-Coziba was killed there,
   though nothing is known of the circumstances of his death.

   The massacre was terrible. A hundred and eighty thousand Jews were
   killed in the various engagements, whilst the number of those who
   perished from hunger, by burning, and from sickness, is incalculable.
   Women and children were murdered in cold blood.Judea literally became a
   desert, and howling wolves and hyenas entered into the houses. Many
   towns of Darom were ruined for ever, and the desolate look which the
   country wears even now is still a living sign of the catastrophe that
   happened seventeen and a half centuries ago.

   The Roman army had been sorely tried. Hadrian, writing to the senate
   from Athens, does not make use of the ordinary preamble which emperors
   were in the habit of using: Si vos liberique vestri valetis, bene est;
   ego quidem et exereitus valemus. Severus was rewarded as he deserved
   for this well-conducted campaign, for, at Hadrian's suggestion, the
   senate decreed him triumphal ornaments, and he was raised to the
   dignity of Legate of Syria. The army of Judea was overwhelmed with
   rewards, and Hadrian was hailed as Emperor for the second time.

   Whatever was not killed was sold at the same price as the horses, at
   the annual fair of the 'I'erebinthe, near Hebron. That was the spot
   where Abraham was supposed to have pitched his tent when he received
   the visit of the three Divine Beings. The field in which the fair was
   held, carefully marked out by a rectangular enclosure, exists still.
   From that time forward a terrible memento was attached to that place,
   which, up till then, had been so sacred in their eyes, and they never
   mentioned the fair of the Terebinthe without horror. Those who were not
   sold there were taken to Gaza and there put up for sale at another fair
   that Hadrian had established there. Those unfortunate wretches who
   could not be got rid of in Palestine were taken to Egypt, and many
   suffered shipwreck, whilst others died of hunger; others, again, were
   killed by the Egyptians, who had not forgotten the atrocities which the
   Jews committed in the same parts eighteen years previously. Two
   brothers who still kept up the resistance at Kafar-Karouba were killed,
   with all their followers.

   The subterranean works of Judea, however, still contained a crowd of
   unfortunate beings, who did not dare to leave them for fear of being
   killed. Their life was terrible; every sound seemed to herald the
   approach of the enemy, and in their mad terror they rushed at and
   crushed each other. The only means they had of assuaging their hunger
   was by eating the bodies of their neighbours who had died. It seems
   that, in certain cases, the Roman authorities forbade the burial of
   corpses, so as to make the impression of their chastisement even
   greater. Judea was like a vast charnel-house, and those wretches who
   succeeded in reaching the desert looked upon themselves as favoured by
   God.

   All certainly had not deserved such severe punishment, and in this
   instance, as happens so often, wise men paid for fools. A nation is a
   solidarity, and the individual who has contributed nothing towards the
   faults of his compatriots, who has even groaned under them, is punished
   no less than the others. The first duty of a community is to check its
   absurd elements; and the idea of withdrawing from the great
   Mediterranean confederation that Rome had created, was absurdity
   itself. Just as history ought to sympathise with those gentle and
   pacific Jews who only desired freedom to meditate on the Law, so also
   our principles oblige us to be severe towards a Bar-Coziba who plunged
   his country into a abyss of ills, and towards an Aquiba who upheld
   popular follies by his authority. Every one who sheds his blood for the
   cause which he considers righteous, is deserving of our respect; but we
   owe him no approval for that. The Jewish fanatics were not fighting for
   their liberty, but for a theocracy, for liberty to harass the Pagans,
   and to exterminate everything that appeared to them to be bad. The
   ideal which they sought after would have been an unsupportable state of
   affairs. Analogous, as far as intolerance went, to the miserable
   Asmonean period, it would have been the reign of zealots, radicals of
   the very worse sort: it would have been the massacre of unbelievers, a
   Reign of Terror. All the liberals of the second century looked upon it
   like that. A very intelligent man, who, like the Jews, belonged to a
   noble and conquered race, Pausanias, the antiquary, expresses himself
   thus:--"In my time there reigned that Hadrian who showed such respect
   for all the gods, and who had the happiness of his subjects so much at
   heart. He undertook no war without being forced to it; and as for the
   Hebrews who border on Syria, he subjugated them because they had
   revolted against him."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XII.

  DISAPPEARANCE OF THE JEWISH NATION.

   The immediate consequence of this mad act of rebellion was a real
   persecution of Judaism. The Jews were weighed down by a tribute that
   was heavier still than the fiscus judaicus imposed by Vespasian. The
   exercise of the most essential practices of the Mosaic
   religion--circumcision, the observance of the Sabbath and of feasts,
   apparently insignificant simple usages were forbidden, under pain of
   death; and even those who taught the Law were prosecuted. Renegade
   Jews, who had turned spies, tracked the faithful who met in the most
   secret places to study the sacred code, and the Jews were reduced to
   reading it on the roofs of the houses. The doctors of the Law were
   cruelly persecuted, and rabbinical ordination entailed the death
   penalty both on the ordainer and on the ordinee. There were many
   martyrs in Judea and Galilee, and throughout the whole of Syria it was
   a crime to be a Jew. It was now, it appears, that the two brothers,
   Julianus and Pappus, who are celebrated in Jewish tradition for having
   preferred death to an apparent violation of the Law committed in
   public, were executed, and though water in a coloured glass was offered
   them so that they might pretend to think that they had drunk Pagan
   wine, they refused to take it.

   About that period the schools of the Casuists were chiefly taken up
   with the question of those precepts which might be broken in order to
   avoid death, and those for which martyrdom ought to be suffered. The
   doctors generally admit that in times of persecution all observances
   may be renounced as long as three prohibited things, idolatry,
   fornication (i.e., unlawful unions), and murder are abstained from.
   This sensible principle was put forward: "It is suicide to resist the
   Emperor's orders." It was admitted that religious worship might be kept
   secret, and that the circumcision of children might be announced by the
   sound of hand-mills instead of with the usual noisy demonstrations. It
   was also pointed out that, according to Leviticus xviii. 5, the
   observance of the Law gives life, and so that consequently any one who
   dies for the Law is responsible for his own death, so that when a man
   found himself between the two precepts to observe the Law and to
   preserve his own life, he ought to obey the second, which is the more
   commanding, at any rate when death is certain, just as, in the case of
   a serious illness, it is lawful to take remedies which may contain some
   impure substance. There was another point on which all were agreed, and
   this was that it was better to suffer death than to violate the
   slightest commandment publicly; and lastly, they agreed in placing the
   duty of teaching above all other obligations. At Lydda especially these
   questions were agitated, and that city had its celebrated martyrs, who
   were called the murdered of Lydda.

   The great doubt about Providence that takes possession of the Jew as
   soon as he is no longer prosperous and triumphant, made the position of
   those martyrs a particularly cruel one. The Christian, depending as he
   does altogether on the future life, is never firmer in his faith than
   when he is being persecuted; but the Jewish martyr has not the same
   light. "Where is now your God?" is the ironical question which he
   constantly fancies that he hears from Pagan lips. To the very last
   Rabbi Ishmael ben Elischa never ceased to fight against the ideas that
   sprang up in his mind, and in the minds of his companions, against
   divine justice. "Do you still trust in your God?" he was asked, and his
   answer was, "Though he slay me yet will I trust in him," using the
   words of Job that have been badly translated.

   Aquiba, who had been a prisoner for a long time, nevertheless kept up a
   correspondence with his disciples. "Prepare for death, terrible days
   are coming," was the sentence always on his lips. He was put to death
   because the was betrayed to the Romans for imparting profound doctrine.
   He is said to have been flayed alive with red-hot iron hooks. Whilst he
   was being torn to pieces he cried incessantly, "Jehovah is our God!
   Jehovah is our only God!" and he laid a stress on the word "only"
   (ehad), till he expired, when a heavenly voice was heard saying, "Happy
   Aquiba, as you died whilst uttering that word only.'"

   It was not till late, and by means of successive experiences, that
   Israel arrived at the idea of immortality. Martyrdom made this belief
   almost a necessity. Nobody could pretend that those scrupulous
   observers of the Law who died for it had their reward here below. The
   answer that sufficed for cases like those of Job and Tobias did not
   suffice here. How could any one talk of a long and happy life for
   heroes who were expiring under a terrible death? Either God was unjust,
   or the saints who were thus tormented were great culprits. In the
   middle ages there were martyrs who accepted this latter doctrine with a
   kind of despair, and when they were being led to execution, they would
   maintain that they had deserved it, for they had been guilty of all
   sorts of crimes. But such a paradox must necessarily be very rare. The
   reign of a thousand years which was reserved for the martyrs, was the
   first solution of that difficult problem which was attempted. Then it
   came to be a received opinion that ascensions to heaven in heart and
   mind, that revelations, the contemplation of the divine secrets of the
   cabala, were the martyr's reward. As the apocalyptic spirit was lost,
   the tikva, that is, the invincible confidence of man in the justice of
   God, assumed forms that were analogous to the enduring paradise of
   Christians. But that article of faith was never an absolute dogma
   amongst the Jews; no trace of it is found in the Thora; and how could
   it be supposed that God had expressly deprived the saints of old of
   such a fundamental dogma?

   From thenceforward all hopes of seeing the Temple raised up again were
   lost, and the Jews had even to give up the consolation of living near
   the holy places. The species of worship that the Jewish people vowed to
   the soil which they thought God had given them, was the evil that the
   Roman authorities wished to cure at any price, so that for the future
   they might cut off the root of Jewish wars. An edict drove the Jews
   from Jerusalem and its neighbourhood under pain of death, and the very
   sight of Jerusalem was refused them. Only once a year, on the
   anniversary of the taking of the city, did they obtain authorisation to
   come and weep over the ruins of the Temple, and to anoint a hollow
   stone, which they thought marked the site of the Holy of Holies, with
   oil; and even that permission was dearly bought. "On that day," says St
   Jerome, "you might see a mournful crowd, a miserable people, who
   received no pity, assemble and draw near. Decrepit women, old men in
   rags, all are weeping, and whilst their cheeks are covered with tears,
   and they raise their livid arms, and tear their thin hair, a soldier
   comes up and calls on them for payment, so that they may have the right
   to weep a little longer." The rest of Judea was also prohibited ground
   to the Jews, but not so strictly, for certain localities, such as
   Lydda, always preserved their Jewish quarters.

   The Samaritans, who had taken no part in the revolt, hardly suffered
   less than the Jews. Mount Gerizim, like Mount Moriah, had its temple of
   Jupiter; the prohibition of circumcision attacked them in the free
   exercise of their religion; and the memory of Bar-Coziba seems to have
   been execrated by them.

   The construction of Ælia Capitolina went on more actively than ever,
   and everything was done to efface the recollection of the past, which
   had been so threatening. The old name of Jerusalem was almost
   forgotten, and Ælia took its place throughout the whole of the East, so
   that a hundred and fifty years later Jerusalem had become a name in
   ancient geography which nobody knew any more. The city was full of
   profane edifices, forums, baths, theatres, tetranymphea, etc. Statues
   were erected in all directions, and the subtle Jewish mind tried to
   discover mocking allusions in them, which Hadrian's engineers certainly
   never intended. Thus over the gate leading to Bethlehem there was a
   piece of sculpture in marble which they thought resembled a pig, and in
   that they saw a most insulting piece of irony towards the vanquished
   people, whilst they forgot that the wild boar was a Roman emblem, and
   figured on the standards of the legions. The circumference of the city
   was slightly altered towards the south, and became about what it is
   now. Mount Zion remained outside the enclosure, and was covered with
   kitchen gardens. Those parts of the city which were not rebuilt
   afforded a mass of loose stones which served as a stone quarry for the
   new buildings. The foundations of Herod's temple (the present harâm)
   excited wonder by their strength, and soon the Christians declared that
   these tremendous layers of stones would only be dislodged at the coming
   of Antichrist.

   On the site of the Temple, as has been said, was raised the temple of
   Jupiter Capitolinus. Bacchus, Serapis, Astarte, the Dioscuri were
   associated there with the principal god. As usual, statues of the
   Emperor were scattered broadcast, and one of them at least was
   equestrian; whilst the statues of Jupiter and Venus were also set up
   near Golgotha. When, in later years, the Christians settled their
   sacred topography, they were scandalised at this proximity, and looked
   upon it as an outrage; and in the same way they thought that the
   Emperor had intended to profane Bethlehem by setting up the worship of
   Adonis there.

   Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius, and Verus occupied themselves in
   beautifying the city, and improving the highroads that led to it, and
   these public works irritated the real Jews. "In spite of all, the works
   of this nation are admirable," said Rabbi Juda bar Ilaï one day to two
   of his friends who were seated with him. "They build forums, construct
   bridges, and establish baths." "That is much to their merit!" replied
   Simeon ben Jochaï; "they do it all for their own benefit: they put
   brothels into the forums; they have the baths for their own amusement,
   and they construct the bridges so that they may receive the tolls.

   The hatred of Greek life, which was always so active amongst the Jews,
   was redoubled at the sight of a material renovation which seemed to be
   its striking triumph. Thus finished the final attempt of the Jewish
   people to remain a nation which possessed a name and a defined
   territory. In the Talmud, the war of Bar-Coziba is very rightly called
   "the war of extermination." Dangerous movements, which seemed to be the
   rekindling of the flame, appeared again during the first years of
   Antoninus: they were easily repressed. From that moment Israel had no
   longer a fatherland, and then it began its wandering life, which for
   centuries has marked it as the wonder of the world. Under the Roman
   sway the civil situation of the Jew was lost without recovery. If
   Palestine had wished it, it would have become a province like Syria,
   and its lot would have been neither worse nor better than that of the
   other provinces. In the first century, several Jews played most
   extraordinarily important parts. Afterwards that will never be seen,
   and it seems as if the Jews had disappeared underground: they are only
   mentioned as beggars who have taken refuge in the suburbs of Rome,
   sitting at the gates of Aricia, besieging carriages, and clinging to
   the wheels, so as to obtain something from the pity of travellers. They
   are a body of raïas, having, it is true, their statutes, and their
   personal magistrates, but who are outside the pale of common law,
   forming no part of the State, in some measure analogous to the Zingari
   in Europe. There was no longer a single rich notable Jew of any
   consideration associating with men of the world. The great Jewish
   fortunes did not re-appear again till the sixth century, and then it
   was chiefly amongst the Visigoths of Spain, in consequence of the false
   ideas with regard to usury and commerce which were spread abroad by
   Christianity. Then the Jew became, and continued to be during the
   greater part of the Middle Ages, a necessary personage without whom the
   world could not accomplish the simplest transactions. Modern Liberalism
   alone could put an end to this exceptional situation. A decree of the
   Constituent Assembly in the year 1791 made them again citizens and
   members of a nation.

   In that world which was burnt up by a sort of internal volcanic fire,
   there were some oases. Some survivors of Sadduceeism, who were treated
   as apostates by their co-religionists, preserved amidst these mystical
   dreams the healthy philosophy of Ecclesiasticus. The provincial Jews,
   who were subject to the Arsaeides, lived tolerably happily, and
   observed the Law without being interfered with. The composition of a
   charming book, the date of which is uncertain, and which was not
   translated into Greek till towards the end of the second century, may
   be attributed to these provinces. It is a little romance, full of
   freshness, such as the Jews excelled in, the idyl par excellence of
   Jewish piety and domestic pleasures.

   A certain Tobit, son of Tobiel, who sprung from Cades of Naphtali, was
   taken captive to Nineveh by Shalmaneser. From his childhood he had been
   a model of goodness, and, far from participating in the idolatry of the
   Northern tribes, he regularly went to Jerusalem, the only spot that God
   had chosen as a place of worship, and offered his tithe to the priests,
   the descendants of Aaron, according to the rules of the Teruma and of
   the Maaser scheni. He was charitable, benevolent, and amiable towards
   all; he abstained from eating the bread of the heathen, and in return
   God obtained Shalmaneser's favour for him, who made him his purveyor.
   After Shalmaneser's death. Sennacherib, who had returned furious from
   his expedition to Jerusalem, began to act very severely towards the
   Jews; their bodies were lying about unburied in all directions, and
   were to be seen in heaps outside the walls of Nineveh, and Tobit went
   and buried them by stealth. The king, surprised at the disappearance of
   the bodies, asked what had become of them. Tobit was persecuted, hid
   himself, and lost his property, and only the murder of Sennacherib
   saved him. He then continued his pious work of burying the Israelites
   whom he found dead, though his neighbours made fun of him, and asked
   him what his reward would be. One evening he came back overcome by
   fatigue; he could not go into his own house, as he was unclean from
   having touched the dead bodies, so he threw himself at the foot of a
   wall in the court of his house and went to sleep: an accident deprived
   him of his eye-sight. Here we have the same problem laid down as in the
   book of Job, and with the same vigour: a just man not only badly
   rewarded for his goodness, but struck in consequence of his virtue
   itself: an act of virtue followed by misfortune resulting from it. How
   can one allege after that that the servant of Jehovah always receives
   the reward of his fidelity? His wife asks him where his alms and his
   good actions are, and what profit he has gained from them.

   Tobit persists in the affirmation of a true Israelite that God is just
   and good, and he even carries his heroism so far as to vilify himself
   so as to justify God; he declares that he has deserved his lot, firstly
   on account of the sins and omissions that he has been guilty of through
   ignorance, then because of the sins of his fathers. Because the
   ancestors of the then existing generation were guilty, therefore that
   generation is dispersed and dishonoured. Tobit only begs for one
   favour, which is to die at once, so that he may return to the earth and
   go to the eternal place.

   Now on that same day, at Ecbatana, another afflicted creature had also
   asked God for death. That was Sara, the daughter of Raguel, who had
   been married seven times, and, though she was absolutely pure, had seen
   her seven husbands strangled on their wedding-night by the wicked demon
   Aëschmadaëva, who was jealous of her, and killed all those who wished
   to touch her. Those two prayers were presented at the same time at the
   throne of God by the Archangel Raphael, who is one of the seven angels
   that are allowed to penetrate into the sanctuary of the divine glory to
   carry the prayers of the saints thither. God hears the supplication of
   these two just and sorely tried persons, and bids Raphael make good the
   evil.

   Everybody knows the charming idyl that follows. It has rightly found a
   place amongst these sacred fables which, reproduced under many
   different shapes, never weary us. Gentle morality, family feeling,
   filial piety, the love and the eternal union of the husband and wife,
   charity towards the poor man, devotion to Israel, have never been
   expressed in a more charming fashion. Good will to all, strict honesty,
   temperance, great care not to do to others what one would not wish to
   have done to oneself; care in the choice of one's company and to be
   intimate only with good people, the spirit of order, regularity in
   one's affairs, judicious family arrangements, that is that excellent
   Jewish morality which, though it is not exactly that of a nobleman, or
   of a man of the world, has become the code of the Christian middle
   classes in its best sense. Nothing is further removed from avarice.
   That same Tobit, who lives on intimate terms with the persecutors of
   his co-religionists because it is an advantageous place, lays it down
   as a principle that happiness consists in a moderate fortune joined to
   justice; he can put up with poverty with a light heart, and declares
   that real pleasure consists in giving, and not in laying up treasure.

   Above all, the ideas of matrimony as developed here are particularly
   chaste, sensible, and refined. The Jew, with his recollections always
   fixed on his ancestors the prophets and patriarchs, and persuaded that
   his race will possess the earth, marries only a Jewess of good family,
   whose relatives are honourable and known to be so. Beauty is far from
   being a matter of indifference; but, before everything else, laws and
   usages and family convenience must be consulted, so that the fortune
   may not change hands. The man and woman are reserved for one another
   throughout all eternity. Marriages founded on sensual love turn out
   badly, but on the other hand, a union founded on real sentiment is the
   agglutination of two souls: it is blessed by God when it is sanctified
   by the prayers of the two lovers, and then becomes friendship full of
   charm, especially when the man maintains that moral superiority over
   his companion that belongs to him by right. To grow old together, to be
   buried in the same tomb, to leave their children well married, to see
   their grand-children, and perhaps the children of the latter, what more
   can be requisite for happiness?

   The author, separated from the book of Job by nearly a thousand years,
   has in reality not an idea beyond that of the old Hebrew book. All ends
   for eth best, as Tobit dies at a hundred and sixty-eight years of age,
   having had nothing but happiness since his trials, and being honourably
   buried by the side of his wife. His son dies at a hundred and
   twenty-seven years of age, in possession of his own and of his
   father-in-law's property. Before dying, he hears that Nineveh is taken,
   and rejoices at that good news, for what can be sweeter than to see the
   chastisement of the enemies of Israel?

   Thus God appears like a father who chastises a son whom he loves and
   then takes pity on him. When the just man suffers, it is as a
   punishment for his own faults and those of his fathers. But if he
   humbles himself and prays, God pardons him and restores him to
   prosperity. Thus to sin is to be one's own enemy: charity preserves
   from death, almsgiving saves.

   What happened to Tobit will happen to Israel. After having chastised
   it, God will repair its disasters. The Temple will be rebuilt, but not
   as it was before, and then all those who were dispersed shall be
   restored to their own country. Israel, thus reunited, will rebuild
   Jerusalem and the Temple with all the magnificence which was foretold
   by the prophets, and this time for eternity. It will be a city of
   sapphires and emeralds; its walls and towers shall be of pure gold; its
   squares shall be like mosaics of beryl and carbuncle, and its streets
   shall say Alleluia. All people shall be converted to the true God, and
   shall bury their idols. Happy shall they be then who have loved
   Jerusalem and pitied her sufferings.

   As soon as it was translated, that little book came into great favour
   with the Christians. Some of its features were of a nature to shock the
   delicacy of a few; it was, in some respects, too Jewish; some places in
   it might be touched up in a still more edifying manner. Hence arose a
   series of alterations, whence sprang a variety of Greek and Latin
   texts. The last alteration, that of St Jerome, which was made with
   remarkable literary feeling, gave that form to the book which it has in
   the Latin text of the Vulgate. The awkwardness and the clumsiness of
   the original have disappeared, and the result of those corrections is a
   small masterpiece which all succeeding centuries have read and admired.

   The Jewish people are without an equal when it is a question of
   accentuating and imparting a charm to an ideal of justice and domestic
   virtues. The Thora is the first book in the world, regarded as a book
   of devotion, but it is an impracticable code. No society could have
   lived under it, and the Jews of the time of Bar-Gioras and Bar-Coziba
   were defending a Utopia when they defended a nationality founded on
   such principles. History has that sympathy for them which it owes to
   all those who have been conquered; but how much more was the peaceable
   Christian and the author of the Book of Tobit, who thought it quite
   natural not to revolt against Shalmaneser, imbued with the traditions
   of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIII.

  THE TALMUD.

   The Law, with that calmness of mind that it produced, acted like a
   sedative which quickly restored serenity to the troubled spirit of
   Israel. The Jewish quarters of the West do not appear to have suffered
   much from the follies of their co-religionists of the East. Even in the
   East peaceable Israelites had not participated in the strife, and soon
   became reconciled to the conquerors. Some ventured to believe that
   heaven was favourable to the Romans, and that, after all, the Law, when
   it was strictly observed in families, always gave the Jews a modus
   vivendi. Thus order was re-established in Syria sooner than one might
   have thought. The fugitives from Jerusalem went either to the East to
   Palmyra, or else into the South towards Yemen, or else to Galilee. That
   latter country above all received a new impulse from the emigration,
   and for centuries afterwards remained an almost exclusively Jewish
   country.

   After the extermination of the year 67, Galilee had been lost to
   Judaism for some time. Perhaps the revolt of 117 was the reason that
   the beth-din was transported thither. After the defeat of Bar-Coziba,
   the inhabitants who had been driven from the South took refuge there in
   a body and repopulated the villages, and then the beth-din became
   definitely Galilean. That tribunal had its seat first of all at Ouscha,
   then in the villages near Sephoris, at Schefaram, at Beth-Shearim, and
   at Sephoris itself; then it was established at Tiberias, and was not
   moved till the Mussulman conquest. Whilst Darom was almost forgotten
   and its schools were declining, whilst even Lydda was falling with
   wretchedness and ignorance, and was losing the right of fixing the
   embolismic calculations, Galilee became the centre of Judaism. Meïron,
   Safat, Gischala, Alma, Casioun, Kafr-Baram, Kafr-Nabarta, Ammouka, were
   the chief localities of this new development, and were filled with
   Jewish monuments, and these, nearly all of them reverenced in the
   Middle Ages as tombs of the prophets, can still be seen in the midst of
   a country which for the third and fourth time has become desert and
   desolate. Tiberias was, in a measure, the capital of that kingdom of
   disputation and subtlety where the last remains of original Jewish
   activity were exhausted.

   In fact, in that tranquil country, restored to its favourite retired
   and studious life, the family life and that of the synagogue, Israel
   definitely renounced its earthly visions, and sought the kingdom of
   God, not like Jesus in the ideal, but in the rigorous observance of the
   Law. From that time forward proselytism disappears by degrees from
   amongst that people who had been its most ardent followers. A law of
   Antoninus put a stop to the restrictive measures of Hadrian, and
   allowed the Jews to circumcise their children; but Modestinus the
   lawyer draws attention to the fact that such permission applied only to
   their own children, and exposed those who should perform that operation
   on any one who was not a Jew to capital punishment. Only some madmen,
   the Siccani, continued their religious ambush, and forced the unhappy
   wretches whom they could surprise in their houses to choose between
   circumcision and the dagger. The majority knew nothing of these
   aberrations. It renounced heroism, and made martyrdom useless by those
   clever distinctions between the precepts which may be transgressed in
   order to save one's life and those for which one must suffer death. And
   from this sprung a singular spectacle: Judaism, which had given the
   first martyr to the world, now left the monopoly of it to Christians,
   so much so that in certain persecutions Christians might be seen
   figuring as Jews, so that they might enjoy the immunities of Judaism.
   The latter only had martyrs whilst it was revolutionary; as soon as it
   renounced politics it settled down altogether, and was satisfied with
   that tolerance, so closely bordering on independence, that was accorded
   to it. On the other hand, Christianity, which never had anything to do
   with politics, reckoned martyrs amongst its ranks, till it in turn
   became triumphant and persecuting.

   It was the Talmud that created the Jewish people during that long
   period of repose. The doctors of old had taught the Law without any
   logical order, solely according to the cases that were brought before
   them. Then in their teaching they had followed the order of the hooks
   of the Pentateuch. With Rabbi Ben Aquiba a fresh distribution was
   introduced, a kind of classification according to matter, necessitating
   divisions and subdivisions, like a Corpus juris. Thus a second code,
   the Mischna, was formed side by side with the Thora. The Scriptures
   were no longer taken as the foundation, and, to speak truly, with that
   taste for arbitrary interpretation that had been introduced, the
   Scriptures had become almost useless. It was no longer a question of
   understanding the will of the legislator clearly, it was a question of
   finding at any price, in the Bible, arguments in favour of traditional
   decisions, and verses to which received precepts could be attached. It
   is the destiny of religions that the sacred books should always be thus
   destroyed by commentaries. Sacred books alone do not form religions; it
   is the force of circumstances, involving a thousand wants of which the
   first originator could not have dreamt. Thus the coincidence between
   the sacred books and the religious state of any period is never
   perfect; the coat does not fit well enough, and then the commentator
   and the traditionalist come and settle matters. Thus it happens that,
   instead of studying the sacred book by itself, it was thought better,
   after a certain time, to read it in the codes which have been extracted
   from it, or rather which have been adapted to it.

   The attempt to codify the oral Jewish law was made in different
   directions at the same time. We have no longer the Mischna of Rabbi
   Aquiba, nor many others that existed. The Mischna of Juda the Holy,
   written sixty years later, has thrown those that preceded it into
   oblivion, but he neither invented all the divisions nor all the titles.
   Many of the treatises in his compilation had been completely drawn up
   before his time. Besides that, after Aquiba, the original schools
   disappeared, and the doctors, full of respect for their predecessors,
   who seemed to them to be surrounded by the halo of martyrdom, tried no
   new methods--they were mere compilers.

   Thus the Jews made a new Bible for themselves, which rather threw the
   first one into the shade, at the same time that the Christians did. The
   Mischna was their Gospel, their New Testament. The distance between the
   Christian and the Jewish book is enormous. The simultaneous appearance
   of the Talmud and the Gospel from the same race of people,--of a slight
   masterpiece of elegance, lightness, and moral subtlety, and of a
   ponderous monument of pedantry, of miserable casuistry, and religious
   formalism, is one of the most extraordinary phenomenons of history.
   These twins are certainly the most dissimilar creatures that ever
   issued from the womb of the same mother. There is something barbarous
   and unintelligible, a disheartening contempt for language and form, an
   absolute lack of distinction and of talent, that make the Talmud one of
   the most repulsive books that exist. The disastrous consequences of one
   of the greatest faults that the Jewish people ever committed, which was
   to turn their back on Greek discipline, which was the source of all
   classical culture, are clearly felt in it. That rupture with reason
   itself placed Israel in a state of deplorable isolation. It was a crime
   to read a foreign book. Greek literature seemed to be a toy, a female
   ornament, an amusement beneath the notice of a man who was preoccupied
   with the study of the Law, a childish science which a man ought to
   teach his son " at an hour which is neither day nor night." As the
   Thora says, "You shall study the law day and night." Thus the Thora
   came to be regarded as the embodiment of all philosophy and all
   science, and dispensing with any other study. Christianity was less
   exclusive, and took a large portion of Hellenic tradition into its
   bosom. Separated from that great source of life, Israel fell into a
   state of poverty, or rather of intellectual aberration, from which it
   did not emerge till it came under the influence of the so-called
   Arabian system of philosophy, that is to say, under the influence of a
   singularly refracted ray of Greek light.

   There certainly are in this confused medley of the Talmud some
   excellent maxims, more than one precious pearl of the kind as those
   which Jesus adopted and idealised. and which the Evangelists made
   divine in writing them. From the point of view of the preservation of
   the individuality of the Jewish people, Talmudism was an heroic party,
   and such as could scarcely be found in the history of a race. The
   Jewish nation, dispersed from one end of the world to the other, had no
   other nationality than the Thora; to maintain this scattered whole,
   without clergy, bishops, pope, or holy city, without any central
   theological college, an iron chain was required, and nothing binds men
   together so firmly as common duties. The Jew, carrying all his religion
   with him, requiring neither temples nor clergy for his worship, enjoyed
   incomparable freedom in his emigrations to the end of the world. His
   absolute idealism made him indifferent to material things; faithfulness
   to the recollections of his race--the confession of faith (the schema)
   and the practice of the Law, sufficed him. When one is present at any
   ceremony in a synagogue, at first sight everything seems modern,
   borrowed, common-place. In the construction of their places of worship
   the Jews have never sought a style of architecture which would be
   peculiar to them. The ministers of religion, with their bands, their
   three-cornered hat, and their stole, look like parish priests; the
   sermon is formed on the model of the Catholic pulpit; the lamps, the
   seats, all the furniture, has been bought in the same shop that
   supplies the neighbouring parish. Nothing in the singing or the music
   goes further back than the fifteenth century. Some portions of the
   worship even are imitations of the Catholic form. The originality and
   the antiquity suddenly burst forth in the profession of faith: 'Hear, O
   Israel, Adonai, our God, is One, holy is His name!" This headstrong
   proclamation, this persistent cry, which in the end has carried away
   and converted the world, constitutes the whole of Judaism. That people
   has made God, and yet there never was a people less given to disputing
   about God.

   One very sensible feature, in fact, was to have chosen practice, and
   not dogma as the basis for religious communion. The Christian is united
   to the Christian by the same belief; the Jew is united to the Jew by
   the same observances. By making the union of souls bear on truths of
   the metaphysical order, Christianity prepared the way for schisms
   without number; by reducing the profession of faith to the schema, that
   is to say, to the affirmation of the Divine Unity and to the outward
   bond of ritual, Judaism got rid of the logical disputes from its midst.
   The season for excommunication amongst the Jews was generally acts, not
   opinions. The Cabala always remained a matter for free speculation, and
   never became a compulsory article of faith; the immortality of the soul
   was regarded as a consoling hope, and it was allowed without difficulty
   that religious practices would be abolished when Messiah came, when
   Jewish principles would be universally adopted. Even the belief
   concerning Messiah had a doubt cast upon it by a learned doctor, and
   the Talmud gives his opinion without blaming it. That was very
   judicious. It is perfect nonsense to be compelled to believe any
   particular doctrine, whilst the greatest external strictness may be
   allied to entire liberty of thought. That is the reason of that
   philosophical independence which ruled in Judaism during the Middle
   Ages down to our days. Eminent doctors, the oracles of the synagogue,
   such as Maimonides and Mendelsohn, were pure rationalists. A book like
   the Iccarim. (Fundamental Principles) of Joseph Albo, which proclaimed
   that religion and prophecy are only a form of symbolism which is
   destined to ameliorate man's moral condition, that all divine laws can
   be modified, that individual punishments and rewards in the future life
   are nothing but figures of speech, that such a book, I say, should
   become celebrated and not incur any anathema, is a fact that is without
   example in any other religion. And piety did not suffer for it. Those
   men who had no hope in a future life endured martyrdom with admirable
   courage, and died accusing themselves of imaginary crimes, so that
   their death might not be too strong an objection against the justice of
   God.

   Great disadvantages counterbalanced the advantages of that severe
   discipline to which Israel submitted in order to retain the unity of
   its race. Their ritual united co-religionists amongst themselves, but
   separated them from the rest of the world, and condemned them to an
   isolated life. The chains of the Talmud forged those of the Ghetto. The
   Jewish people, which up till then had been so devoid of superstition,
   became its most thorough type, and the mocking allusions that Jesus
   made to the Pharisees were justified. For centuries their literature
   turned chiefly on the sacred furniture and vestments, and on slaughter
   houses. That other Bible became a prison in which the new Judaism
   carried on its unhappy life of reclusion up to our days. Enclosed in
   that unwholesome encyclopedia, the Jewish intellect got so sharp that
   it went wrong. For the Israelites the Talmud became a sort of Organon,
   in every respect inferior to that of the Greeks. The Jewish doctors put
   forward the same claims as the jurists who in the sixteenth century
   declared that they could find a whole system of intellectual culture in
   Roman Law. In our time, this vast collection, which still serves as the
   basis for Jewish education in Hungary and in Poland, may be considered
   as the principal source of the defects which may be remarked
   occasionally amongst the Jews of those countries. The belief that
   Talmudic studies supply the place of all others, and make those who
   devote themselves to them fitted for everything, is the great cause of
   that presumption, that subtlety, that want of general culture, which so
   often destroy really fine qualities in the Israelite.

   The Jewish mind is endowed with extreme vigour. For centuries it was
   forced to rave because it was restricted to a narrow and barren circle
   of ideas. The activity which it displayed was the same as if it had
   been working in a wide and fertile soil, and thus the result of
   headstrong work, applied to a thankless dry matter, was mere subtlety.
   To wish to find everything in texts was to oblige themselves to
   childish feats of strength. When their natural sense is exhausted, a
   mystical sense is sought for, and then men set to work to count
   letters, and to compute them as if they were numbers. The chimeras of
   the Cabala and of the Notarikon were the last results of that extreme
   spirit of exactitude and of servile adherence. In such an accumulation
   of disputes as to the best means of fulfilling the Law, there was the
   proof of a very ardent religious spirit; but we may be allowed to add
   that there was in it something of a witticism and of amusement.
   Ingenious and active men, who were condemned to a sedentary life,
   driven from public places and from the general society of the time,
   sought means to get rid of their weariness by combining dialectics with
   the texts of the Law. Even in our time, in those countries where Jews
   live exclusively among themselves, the Talmud is, if we may say so,
   their chief diversion. The meetings which they have to explain its
   difficulties, and to discuss obscure or imaginary cases, seem to them
   to be pleasure parties, and those subtleties which we look upon as
   irksome, have seemed, and still seem, to thousands of men to be the
   most attractive matter to which human genius can be applied.

   From that moment the Jews acquired all the faults of isolated men: they
   became morose and malevolent. Till that time the spirit of Hillel had
   not altogether disappeared, and at least some gates of the synagogue
   were open to converts; but now they would have no more proselytes. They
   asserted that they had the true, the only Law, and at the same time
   asserted that that Law belonged to them only. Any one who tried to join
   God's people was repelled with insults. Certainly it was only right to
   be discreet, and to inform the neophyte of the dangers and
   unpleasantnesses that awaited him. But they did not stop there: every
   proselyte was soon looked upon as a traitor; as a deserter who would
   make use of Judaism as a short cut to Christianity. It was openly
   declared that proselytes were Israel's leprosy, and that these
   intruders ought to be mistrusted to the twenty-fourth generation. The
   wise distinctions that the Jews of the first century, and the
   Haggadists, who took their inspiration from Isaiah and Jeremiah, made
   with regard to ceremonial, that grand concession that the precept of
   circumcision only applied to the descendants of Abraham, were all
   forgotten. From that time forward proselytism was forbidden, and the
   law of Antoninus, which permitted Jewish children alone to be
   circumcised, became superfluous; for it was evident that neither the
   Greek nor Roman world would resign itself to an ancient African
   practice which had its origin in a matter of health, but which was not
   at all fitted for our climate, and which had become oppressive and
   senseless for the Jews themselves.

   Morals suffered somewhat from so many attacks on nature. Without
   containing any bad advice, and, even strangely enough, whilst insisting
   on bashful modesty, the Talmud often mentions lascivious subjects, and
   takes a tolerably excited imagination on the part of its writers for
   granted. In the third and fourth centuries, Jewish morals, especially
   those of the patriarchs and doctors, are said to have been very lax,
   but, above all things, in this decrepit Israel, reason seems to have
   been weakened. The supernatural is scattered about lavishly in an
   insane fashion. Miracles appeared so simple that a hallel, a special
   prayer, is devoted to them as to one of the most ordinary events of
   life. There never was any nation which, after a period of extraordinary
   activity, underwent such a terrible abasement.

   A small sect, hedged in by numerous rules which prevent it from living
   the general life, is unsociable by nature, and is necessarily hated and
   easily gets to hate others in turn. In a large society which is imbued
   with great liberal principles, as our modern civilisation is, and as in
   some respects Arabian civilisation, and that of the first half of the
   Middle Ages were, that causes no great inconvenience. But in a society
   like that of the Christian Middle Ages, and like in the East in our
   time, it is the cause of accumulated antipathies and contempt. The
   Jewish Talmudist, who, wherever he went, was a stranger without a
   fatherland, often proved himself a scourge for the country to which
   chance had taken him. We must remember the Jews of the East and of the
   coast of Barbary, who are filled with hatred when they are persecuted,
   and are arrogant and insolent as soon as they feel that they are
   protected. The noble efforts of the Jews of Europe to improve the moral
   condition of their Eastern brethren are themselves the best proof of
   the inferiority of these latter. No doubt the detestable social
   organisation of the East is the primary cause of the evil, but the
   exclusive spirit of Judaism has also much to do with it. The
   regulations of the Ghetto are always disastrous, and, I repeat it, that
   Pharisaism and Talmudism made that rule of reclusion the natural state
   of the Jewish people. For the Jew, the Ghetto was not so much a
   restraint coming from outside as a consequence of the Talmudic spirit.
   Any race would have perished under it, and the manner in which the
   Jewish people resisted this deleterious mode of life, speaks highly for
   its moral constitution.

   No one who has any lofty mind can help feeling a profound sympathy for
   a people which has played so extraordinary a part in this world, that
   one cannot imagine what would have been the history of the human race
   if chance had checked the destinies of that small tribe. In judging of
   that terrible crisis which the Jewish people went through about the
   beginning of our era, which caused, on the one hand, the foundation of
   Christianity, and, on the other, the destruction of Jerusalem and the
   introduction of Talmudism, there are several acts of injustice that
   have to be repaired. The colours in which the Pharisees are represented
   in the Gospels have been rather heightened; the Evangelists seem to
   have written under the influence of the violent ruptures which took
   place between the Christians and the Jews about the time of the siege
   of Titus. In the Acts of the Apostles, in all that we know about the
   Church of Jerusalem, and of James, the Saviour's brother, the Pharisees
   have a very different part to that which they play in the discourses
   which the Synoptists attribute to Jesus. Nevertheless, one cannot
   prevent one's self from being decidedly with Hillel, with Jesus, with
   St Paul against Sehamaï, or with the Haggadists against the Halachists.
   It was the Haggada (popular preaching) and not the Halacha (the study
   of the Law) which conquered the world. Certainly Judaism, serried,
   resisting, enclosed between the double hedge of the Law and the Talmud
   which survived the destruction of the Temple, is still grand and
   imposing. It has done the greatest service to the human intellect; it
   saved the Hebrew Bible, which the Christians would probably have
   allowed to be lost, from destruction. Judaism, since it has been
   dispersed, has given great men to the world, and some of the highest
   moral and philosophical characters; and on several occasions it has
   been a valuable auxiliary to civilisation; but it is no longer that
   grand, fertile Judaism, carrying in its loins the salvation of the
   world, which the period of Jesus and of the Apostles presents to our
   view; it is the respectable old age of a man who once upon a time held
   the destinies of humanity in his hand, and who afterwards lives in
   obscurity for many years, still worthy of esteem, but for the future
   without any providential part to play.

   St Paul, Philo, the author of the Sibylline verses, and of those
   attributed to Phocylides, were right then when they rejected the
   practices of Judaism, whilst they maintained its basis. These practices
   would have made all conversions impossible, for, scrupulously observed
   by the majority of the nation, they were, and are still, a real
   misfortune for it and for those countries which they inhabit in large
   numbers. The prophets, with their lofty aspirations, and not the Law,
   with its strict observances, contained the future of the Hebrew people.
   Jesus is the outcome of the prophets, and not of the Law, whereas the
   Talmud is the worship of the Law carried to superstition. After having
   waged relentless war on all idolatries, Israel substituted a fetichism
   for them, the fetichism of the Thora.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIV.

  THE MUTUAL HATRED OF JEWS AND CHRISTIANS.

   The Jewish catastrophe of the year 134 was almost as advantageous for
   the Christians as that of the year 70 had been. In their eyes,
   everything that savoured of the law of Moses must have appeared to be
   abrogated without a chance of return; faith alone, and the merits of
   the death of Jesus, were all that remained. Hadrian did a signal
   service to Christianity when he prevented a Jewish restoration of
   Jerusalem. Ælia, peopled, like all the colonies were, by veterans and
   common people from different parts, was no fanatical city, but, on the
   contrary, a centre disposed to receive Christianity. As a rule, the
   colonies were inclined to adopt the religious ideas of the countries to
   which they were transported. They would not have thought of embracing
   Judaism, but Christianity, on the other hand, received everybody.
   During the whole course of its three thousand years of history, it was
   only for those two hundred years, from Hadrian to Constantine, that
   human life had unfolded freely within its bosom idolatrous forms of
   worship, established on the ruins of the Jewish religion, complacently
   adopted more than one Jewish practice. The Pool of Bethesda continued
   to be a place of healing, even for the heathen, and to work its
   miracles as in the times of Jesus and of the apostles, in the name of
   the great impersonal God. For their part, the Christians continued,
   without exciting any feeling except one of pious admiration in the
   breasts of the worthy veterans who formed the colony, to perform their
   cures by means of oil and sacred washings. The traditions of that
   Church of Jerusalem were distinguished by a special character of
   superstition, and, of course, thaumaturgy. The holy places, especially
   the cave and the manger at Bethlehem, were shown, even to the heathen.
   Journeys to those places sanctified by Jesus and the apostles, began
   within the first years of the third century, and replaced the former
   pilgrimages to the temple of Jehovah. When St Paul took a deputation of
   his churches to Jerusalem, he took them to the Temple, and surely he
   was thinking neither of Golgotha nor of Bethlehem. Now on the other
   hand, men strove to retrace the life of Jesus, and a topography of the
   Gospel was formed. The site of the Temple was known, and, close to it,
   the stela of James, the Martyr, brother of the Saviour, was venerated.

   Thus the Christians reaped the fruits of their prudent conduct during
   the insurrection of Bar-Coziba. They had suffered for Rome that had
   persecuted them; and in Syria, at least, they found the prize of their
   meritorious fidelity. Whilst the Jews were punished for their ignorance
   and their blindness, the Church of Jesus, faithful to the Spirit of her
   Master, and, like Him, indifferent to politics, was peaceably
   developing in Judea and the neighbouring countries. The expulsion of
   the Jews was also the lot of those Christians who were circumcised and
   kept the Law, but not of those uncircumcised Christians who only
   practised the precepts of Noah. That latter circumstance made such a
   difference for their whole life that men were classified by it, and not
   by faith or disbelief in Jesus. The Hellenistic Christians formed a
   group in Ælia, under the presidency of a certain Mark. Till then, what
   was called the Church of Jerusalem had had no priest who was not
   circumcised, and, more than that, out of regard for the old Jewish
   nucleus, nearly all the faithful of that Church united the observation
   of the Law with belief in Jesus. From that time the Church in Jerusalem
   was wholly Hellenistic, and her bishops were all Greeks, as they were
   called. But this second Church did not inherit the importance of the
   former one. Hierarchically subordinate to Cæsarea, she only occupied a
   relatively humble position in the universal Church of Jesus, and
   nothing more was heard of the Church of Jerusalem till two hundred
   years later.

   In those countries the controversy with the Jews became an object of
   paramount importance. The Christians thought them much more difficult
   to convert than the heathen, and they were accused of subtlety and of
   bad faith in the discussions. It was alleged that as beforehand they
   had made up their minds to baffle their antagonists, they only looked
   at minutiæ, at slight inexactitudes, in which they easily got the
   better. What was said to them about the life of Jesus irritated them,
   and no doubt the antipathy that they felt for the accounts of the
   virginal birth of the pretended Messiah, inspired them with the fable
   of the soldier and of the prostitute who, according to them, were the
   real authors of that birth, which was allowed to be irregular.
   Arguments taken from the Scriptures did not affect them any more, and
   they lost their patience when certain passages were brought up against
   them in which it appeared as if God were mentioned in the plural. The
   passage in Genesis: "Let us make man in our own image," particularly
   irritated them. A pretty Haggada was invented to guard against that
   objection: "When God was dictating the Pentateuch to Moses, and He got
   to the word naase, let us make,' Moses was very much astonished, and
   refused to write it down, and vehemently rebuked the Eternal for thus
   striking a mortal blow at Monotheism. The Eternal, however, maintained
   his wording, and said, 'Let him who wishes to be deceived, deceive
   himself'!" The Jews generally admitted that wherever in the Bible there
   was a passage that was favourable to the plurality of the Divine
   persons, God, by special providence, has so disposed matters that the
   refutation is found side by side with it.

   The essential matter for the Christians was to prove that Jesus had
   accomplished all the texts of the prophets and the psalms which were
   thought to apply to the Messiah. Nothing can equal the arbitrariness
   with which the Messianic application was carried out. The Christian
   exegesis was the same as that of the Talmud and of the Midraschim: it
   was the very denial of the historical meaning. The texts were cut up
   like so much dead matter, and every phrase, separated from its context,
   was applied without scruple to the prominent prejudice of the moment.
   Already the Evangelists who wrote at second hand, especially
   pseudo-Matthew, had sought for prophetic reasons for all the facts of
   the life of Jesus. Men went much further than that. Not only did
   Christian exegetes torture the Septuagint version so as to obtain from
   it anything that might fit into their thesis and abuse the new
   translators who weakened the arguments which they drew from it, but
   they forged some passages. The wood of the cross was introduced into
   Psalm xcvi. 10, where it had never figured; the descent into hell, into
   Jeremiah; and when the Jews cried out, protesting that nothing like it
   was found in the text, they were told that they had mutilated the text
   out of pure spite and bad faith, and that,. for example, they had cut
   the account of the prophet being sawn in two by a wood saw out of the
   book of Isaiah, because that passage brought to mind the crime which
   they had committed against Jesus, too well. A convinced and ardent
   apologist finds no difficulty in anything. They referred to the
   official registers of the returns of Quirinius, which never existed,
   and to a pretended report of Pilate to Tiberius, that had been forged.

   Dialogue seemed to be a convenient form by which to attain to the
   wished-for object in these controversies. A certain Ariston of Pella,
   doubtlessly the same from whom Eusebius has borrowed the account of the
   Jewish war under Hadrian, wrote a discussion that was supposed to have
   taken place between Jason, a Jew who had been converted to Christianity
   and Papiscus, a Jew of Alexandria, who obstinately adhered to his
   ancient faith. As usual, the war was waged by means of Biblical texts;
   Jason proved that all the Messianic passages were accomplished in
   Jesus. The admirers of the book asserted that Jason's Hebraic arguments
   were so strong, and his eloquence so gentle, that there was no
   resisting it. Papiscus, in fact, at the end of the dialogue, his heart
   enlightened by the infusion of the Holy Ghost, recognised the truth of
   Christianity, and asked Jason to baptise him. However, the book was not
   received with unanimous approval. The author appeared almost too
   simple-minded, and it was thought what he wrote about the Scripture
   bordered on the ridiculous. Celsus eagerly seized the opportunity of
   making fun of it, and Origen only defended it in an embarrassed manner,
   allowing that it was one of the least valuable books that had ever been
   written in the defence of religion, and recognising it as more fit to
   instruct the simple than to satisfy the learned. Eusebius and St Jerome
   gave it up altogether; it was not copied, and so it was lost.

   Another very inferior book that appeared in Judea has preserved for us
   the echo of these intestine broils. The author made use of the wills or
   rather of the recommendations that he put into the mouths of the
   patriarchs, Jacob's sons, as the basis of his writing. The language of
   the original is that Greek interspersed with Hebraisms which is the
   language of the greater part of the New Testament writings. The
   quotations are taken from the Septuagint. The author was a born Jew,
   but he belonged to Paul's party, for he speaks of the great apostle in
   a tone of enthusiasm, and he shows himself most severe towards his
   former co-religionists, whom he accuses of felony and treason. In the
   work, traces of nearly all the writings in the New Testament are to be
   found, and the two Bibles are comprehended under the common term of
   "The Holy Books," and the book of Enoch is quite confidently quoted as
   being inspired. Never was the divinity of Jesus spoken of in grander
   terms. It was because they had slain Jesus and denied his resurrection
   that the Jews were captives, dispersed over the whole world, given up
   to the influence of Satan and of demons. Since their apostacy, the
   spirit of God has gone over to the heathen. Israel will again be
   gathered together from the dispersion, but it will have the disgrace of
   not associating itself till late with the converted Gentiles.

   A striking vision expresses the sentiments of the author with regard to
   his ancient race. Napthali relates that one day in a dream he saw
   himself sitting with his brothers and his father on the shore of the
   lake Jabneh where they saw a vessel sailing at random. It was laden
   with mummies, and had neither crew nor captain, and its name was The
   Ship of Jacob. The patriarchal family embarked on it, but soon a
   terrible tempest arose, and the father, who was holding the rudder,
   disappeared like a phantom; Joseph saved himself on the mast, the
   others escaped on ten planks, Levi and Juda on the same one. The
   shipwrecked men were dispersed in all directions; but Levi, clothed in
   sackcloth, prayed to the Lord, when the tempest was stilled, the vessel
   reached the land in the midst of a profound calm, the ship-wrecked men
   found their father Jacob again, and joy became universal.

   The intention of the author of the testaments of the twelve patriarchs
   had been to enrich the list of the writings contained in the sacred
   canon; his book is of the same order as the pseudo-Daniel, the
   pseudo-Esdras, the pseudo-Baruch, the pseudo-Enoch. Its success,
   however, was not the same. By its declamatory tone and its emphatic
   commonplaceness, by an exaggerated severity towards the pleasures of
   love and the luxury of women, by its severe tirades against the Jews,
   the book was calculated to edify the pious faithful; but the time for
   great successes with regard to frauds in the Canon of Scripture was
   passed; already a tolerably strong hedge surrounded the sacred volume
   and prevented fresh compositions being furtively inserted. so the book
   was only received in very restricted fractions of the Church. However,
   as it was altogether Christian and anti-Jewish, it did not share in the
   reprobation with which the Greek Church visited apocryphal Jewish and
   Judeo-Christian literature. Copies of it were multiplied, and the
   original Greek was preserved in a good number of manuscripts.

   The philosopher Justin of Neapolis, in Samaria, was a much more
   valuable defender whom the Church acquired at about that period. His
   father, Priscus, or his grandfather, Bacchius, doubtlessly belonged to
   the colony which Vespasian established at Sychem, and which procured
   for that town the name of Flavia Neapolis. His family was heathen, and
   gave him a careful Hellenistic education. Justin had more heart and
   religious requirements than rational faculties. He read Plato, tried
   the different philosophical schools of his time, and as happens to
   ardent but not very judicious minds, he found satisfaction in none of
   them. He required the impossible from those schools. He wanted a
   complete solution of all the problems which the universe and the human
   conscience raise. The sincere avowal of powerlessness which his
   different masters made to him attracted him towards the disciples of
   Jesus. He was the first man who became a Christian through scepticism,
   the first who embraced the supernatural, that is to say, the negation
   of reason, because he was out of temper with reason.

   He has related to us, with too much art for his account to be looked
   upon as an exact autobiography, how he went through all the sects, his
   errors, the charm which the Jewish revelation exercised on him when he
   knew it, and the manner in which the prophets led him to Christ. What
   struck him above all was the eight of the morality of the Christians
   and the spectacle of their indomitable firmness. The other forms of
   Judaism, by which he was surrounded, especially the sect of Simon
   Magus, only filled him with disgust. The philosophical turn which
   Christianity was already assuming had great attractions for him. He
   adhered to the dress of the philosophers, that pallium which was
   nothing but an index of an austere life devoted to asceticism, and
   which many Christians were fond of wearing. In his eyes his conversion
   was no rupture with philosophy. He was fond of repeating that he had
   only begun to be a real philosopher from that day; that he had only
   abandoned the writings of Plato for those of the prophets, and profane
   philosophy for a new philosophy--the only sure system, the only one
   which gives repose and peace to those who profess it.

   The attraction which Rome possessed over all the sectaries made itself
   felt by Justin. Shortly after his conversion he set out for the capital
   of the world, and there it was that he composed those Apologies, which,
   by the side of Quadratus and Aristides, were the first manifestation of
   Christianity to the eyes of a public initiated to philosophy. His
   antipathy for the Jews, which was inflamed by the recollection of the
   recent acts of violence of Bar-Coziba, inspired him with another work,
   whose exegesis was as singular as that of Ariston of Pella, and in
   which error and injustice have perhaps been pushed even further.

   In fact, the parts were changed. The heathen entered the Church in
   crowds, and became its most numerous members. The two great bonds that
   attached the new worship to Judaism--the Passover and the Sabbath--were
   getting looser day by day. Whilst in St Paul's day the Christian who
   did not observe the law of Moses was hardly tolerated, and was
   constrained to make all kinds of humiliating concessions, it was now
   the Judaising Christian whom it was not wished to exclude from the
   Church. If he was irreproachable in his faith in Jesus Christ and in
   his obedience to the commandments, if he was persuaded of the
   inefficacy of the Law, if he only wished to observe a part of it by way
   of a pious remembrance, if he would not in any way trouble those
   Gentiles whom Jesus Christ had truly circumcised and brought out of
   error, if he was not guilty of any propaganda to persuade those latter
   to submit to the same practices as he did himself, if he did not hold
   up these practices as obligatory and necessary for salvation, he might
   be saved. This, at any rate, was what men of large mind admitted. But
   there were others who neither dared to have intercourse nor to live
   with those who observed the Law in any shape.

   "As for me," Justin says, "I believe that when a person, from weakness
   of understanding, wishes to observe as much as he can of that Law which
   was imposed upon the Jews because of the hardness of their heart, when,
   at the same time, that person hopes in Jesus Christ, and is determined
   to satisfy all the eternal and natural duties of justice and of piety,
   that he makes no difficulty in living with other Christians without
   wishing to induce them to be circumcised or keep the Sabbath, I
   believe, I repeat, that such a person ought to be received to friendly
   intercourse in every way. But any Jews who pretend to believe in Jesus
   Christ and wish to force the faithful Gentiles to observe the Law, I
   reject absolutely. . . . Those who, after having known and confessed
   that Jesus is the Christ, abandon their faith because they are
   persuaded by these obstinate-minded men in order to go over to the Law
   of Moses, whatever may be their reason for doing so, will find no
   salvation unless they acknowledge their fault before their death."

   Origen looks at matters in a similar fashion. Jews who have become
   Christians, according to him, have abandoned the Law. Jews who observe
   the Law as Christians are Ebionites and sectaries, because they value
   circumcision and practices that Jesus has abolished. Logic accomplished
   itself. It was inevitable that a duality which prevented Christians
   from eating together even at Easter, must end in a complete schism.

   From the middle of the second century, in fact, the hatred between the
   two religions was sealed. The quiet disciples of Jesus, and the Jews
   who were exiled for their territorial fanaticism, became daily more
   mutually furious. According to the Christians, a new people had been
   substituted for the ancient. The Jews accused the Christians of
   apostacy, and subjected them to real persecution.

   "They treat us like enemies, as if they were at war with us, killing us
   and torturing us when they can, just as you do yourselves," Justin said
   to the Romans.

   Women who wished to become converts were scourged in the synagogues and
   stoned. The Jews reproached the Christians for no longer sharing the
   anger and the griefs of Israel. The Christians began to inflict a
   reproach on the whole Jewish nation which certainly neither Peter, nor
   James, nor the author of the Apocalypse would have addressed to them,
   that of having crucified Jesus. Up till then his death had been looked
   upon as Pilate's crime, as that of the High Priests and of certain
   Pharisees, but not of the whole of Israel. Now the Jews were made to
   appear as a decided nation, one that assassinated God's envoys and
   rebelled against the clearest prophecies. The Christians made a sort of
   dogma out of the non-reconstruction of the Temple, and looked upon
   those as their most mortal enemies who put forward any pretensions to
   giving the lie to their prophecies on this matter. As a matter of fact,
   the Temple was not restored till the time of Omar, that is to say, at
   the period when Christianity in its turn was conquered at Jerusalem.
   When Omar wished to be shown the holy site, he found that the
   Christians had converted it into a place for depositing filth, out of
   hatred for the Jews.

   The Ebionites or Nazarenes, who had for the most part retired to the
   other side of the Jordan, naturally did not share these sentiments.
   They were a numerous body, and by decrees gained possession of Paneas,
   all the country of the Nabateans, Hauran, and Moab. They kept up their
   relations with the Jews and Aquiba, and the most celebrated doctors
   were known to them; Aquila was their favourite translator, but the
   mistakes that they made with regard to the period at which those two
   teachers flourished, proves that they had only received a vague echo of
   their celebrity. Besides this, the writers of the Catholic Church speak
   about two sorts of Ebionites, one of which retained all the Jewish
   ideas, and only attributed an ordinary birth to Jesus, whereas the
   other agreed with St Paul in admitting that observances were necessary
   only for Israelites by blood, and admitted that Jesus had a
   supernatural birth, such as is recounted in the first chapter of
   Matthew. The dogmas of the Ebionite school followed the same line of
   development as those of the Catholic Church; by degrees, even in that
   direction, there was a tendency to elevate Jesus above humanity.

   Although they were excluded from Jerusalem as being circumcised, the
   Ebionites of the East were always supposed to dwell in the Holy City.
   The Ebionites of the rest of the world still looked upon the Church of
   Jerusalem as it had been in the time of Peter and James as the peaceful
   capital of Christendom. Jerusalem is the universal kibla of
   Judeo-Christianity; the Elkasaites, who observed that kibla to the
   letter, only symbolised the general feeling. But such a resistance to
   evidence could not last long. Soon Judeo-Christianity had no longer a
   mother, and Nazarene or Ebionite traditions existed no longer except
   amongst the scattered sectaries of Syria.

   Hated by the Jews, almost strangers to the Churches of St Paul, the
   Judeo-Christians decreased daily. It was not with them as it was with
   other Churches, which were all situated in large cities, and
   participated in the general civilisation, for they were scattered about
   in unknown villages, to which no rumours from the outside world had
   access. Episcopacy was the product of great cities: they had no
   Episcopacy. Thus having no organised hierarchy, deprived of the ballast
   of Catholic orthodoxy, tossed about by every wind, they were more or
   less lost in Essenism and Elkaism. With them the Messianic belief
   resulted in an endless theory about angels. The theosophy and the
   asceticism of the Essenes caused the merits of Jesus to be forgotten;
   abstinence from flesh, and the ancient precepts of the Nazarites,
   assumed an exaggerated importance. The literature of the Ebionites,
   which was all in Hebrew, appears to have been weak. Only their old
   Hebrew gospel, which resembled that of Matthew, preserved its value.
   The converted Jews who knew no Greek were fond of it, and still made it
   their gospel in the fourth century. Their Acts of the Apostles, on the
   other hand, were more or less sophisticated. The journeys of Peter,
   which are scarcely mentioned in the canonical Acts, received a large
   development through their imagination. They added on to them some
   wretched apocryphas, which were attributed to some of the prophets and
   apostles, and in which James seems to have played a principal part.
   Hatred for St Paul breathes out of all those writings, the like of
   which we shall find written in Greek at Rome.

   Such a false position was sure to condemn Ebionism to death. "Wishing
   to maintain an intermediary position," Epiphanius wittily remarks,
   "Ebion was nothing, and in him this saying was accomplished: I came
   near suffering every misfortune, party wall as I am between the Church
   and the synagogue.'" St Jerome also says that because they wished to be
   Jews and Christians at the same time, they did not succeed in being
   either Jews or Christians. Thus at the very birth of Christianity
   occurred what has happened in nearly all religious movements. The first
   century of the Hegira witnessed the extermination of the companions,
   relations, and friends of Mahomet, of all those, in a word, who wished
   to enjoy the monopoly of that revolution of which they were the
   authors. In the Franciscan movement, the real disciples of St Francis
   d'Assisi found, at the end of a generation, that they were dangerous
   heretics who were given up to the flames by hundreds.

   The fact is that in those first days of a creative activity ideas
   progress with giant strides: the imitator soon becomes retrograde, and
   a heretic amongst his own sect, an obstacle to its views, which wish to
   progress in spite of him, and thus often insult and kill him. He does
   not advance any more, and everything is advancing around him. The
   Ebionim, for whom the first Beatitude had been pronounced (Blessed are
   the Ebionim!), were now a scandal for the Church, and their pure
   doctrine was looked on as blasphemy. Certainly the jokes of Origen, and
   the insults of Epiphanius towards the real founders of Christianity,
   have something offensive about them. On the other hand, it is certain
   that the Ebionim of Kokaba would not have transformed the world if
   Christianity had remained a Jewish sect; a small Talmud would have been
   the result, and the Thora would never have been abandoned. In time the
   relations of Jesus would have become a religious aristocracy, which
   would have been intolerable and destructive to the work of Jesus. Like
   nearly all the descendants of great men, they would have laid claim to
   the inheritance of his genius, or of his sanctity, and would have
   treated those with disdain whom Jesus would, with much more reason,
   have taken as his spiritual family. Like the heirs of some celebrated
   writer, they would have wished to keep what he had thought and felt for
   the benefit of all to themselves. The lowly Jesus would have become a
   principle of vanity for some foolish people; the desposyni would have
   been persuaded that their great-great uncle had preached and had been
   crucified to obtain religious titles and honours in the synagogue for
   them. Jesus seems to have feared this serious mistake; one day,
   stretching out his hand to his disciples, he said with perfect truth,--

   Behold, my mother and my brethren. Whoever does the will of my Father
   which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

   Ebionism and Nazaraism continued till the fifth or sixth centuries in
   the more remote parts of Syria, especially in the countries beyond
   Jordan, which was the refuge of all the sects, as well as in the region
   of Alep, and in the island of Cyprus. Persecuted by the orthodox
   emperors, it disappeared in the whirlwind of Islam. In one sense it
   might be said that it was continued by Islam. Yes, Islamism is, in many
   respects, the prolongation or rather the revenge of Nazaraism.
   Christianity, such as the Greek polytheists and metaphysicians had made
   it, could not suit the Syrians or Arabs, who held strongly to the view
   of separating God from man, and who required the greatest religious
   simplicity. The heresies of the fourth and fifth centuries, having
   their centre in Syria, are a sort of permanent protestation against the
   exaggerated doctrines of the Trinity and the Incarnation, which the
   Greek fathers brought so prominently forward. Theodoret asked himself
   how he, who is the author of life, could become mortal. He, who has
   suffered, is a man whom God took from our midst. Sufferings belong to
   man, who is passible. It was the form of the servant which sufered.
   Ibas, of Edessa, said:--

   I do not envy Christ, who has become God, for I may become what he has
   become.

   And on Easter Day he ventured to express himself thus:

   To-day, Jesus has become immortal.

   That is the pure Ebionite or Nazarene doctrine. Islamism says nothing
   more. Mahomet knew Christianity from those communities established
   beyond the Jordan which were opposed to the Council of Nicæa and to the
   councils which it developed. For him, Christians are Nazarenes.
   Mussulman Docetism has its roots in the same sects. If Islamism
   substitutes the Kibla of Mecca for that of Jerusalem, on the other hand
   it renders the greatest honour to the site of the Temple: the mosque of
   Omar rises from that ground which was defiled by the Christians. Omar
   himself worked to clear away the filth, and pure monotheism rebuilt its
   fortress on Mount Moriah. It is often said that Mahomet was an Arian:
   that is not exact. Mahomet was a Nazarene, a Judeo-Christian. Under him
   Semitic monotheism regained its rights, and avenged itself for those
   mythological and polytheistic complications which Greek genius had
   introduced into the theology of the first disciples of Jesus.

   There was one direction in which the Hebrew Ebionites were important in
   the literary work of the Universal Church. The study of Biblical
   Hebrew, which was so neglected in Paul's Churches, continued to
   flourish amongst them. From their midst, or from the midst of
   neighbouring sects, there sprang the celebrated translators Symmachus
   and Theodosion. They are represented now as Ebionites now as
   Samaritans, always as proselytes, deserters, Judaising heretics. The
   controversies with regard to the Messianic prophecies, especially with
   regard to the Alma, the alleged virgin mother of Isaiah, brought men
   back to the study of the text. The Hebrew Gospel and its slightly
   altered brother the Gospel of St Matthew, with its legends and
   genealogies at the beginning, were another object of polemics.
   Symmachus, above all, seems to have been a universally respected doctor
   in those distant Churches.

   It was under conditions which differed but little from those that have
   been described that, apparently, the Syriac version of the Old
   Testament, called Peschito, was made. According to some, Greeks were
   its authors; according to others, Judeo-Christians; it is, however,
   certain that Jews collaborated in it, as it is produced directly from
   the Hebrew, and as it has some passages which are remarkably parallel
   with the Targums. According to all appearances, this version was
   produced at Edessa. Later, when Christianity dominated in those
   countries, the New Testament writings were translated into a dialect
   which is altogether analagous to that of the ancient Peschito.

   That school of Hebraising Christians did not outlive the second
   century. The orthodoxy of the Hellenistic Churches was always
   suspicious of Hebraic truth; piety did not inspire men with any wish to
   consult it, and the study of Hebrew offered almost insurmountable
   obstacles to any one who was not a Jew. Origen, Dorotheus of Antioch,
   and St Jerome were exceptions. Even Jews who were living in Greek or
   Latin countries greatly neglected the ancient text. Rabbi Meir, obliged
   to go to Asia, could not find a Hebrew copy of the book of Esther
   amongst the inhabitants; he wrote it for them from memory, so that he
   might be able to read it in the synagogue on the day of Purim. It is
   certain that, but for the Jews of the East, the Hebrew text of the
   Bible would have been lost. By preserving that invaluable document of
   the old Semitic world for us, the Jews have rendered a service to the
   human race which is equal to that which the Brahmins have rendered it
   by preserving the Vedas.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XV.

  ANTONINUS PIUS.

   Hadrian returned to Rome, which he did not leave again, in 135. Roman
   civilisation had just exterminated one of its most dangerous enemies,
   Judaism. On all sides there was peace, the respect of peoples, the
   barbarians apparently submissive, and the mildest maxims of government
   introduced and carried out.

   Trajan had been perfectly right in believing that men can be governed
   whilst they are treated with civility. The idea that the State was not
   only tutelary but also benevolent was taking deep root. Hadrian's
   private conduct gave rise to grave reproach; his character got worse as
   his health became worse, but the people did not notice it. Unexampled
   splendour and well-being which enveloped everything like a brilliant
   halo, hid the defective sides of the social organisation. To speak the
   truth, these defective sides were capable of being corrected. The door
   was open to any progress. Stoic philosophy was penetrating the
   legislature, and introducing into it the idea of the rights of man, of
   civil equality, and of the uniformity of provincial administration. The
   privileges of the Roman aristocracy were daily disappearing, and the
   chiefs of society believed in and were working for progress. They were
   philosophers who, without looking for Utopia, yet desired the greatest
   possible application of reason to human affairs. That was worth a great
   deal more than the fanatical and inapplicable Thora, which at best was
   only good for a very small nation. Men had reason to be satisfied with
   life, and behind that fine generation of statesmen one could perceive
   another wiser, more serious, more upright still.

   Hadrian was amusing himself, and he had the right to do so. His curious
   and active mind dreamt of all sorts of chimeras at one and the same
   time, but his judgment was not sure enough to preserve him from faults
   of taste. At the foot of the hills of Tibur he had a villa built which
   was, as it were, the album of his journeys and the pandemonium of
   celebrity. It might have been called the noisy and somewhat bold fair
   of a dying world. Everything was there: false Egyptian, false Greek,
   the Lyceum, the Academy the Prytaneum, the Canous, the Alpheus, the
   vale of Tempe, the Elysian Fields, Tartarus; temples, libraries,
   theatres, a hippodrome, a naumachia, baths. It was a strange place, and
   yet attractive I For it was the last place in which men amused
   themselves, where men of intellect went to sleep to the empty noise of
   "greedy Acheron." At Rome the chief care of the fantastic emperor was
   that senseless tomb, that vast mausoleum, where Babylon was outdone,
   and which, stripped of its ornaments, has been the citadel of Papal
   Rome. His buildings covered the world; the atheneums that he founded,
   the encouragement that he gave to letters and fine arts, and the
   immunities that he granted to professors, rejoiced the hearts of all
   men of learning. Unhappily superstition, eccentricity, and cruelty more
   and more gained the upper hand over him as his physical forces left
   him. He had built himself an elysium, in order not to believe in it,
   and a hell, to laugh at it; a hall of philosophers, to make fun of
   them; a canopus, to point out the impostures of priests, and to recall
   to his mind the foolish festivals of Egypt, that had made him laugh so
   much. Now, everything seemed to him hollow and empty: nothing more
   supported him.

   Perhaps some martyrdoms which took place during his reign, and for
   which there seems to have been no motive, are to be attributed to the
   caprices and disorders of his last months. Telesphorus was then the
   head of the Church at Rome; he died confessing Christ, and passed to
   the number of the glories of the faith.

   The death of this amateur Cæsar was sad and without dignity, for no
   really lofty moral sentiment animated him. Nevertheless, in him the
   world lost a powerful support. The Jews alone triumphed over the
   agonies of his last moments. It was customary amongst them not to
   mention him except saying after his name, "May God smash his leg." He
   was sincerely attached to civilisation, and understood well what it
   would come to in time. With him ancient literature and art came to an
   end. He was the last emperor who believed in glory, just as Ælius Verus
   was the last man who knew how to enjoy delicate pleasures. Human
   affairs are so frivolous that brilliancy and splendour must take their
   share in them. A world will not hold together without that; Louis XIV.
   knew it, and men lived and live still in his sun of gilded copper. In
   his own fashion, Hadrian marked a summit, after which a rapid descent
   commenced. Certainly Antoninus and Marcus Aurelius were vastly his
   superiors in virtue, but under them the world was getting sad and
   losing its gaiety, was beginning to wear the monk's cowl and become
   Christian; superstition was on the increase. Hadrian's art, although it
   also had its gnawing worm, still holds to principles: it is a clever
   and wise art; afterwards the decadence set in with irresistible force.
   Ancient society perceives that all is in vain; now, the day when one
   makes that discovery, one is near death. The two accomplished sages who
   are going to reign are two ascetics, after their own fashion. Lucius
   Verus and Faustina will be the unclassed survivors of the ancient
   elegance. It really was from that time that the world bade farewell to
   joy, treated the muses as seductresses, will no longer listen to
   anything but what keeps up its melancholy, and becomes changed into a
   vast hospital.

   Antoninus was a St Louis as far as heart and rectitude went, with much
   more judgment, and a wider range of intellect. He was the most perfect
   sovereign that ever reigned. He was even superior to Marcus Aurelius,
   as the reproaches of weakness which may be addressed to the latter
   cannot be applied to him. To enumerate his virtues would be to
   enumerate all the qualities of which a perfect man can command. In him
   all the world saluted an incarnation of the mythical Numa Pompilius. He
   was the most constitutional of sovereigns, and, of the same time,
   simple, economical, quite taken up with good deeds and public works,
   far from any excess, free from rhetoric and any affectation of mind. By
   his means philosophy really became a power; everywhere philosophers
   were richly pensioned; already he was surrounded by ascetics, and the
   general direction of the education of Marcus Aurelius was his work.

   Thus the world's ideal seemed to have been attained, wisdom reigned,
   and for twenty-three years the world was governed by a father.
   Affectation, false taste in literature, fell to the ground; people
   became simple; public instruction became an object of lively
   solicitude. The condition of the whole world was ameliorated; excellent
   laws, especially in favour of slaves, were carried; the relief of those
   who suffered became the object of universal care. The preachers of
   moral philosophy even surpassed the successes of Dion Chrysostom; the
   seeking for frivolous applause was the rock which they had to avoid. A
   provincial aristocracy of upright people who wished to do right, had
   succeeded the cruel aristocracy of Rome. The force and the loftiness of
   the ancient world were being lost, and men were becoming good, gentle,
   patient, humane. As always happens, socialistic ideas profited by that
   largeness of views and made their appearance, but general good sense
   and the force of established order prevented them from becoming a
   public evil.

   The similarity between these aspirations and those of Christianity was
   striking, but a profound difference separated the two schools, and was
   bound to make them hostile to each other. By its hope in the
   approaching end of the world, by its badly-concealed wishes for the
   ruin of ancient society, Christianity in the midst of the beneficent
   empire of the Antonines became a subverter that it was necessary to
   combat. Always pessimistic, inexhaustible in mournful prophecies, the
   Christian, far from being of service to national progress, showed that
   he disdained it. Nearly all the Catholic doctors looked upon war
   between the empire and the Church as necessary, as the last act in the
   strife between God and Satan; they boldly affirmed that persecution
   would last till the end of time. The idea of a Christian empire, though
   it sometimes presented itself to their mind, seemed to them a
   contradiction and an impossibility.

   Whilst the world again began to live, the Jews and Christians wished
   more obstinately than ever that it should be approaching its last hour.
   We have seen the false Baruch exhaust himself in vague announcements.
   The Judeo-Christian Sibyl never ceased thundering the whole time. The
   ever-increasing splendour of Rome was a terrible insult to divine
   truth, to the prophets, to the saints, and so they boldly denied the
   happiness of the century. All the natural scourges, which continued to
   be tolerably numerous, were represented as signs of implacable anger.
   The past and present earthquakes in Asia were made the most of as signs
   of fearful terrors. According to the fanatics, the only cause of these
   calamities was the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem. Rome, the
   harlot, had given herself up to a thousand lovers, who have intoxicated
   her; in her turn she shall be a slave. Italy, covered with blood from
   civil wars, had become the haunt of wild beasts. The new prophets, to
   express the ruin of Rome, employed nearly the same images which had
   served the Seer of 69 to depict his sombre rage.

   It was difficult for a society to put up with such attacks, without
   replying. The Sibylline books which contained those which were
   attributed to the pretended Hystaspes, and which announced the
   destruction of the empire, were condemned by the Roman authorities, and
   those who possessed them or read them were condemned to death. The
   uneasy search into the future was a crime under the empire; in fact,
   such vain curiosity almost always served as a cloak or a wish for
   revolutions and incitements to murder.

   It would certainly have been worthy of the wise emperor, so many humane
   reforms, if he had despised the intemperate imagination without a real
   object, and if he had abrogated the severe laws which, under Roman
   despotism, weighed on the liberty of worship and of meeting; but
   evidently no one about thought of it, any more than any one did who was
   about Marcus Aurelius. The unfettered thinker alone can be quite
   tolerant; now Antoninus observed and scrupulously maintained the
   ceremonies of the Roman worship. The policy of his predecessors had
   been unvarying in that respect. They saw in Christianity a secret
   anti-social sect which dreamt of the overthrow of the empire; like all
   the men who were attached to the old Roman principles, they believed it
   necessary to repress it. There was no necessity for special edicts: the
   laws against coetus illiciti and illicita collegia were numerous. The
   Christians came in a quite regular manner under the power of those
   laws. It must be observed, first of all, that the true spirit of
   liberty, as we understand it, was not understood by any one at that
   time; and that Christianity, when it became the master, did not
   practise it any more than the heathen emperors; in the second place,
   that the abrogation of the law of illicit societies would most likely
   in fact have been the ruin of the empire, founded essentially on this
   principle that the State cannot admit any society which differs from it
   into its midst. The idea was wrong, according to our ideas; however, it
   is quite certain that it was the corner-stone of the Roman
   constitution. The foundations of the empire would have been thought to
   be overthrown if those repressive laws which were looked upon as
   essential conditions to the stability of the State had been relaxed.

   The Christians seemed to understand this. Far from finding fault with
   Antoninus personally, they rather looked upon him as having ameliorated
   their lot. A fact which does this sovereign infinite honour, is that
   the principal advocate of Christianity ventured to address him with
   full confidence, in order to obtain redress from a legal situation
   which he reasonably found unjust and unbecoming in such a fortunate
   reign. They went further, and there is no doubt that during the first
   years of Marcus Aurelius different rescripts were forged in the name of
   Antoninus, which, supposed to be addressed to the Lariseans, the
   Thessalonians, the Athenians, to all the Greeks, to the Asiatic States,
   were so favourable to the Church that if Antoninus had really
   countersigned them he would have been very inconsistent in not turning
   Christian. These documents only prove one thing,--the opinion which the
   Christians retained of the excellent emperor. He did not show himself
   less benevolent towards the Jews, who no longer menaced the empire. The
   laws forbidding circumcision, which had been the consequence of
   Bar-Coziba's revolt, were abrogated, as far as they were vexatious. The
   Jew was at perfect liberty to sacrifice his sun, but the penalty for
   practising the operation on a non-Jew was castration, that is, death.
   Civil jurisdiction within the community does not appear to have been
   restored to the Jews till later.

   Such was the rigour of the established legal order, such was the
   popular effervescence against the Christians, that even 'during this
   reign one is sorry to find many martyrs. Polycarp and Justin are the
   most illustrious amongst them, but they were not the only ones. Asia
   Minor was stained with the blood of very many judicial murders, which
   were all provoked by riots; we shall see Montanism rise up like a
   hallucination of that intoxication for martyrdom. In Rome, the book of
   the false Hernias will appear to us as if it came out of a bath of
   blood. Prejudice for martyrdom, questions relating to renegades, or to
   those who had shown some weakness, fill up the whole book. Justin has
   described to us on every page Christians as victims who expect nothing
   but death; their very name, like in the time of Pliny, was a crime.

   Jews and heathens persecute us on all sides; they rob us of our
   possessions, and only leave us our life when they cannot deprive us of
   it. They cut off our heads, nail us to the cross, expose us to wild
   beasts, torture us with chains, with fire, with the most horrible
   torments. But the more ills we have to endure, the more the number of
   the faithful increases. The vine-grower prunes his vines to make them
   shoot out anew; he cuts off the branches that have borne fruit, to make
   it throw out others more vigorous and fruitful; the same thing happens
   to God's people, which is like a fertile vine, planted by its band and
   that of our Lord Jesus Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVI.

  THE CHRISTIANS AND PUBLIC OPINION.

   In order to be just, one must picture to oneself the prejudices amongst
   which the public then lived. Christianity was very little known. The
   lower classes do not like distinctions, or for some to live apart by
   themselves, for others to be more Puritan than they are, and to abstain
   from feasts and their usages. When one hides oneself, they always
   suppose that there is something to hide. In all time secret religious
   rites have provoked certain calumnies, which are always the same. The
   mysteries by which they are surrounded cause others to believe in
   unnatural debaucheries, in infanticide, incest, even in anthropophagy.
   They are tempted to believe that it is a secret camorra, organised in
   opposition to the laws. Besides this, informing had in ancient law, in
   spite of the efforts of good emperors, an importance which fortunately
   it no longer possesses, and thence sprang a type of libel, drawn up, so
   to say, in advance, from which no Christian could escape.

   Everything was certainly false in those popular rumours, but some
   badly-understood fact seemed to give some substance to them. Certain
   inquiries had turned out to the detriment of those who were inculpated.
   The apologists do not deny it: respect for the matter which had been
   judged stops them, but they charge the sectaries with the evil, and ask
   that the faults of some may not be laid to all. The nocturnal
   gatherings, the signs of recognition, certain eccentric symbols,
   everything that had anything to do with the mystery in the Eucharist,
   the sacramental phrases with regard to the body and blood of Christ,
   excited suspicion. That bread which the Christian woman ate in secret
   before every meal must have appeared to be a philtre. A number of
   practices seemed tokens of the crime of magic, which was punished with
   death. The custom of the faithful to call each other brother and
   sister, and above all the holy kiss, the kiss of peace, which was given
   without distinction of sex at the most solemn moment of the assemblage,
   would be sure to provoke the most unfavourable interpretations in the
   mind of a public that was incapable of understanding this golden age of
   purity. The idea of meetings where all familiarities and promiscuities
   were allowed, naturally arose from such facts, which were distorted by
   malice and sarcasm.

   The accusation of atheism was even more redoubtable. It entailed the
   punishment of death as a parricide, and worked up all superstitions at
   once. The undissembled aversion of the Christians for the temples,
   statues, and altars was constantly productive of some incident. There
   was no scourge, no earthquake, for which they were not held
   responsible. Every act of sacrilege, every fire in a temple, was
   attributed to them. Christians and Epicureans were confounded in this
   respect, and their secret presence in any town caused consternation,
   which was worked upon to raise the mob. The lower classes were thus the
   centre of hatred for the Christians. What the authentic acts of the
   martyrs treat with the greatest contempt, and as the worst enemies of
   the saints, are the ruffians of the large towns. The faithful never
   looked upon themselves as belonging to the people; they seemed in the
   towns to form the respectable middle class, very respectful towards the
   authorities, and very much disposed to come to an understanding with
   them. To defend themselves before the people seemed to the bishops to
   be a disgrace: they would only argue with the authorities. How plain it
   is that the very day the government would relax its rigour,
   Christianity and it would soon come to an understanding! How clear it
   is that Christianity would be delighted to be the religion of the
   government. A singular thing is that the only portion of heathen
   society with which the Christians had any analogy of opinion was the
   group of Epicureans. The name of Atheists was equally assigned to the
   disciples of Jesus and those of Epicurus. They had, in fact, this
   feature in common, that they denied, though certainly from very
   different reasons, the puerilely supernatural and the ridiculous
   wonders in which the people believed. In them the Epicureans saw the
   impostures of the priests, the Christians the impostures of the devil.
   What aggravated the case of the Christians was that by their exorcisms
   they were supposed to be able to stop local wonders, and to impose
   silence on the oracles which made the fortune of a city or of a
   country. When Alexander of Abonotica saw that his frauds were
   discovered, he said,--"There is nothing surprising in that; Pontus is
   full of Atheists and Christians!" That frightened the people, and
   restored to the impostor a momentary popularity. He burnt the books of
   Epicurus, and ordered the partisans of both sects to be stoned.
   Amastris, a Christian and Epicurean town, was particularly hateful to
   him. At the beginning of his mysteries there was a cry: " If there is
   any Atheist, Christian, or Epicurean here, let him go out!" He himself
   said: "Put the Christians out!" and the mob replied: "Put the
   Epicureans out!" In that superstitious country the name Epicurean was
   synonymous with accursed. Like that of Christian, any one who bore it
   ran the risk of his life, or at least was put under the ban of society.

   The Christians made use of the arguments of free-thinkers and of the
   incredulous to turn the popular beliefs into ridicule, and to fight
   against fatalism. The oracles were an object of mockery to all men of
   intellect and common sense; the Christians applauded this quizzing. One
   curious fact is that of OEnomaüs of Gadara, a Cynic philosopher, who
   having been deceived by a false oracle, lost his temper, and took his
   revenge in a book called The Deceits Unveiled, in which he wittily
   ridiculed as an imposture the superstition of which he had for a moment
   been the dupe. This book was eagerly received by Jews and Christians.
   Eusebius has inserted it entire in his Evangelical Preparations, and
   the Jews appear to have put the author on a footing with Balaam, in the
   class of involuntary apologists of Israel, and of the apostles amongst
   the heathen.

   The Christians and Stoics, between whom there was really more
   resemblance than between the Christians and the Epicureans, never
   blended. The Stoics did not make a parade of contempt for public
   worship. The courage of the Christian martyrs seemed to them foolish
   obstinacy, an affectation of tragical heroism, a determination to die,
   which merited nothing but blame. These crowds of infatuated individuals
   of Asia irritated them. They confounded them with vain and proud Cynics
   who sought for theatrical deaths, and burnt themselves alive, in order
   that they might be spoken about.

   There was certainly more than one point of resemblance between the
   Christian philosopher and the Cynic; austere dress, constant
   declamation against the century, an isolated life, open resistance to
   the authorities. The Cynics, besides a dress which was analogous to
   that of the begging friars in the Middle Ages, had a certain
   organisation, novices, superiors. They were the public professors of
   virtue, censors, bishops, "angels of the gods," in their own manner; a
   pastoral vocation was attributed to them, a mission from Heaven to
   preach and give advice, a mission that required celibacy and perfect
   renunciation. Christians and Cynics excited the same antipathy in
   moderate men, because of their common contempt for death. Celsus
   reproaches Jesus, like Lucian reproaches Peregrinus, with having spread
   abroad that fatal error. "What will become of society," men asked
   themselves, "if this spirit gets the upper hand, if criminals no longer
   fear death?" But the immorality, the coarse impudence of the Cynics,
   would not allow such a confusion, unless to very superficial observers.
   Nothing that is known of the Cynics authorises the belief that they
   were anything but attitudinarians and villainous fellows.

   There is no doubt that in many cases the provocation came from the
   martyrs. But civil society is wrong to allow itself to be drawn into
   acts of rigour, even towards those who seem to ask for them. The
   atrocious cruelty of the Roman penal code creates a martyrology which
   is itself the source of a vast legendary literature, full of
   unlikelihoods and exaggeration. Criticism, in exposing what is
   untenable in the accounts of the acts of the martyrs, has sometimes
   gone to the opposite extreme. The documents which were at first
   represented as reports of the trials of the martyrs, have been mostly
   found to be apocryphal. As the texts of historians, properly so called,
   relating to persecutions are rare and short; as the collections of
   Roman laws contain next to nothing about the matter, it was natural
   that the greatest reserve should be imposed on it. One might be tempted
   to believe that the persecutions really were only a slight matter, that
   the number of martyrs was inconsiderable, and that the whole
   ecclesiastical system on this point is nothing but an artificial
   structure. By degrees light was thrown on the subject. Even freed from
   legendary exaggeration, the persecutions remain one of the darkest
   pages of history, and a disgrace to ancient civilisation.

   Certainly if we were reduced to the acts of the martyrs to know about
   the persecutions, scepticism could have a free course. The composition
   of the acts of the martyrs became at a certain period a species of
   religious literature for which the imagination, and a certain pious
   enthusiasm, were much more consulted than authentic documents. With the
   exception of the letter relative to Polycarp's death, that which
   contains the account of the sufferings of the heroes of Lyons, the acts
   of the martyrs of Africa, and some other accounts which bear the stamp
   of being written in the most serious manner, one must allow that the
   documents of this character, which have been too easily accepted as
   sincere, are nothing but pious romances. We know also that the
   historians of the empire were singularly poor in detail on what refers
   to the Christians as well as on other matters. The true documents
   concerning the persecutions which the Church had to suffer, are the
   works that compose the primitive Christian literature. These works need
   not be by the authors to whom they are attributed, to have authority on
   such a question. There was such a widespread taste at that date for
   attributing documents, that a great number of those books which have
   been left to us by the first two centuries are by uncertain authors;
   but that does not prevent these books from being exact mirrors of the
   time at which they were written. The first Epistle attributed to St
   Peter, the Revelation of St John, the fragment that is called the
   Epistle of Barnabas, the Epistle of Clement Romanus, even though it be
   not by him, the totally or partially apocryphal Epistles of St Ignatius
   and Polycarp, the Sibylline poems that belong to the first or second
   century, all the original documents that Eusebius has preserved for us
   on the origin of Montanism, the controversies between the Gnostics and
   the Montanists about martyrdom, the Pastor of Hermas, the Apologies of
   Aristides and of Quadratus, of St Justin, Tatian, Athenagoras, show at
   each page a state of violence that weighs on the thoughts of the
   writer, besets him in a measure, and leaves him with no just
   appreciation of the situation.

   From Nero to Commodus, except at short intervals, one might say that
   the Christian lived continually with the prospect of being put to death
   before his eyes. Martyrdom is the basis of Christian apology. To listen
   to the controversialists of the period, it is the sign of the truth of
   Christianity. The orthodox Church alone has martyrs; the dissenting
   sects, the Montanists, for example, made ardent efforts to prove that
   they were not deprived of that supreme criterion of truth. The Gnostics
   are put under the ban by all the Churches, above all because they
   declared martyrdom to be useless. In fact then, as Tertullian wishes,
   persecution was the natural state of the Christian. The details of the
   acts of the martyrs may be mostly wrong, but the terrible picture that
   they lay before us, was nevertheless a reality. One has often drawn a
   wrong picture to oneself of that terrible strife which has surrounded
   the origins of Christianity with a brilliant halo and impressed on the
   most beautiful centuries of the empire a hideous blot of blood: one has
   not exaggerated its gravity. The persecutions were an element of the
   first order in the formation of that great association of men which was
   the first to make its rights triumph over the tyrannical pretensions of
   the State.

   As a matter of fact, men die for their opinions, not for
   certainties--for what they believe, and not for what they know. A
   scholar who has discovered a theorem has no need to die in order to
   attest the truth of that theorem; he proves his demonstration, and that
   is enough. On the other hand, as soon as it is a question of beliefs,
   the great sign and the most efficacious demonstration is to die for
   them. That is the explanation of the extraordinary success which some
   of the religious attempts of the East have obtained.

   "You Europeans will never understand anything about religions," said to
   me the most intelligent of Asiatics, "for you have never had the
   opportunity of seeing them formed amongst yourselves; whereas we, on
   the contrary, see them formed every day. I was there whilst people who
   were cut to pieces and burnt, suffered the most horrible tortures for
   days, danced and jumped for joy because they were dying for a man whom
   they had never known (the Bab), and they were the greatest men of
   Persia. I, who am now speaking to you, was obliged to stop my legend,
   which in a manner preceded me, to prevent the people from getting
   killed for me."

   Martyrdom does not at all prove the truth of a doctrine, but it proves
   the impression that it has made on men's minds, and that is all that is
   needed for success. The finest victories of Christianity, the
   conversion of a Justin, of a Tertullian, were brought about by the
   spectacle of the courage of the martyrs, of their joy under torments,
   and of the sort of infernal rage which urged the world on to persecute
   them.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVII.

  THE SECTS AT ROME--THE CERYGMAS--THE ROMAN CHRISTIAN--DEFINITIVE
  RECONCILIATION OF PETER AND PAUL.

   Rome was at the highest period of her grandeur: her sway over the world
   seemed uncontested; no cloud was visible on the horizon. Far from
   growing weaker, the movement that led the provincials, above all those
   of the East, to come there in crowds, increased in intensity. The Greek
   speaking population was more considerable than ever. The insinuating
   Græculus, who was good for every trade, was driving the Italian from
   the domesticity of great houses; Latin literature was daily losing
   ground, whilst Greek was becoming the literary, philosophical, and
   religious language of the enlightened classes, just as it was the
   language of the lower classes. The importance of the Church of Rome was
   measuring itself with that of the city itself. That Church, which was
   still quite Greek, had an uncontested superiority over the others.
   Hyginus, her chief, obtained the respect of the whole Christian world.
   Rome was then for the provinces what Paris is in its brilliant days,
   the city of all contacts, all fecundations. Whoever wished to find a
   place of mark aspired to go thither; nothing was consecrated but what
   had received its stamp at that universal exhibition of the productions
   of the entire universe.

   Gnosticism, with its ambition of setting the fashion in Christian
   preaching, especially yielded to that tendency. None of the Gnostic
   schools sprang from Rome, but nearly all came to an end there.
   Valentinus was the first to try it. That daring sectary may even have
   had the idea of seating himself on the episcopal throne of the
   unrivalled city. He showed every appearance of Catholicism, and
   preached in the absurd style that he had invented. Its success was
   mediocre; that pretentious philosophy, that unquiet curiosity,
   scandalised the faithful. Hyginus drove the innovator from the
   Christian pulpit. From that time forward the Roman Church indicated the
   purely practical tendency which was always to distinguish her, and
   showed herself ready quickly to sacrifice science and talent to
   edification.

   Another heterodox doctor, Cerdon, appeared at Rome about that time. He
   was a native of Syria, and introduced doctrines which differed but
   little from those of the Gnostics of that country. His manner of
   distinguishing God from the Creator; of placing another unknown god
   above God, the father of Jesus; of representing one of the gods as
   just, the other as good, sounds contrary to right. Cerdon found that
   this world was as imperfect a work as that Jehovah Himself to Whom it
   was attributed, and who was represented as subject to human passions.
   He rejected all the Jewish books in a mass, as well as all the passages
   in Christian writings, from which it might result that Christos had
   been able to take real flesh. It was quite simple: matter seemed to him
   to be a deterioration, an evil. The Resurrection was repugnant to him
   for the same reason. The Church censured him; he submitted, and
   retracted his opinions, then began to dogmatise afresh, either in
   public or private. Thence arose a most equivocal position. His life was
   spent in leaving the Church and joining it again, in doing penance for
   his errors, and in maintaining them afresh. The unity of the Church was
   too strong in Rome for Cerdon to be able to dream of forming a separate
   congregation there as he would certainly have done in Syria. He
   exercised his influence over a few isolated individuals, whom the
   apparent depth of his language and of doctrines which were then quite
   novel seduced. A certain Lucain or Lucian is particularly quoted
   amongst his disciples, without mentioning the celebrated Marcion, who,
   as we shall see, sprang from him.

   The abstract Gnosticism of Alexandria and Antioch, appearing under the
   form of a bold philosophy, found little favour in the capital of the
   world. It was the Ebionites, the Nazarenes, the Elkasaites, the
   Essenes, which were all Gnostic heresies in a way, but of a moderate
   and Judeo-Christian Gnosticism in their affinities, it was those
   heresies, I say, that swarmed at Rome, which made the legend of Peter,
   and created the future of that great Church. The mysterious formulas of
   Elkasaism were usual in their midst, especially for the baptismal
   ceremony. The neophyte, presented on the edge of a river or a fountain
   of flowing water, took heaven and earth, air and water, to witness that
   it was his firm resolve to sin no more. For these sectaries, who sprang
   from Juda, Peter and James were the two corners of the Church of Jesus.
   We have often remarked that Rome was always the principal home of
   Judeo-Christianity. The new spirit, represented by the school of Paul,
   was checked there by a highly conservative one. In spite of the efforts
   of conciliatory men, the apostle of the Gentiles had here also
   obstinate adversaries. Peter and Paul fought their last battle before
   becoming definitely reconciled in the bosom of the Universal Church for
   eternity.

   The life of the two apostles was beginning to be much forgotten. They
   had been dead about seventy-seven years; all who had seen them had
   disappeared, the greater portion without leaving any writings behind
   them. One was at perfect liberty to embroider on that still virgin
   canvas. A vast Ebionite legend had been formed in Rome and was settled
   at about the time at which we have arrived. St Peter's journeys and
   sermons were its principal object. In it the missionary journeys of the
   chief of the apostles, especially along the coasts of Phoenicia; the
   conversions which be had effected; his strifes, especially with the
   great Antichrist who at that time was the spectre of the Christian
   conscience, Simon Magus, were related. But often in hidden words, under
   that abhorred name was hidden another personage, the false Apostle
   Paul, the enemy of the Law, the destroyer of the true Church. The true
   Church was that of Jerusalem, over which James, the Lord's brother
   presided. No apostolate was valid which could not produce letters
   emanating from that central college. Paul had none, he was therefore an
   intruder. He was the "enemy" who came behind the real sower to sow the
   bad seed. With what force, too, Peter exposed his impostures, his false
   allegations of personal revelations, his ascension into the third
   heaven, his pretensions of knowing things about Jesus which those who
   had heard the Gospel had not heard, his disciples' exaggerated
   conceptions of the divinity of Jesus! At Antioch especially Peter's
   triumph was complete. Simon had succeeded in turning the people of that
   city away from the truth. By a series of clever manoeuvres Peter
   brought one of the victims of Simon's sorceries, to whom the magician
   had imparted his own form, to show himself to the people of Antioch.
   What was their astonishment on hearing him whom they took for the
   Samaritan magician, retract in these terms:--

   I have lied about Peter he is the true apostle of the prophet who was
   sent by God for the salvation of the world. The angels beat me last
   night for having calumniated him. Do not listen to me if I speak
   against him in the future!

   Naturally all Antioch returned to Peter and cursed his rival.

   Thus the real apostle continued his journeys, following the traces of
   the Samaritan impostor, and arrived at the capital of the empire
   immediately after him. The impostor redoubled his artifices, invented a
   thousand spells, and gained Nero's mind. He even succeeded in passing
   off as God, and in being adored. His admirers raised altars to him,
   and, according to the author, these altars were still shown in his
   time. On the island of the Tiber, in fact, a college of the Sabine god
   Semo Sancus was established. There there were a number of votive
   columns, SEMONI DEO SANCO, on which it was easy to read, with a little
   goodwill, SIMONI DEO SANCTO.

   The decisive struggle was to take place in the emperor's presence.
   Simon's programme was that he would raise himself into the air, and
   would hover there like a god. He did raise himself in fact, but on a
   sign from Peter the skin of his magic was burst, and he fell
   ignominiously, and was shattered to pieces. A similar accident had
   happened in the amphitheatre of the Campus Martius under Nero. An
   individual who had claimed to be able to raise himself into the air
   like Icarus, fell on to the angle of the emperor's box, and he was
   covered with blood. Perhaps some real facts in the life of the
   Samaritan charlatan served as a foundation for these stories. At any
   rate the discomfiture of the impostor was represented as Peter's
   greatest glory, and by it he really took possession of the eternal
   city. According to the legend his death followed very soon on his
   victory; Nero, irritated at the misadventure that had happened to his
   favourite juggler, put the apostle to death.

   Such is the legend which, started about the year 125 by the passions
   and rancour of the Jewish party in the Church at Rome, was by degrees
   softened down, and produced, towards the end of Hadrian's reign, the
   work, in ten books, called "The Preaching of Peter," or "The Journeys
   of Peter." The legend had been cut into three parts for the purposes of
   publication. " The Preaching" contained the account of Peter's
   apostolate in Judea; the Periodi comprised Peter's journeys and his
   controversies with Simon in Syria and Phoenicia. His sojourn at Rome
   and his struggles before the Emperor were the subject of the "Acts of
   Peter," another composition which formed, in some sort, the sequel of
   the Cerygma and of the Periodi. Those accounts of his apostolical
   journeys, full of charm for the Christian imagination, gave rise to
   numerous compositions, which soon became romances. The narrative was
   interspersed with pious sermons; Peter was made the preacher of all
   good doctrines; the picture of chaste love vivified and imparted warmth
   to the painting; Christian romance was created, and no essential
   machinery has been added to it since.

   All that first literature of the Cerygmas and of the Periodi was the
   work of Ebionite, Essenian, and Elkasaite sectaries. Peter, represented
   as the real apostle of the Gentiles, was always its hero; James
   appeared in it as the invisible president of a coenaculum filled with
   the divine spirit, having its seat at Jerusalem. Animosity against Paul
   was evident Like the Essenes and the Elkasaites of the East, those of
   Rome attached great importance to the possession of a secret literature
   which was reserved for the initiated, and the commonest frauds were
   employed to give to those later productions of Christian inspiration an
   authority which they did not merit.

   The most ancient edition of the Cerygmas of Peter is lost, and we only
   possess two fragments which form a sort of introduction to the work.
   The first is a letter in which Peter addresses the book of his Cerygmas
   to James, "master and bishop of the Holy Church," and begs him not to
   communicate it to any heathen, nor even to any Jew with a preliminary
   test. Peter says that the admirable policy of the Jews ought to be
   imitated, who, in spite of the diversities of the interpretation to
   which the Scripture gives rise, have succeeded in keeping the unity of
   the faith and of hope. If the book of the Cerygmas were to be
   circulated indiscreetly, it would give rise to schisms. Peter adds,--

   I do not know that as a prophet, but because I already see the
   beginning of the evil. Some of those who are of heathen origin have
   rejected my preaching, which is conformable to the Law, and have
   attached themselves to the frivolous teaching of the enemy, which is
   contrary to the Law. During my life people have tried, by different
   interpretations, to pervert my words, in the sense of destroying the
   Law. According to them, that is my idea, but I am not bold enough to
   declare it. God forbid! that would be to blaspheme the Law of God which
   Moses proclaimed, and whose eternal duration our Saviour attested when
   He said: "Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle
   of the Law shall pass away." This is the truth, but there are some
   people who think themselves authorised, I do not know how, to expound
   my thoughts, and who claim to interpret the discourses that they have
   heard from me more pertinently than I do myself. They put before their
   catechumens as my true opinion matters of which I have never dreamt. If
   such lies are produced during my life, what will they not dare to do
   after my death?

   James decided in fact that the book of the Cerygmas should only be
   communicated to circumcised men of mature age who aspired to the title
   of doctor, and who had been tested for at least six years. The
   initiation was to take place by degrees, in order that if the results
   of a first experience were bad it might be stopped. The communication
   was to be made mysteriously, on the very spot where baptism was
   administered, and with the formulas of baptismal promises according to
   the Essenean or Elkasaite rite. The person who was initiated was to
   promise to submit himself to him who gave the Cerygmas, not to pass
   them on to any one else, not to copy them or allow them to be copied.
   If some day the books which were given to him as Cerygmas should not
   appear to him any longer to be true, he was to give them back to him
   from whom he had received them. On setting out on a journey he was to
   give them up "to his bishop professing the same faith as himself, and
   starting from the same principles." When he was in danger of death he
   was to do the same thing, if his sons were not yet fit to be initiated.
   When they had become worthy of it the bishop would give them the books
   back, as a paternal deposit. The most singular thing is that the
   sectary is to foresee the case in which he may himself change his
   religion, and go over to the worship of some strange god. In that case,
   he must swear by his final god, and rob himself of the subterfuge of
   saying afterwards, to establish the nullity of his oath, that that God
   did not exist. "If I break my engagements," the neophyte was obliged to
   add, "may the universe be hostile to me, as well as the ether that
   penetrates everything, and the God who is over all, the best, the
   greatest of beings. And if I come to know any other god, I swear also
   by that god that I will keep the engagements that I have taken, whether
   that god exists or does not exist." Then, as a sign of secret
   partnership, the initiator and the initiated took bread and salt
   together.

   The absurdities of the sectaries would have been without any
   consequence anywhere but in Rome, but everything that referred to Peter
   assumed considerable proportions in the capital of the world. In spite
   of its heresies, the book of the Cerygmas was of great interest for the
   orthodox. The primacy of Peter was proclaimed in it; St Paul was
   abused, but a few after touches might soften down anything offensive in
   such attacks. Thus several attempts were made to lessen the
   singularities of the new book and to adapt it to the wants of the
   Catholics. This fashion of altering books to suit the sect towhich one
   belonged was quite usual. By degrees the force of circumstances made
   itself felt: all sensible men saw that there was no safety for the work
   of Jesus except in the perfect reconciliation of the two chiefs of
   Christian preaching. For a long time still Paul had bitter enemies in
   the Nazarenes, and he had also exaggerated disciples like Marcion.
   Outside this stubborn right and left, a fusion of the moderate parties
   took place, who, although they owed their Christianity to one of the
   schools and remained attached to it, yet fully recognised the right of
   the others to call themselves Christians. James, who was the partisan
   of an absolute Judaism, was sacrificed; although he had been the real
   chief of the Christians of the circumcision, Peter was preferred to
   him, as he had shown more regard for Paul's disciples, and James only
   retained his vehement partisans amongst the Judeo-Christians.

   It is difficult to say who gained most by that reconciliation. The
   concessions chiefly came from Paul's side: all his disciples admitted
   Peter without difficulty, whilst most of the Christians of Peter
   rejected Paul. But concessions often come from the strongest. In
   reality, every day gave the victory to Paul, and every Gentile who was
   converted made the balance incline to his side. Out of Syria, the
   Judeo-Christians were, so to say, drowned by the waves of the newly
   converted. St Paul's churches prospered; they had sound sense, a
   sobriety of intellect, and pecuniary resources which the others did not
   possess. The Ebionite churches, on the other hand, were daily getting
   poorer. The money of Paul's churches was used for the support of poor
   saints who could not gain their own livelihood, but who possessed the
   living tradition of the primitive spirit. The communities of Christians
   of heathen origin admired, imitated, and assimilated to themselves the
   others' elevated piety and strictness of morals. Soon more distinction
   could be made as regarded the most eminent persons in the Church of
   Rome. The mild and conciliatory spirit that had already been
   represented by Clemens Romanus and St Luke prevailed, and the contract
   of peace was sealed. It was agreed, according to the system of the
   author of the Acts, that Peter had converted the first fruits of the
   Gentiles, and that he was the first to deliver them from the yoke of
   the Law. It was admitted that Peter and Paul had been the two chiefs,
   the two founders of the Church of Rome, and thus they became the two
   halves of an inseparable couple, two luminaries like the sun and the
   moon. What one taught, the other taught also; they were always agreed,
   they combated the same enemies, were both victims of the perfidies of
   Simon Magus; at Rome, they lived like two brothers, the Church of Rome
   was their common work. Thus the supremacy of that Church was founded
   for centuries.

   So from the reconciliation of parties and the settlement of the earlier
   strifes there sprang a great unity, the Catholic Church, the Church at
   the same time of Peter and of Paul, a stranger to the rivalries which
   had marked the first century of Christianity. Paul's churches had shown
   the most conciliatory spirit, and they triumphed. The stubborn
   Ebionites remained Jewish, and shared the Jewish immovableness. Rome
   was the point where this great transformation took place. Already the
   high Christian destiny of that extraordinary city was being written in
   luminous characters. The transference of Easter to the day of the
   resurrection, which was in some measure the proclamation of the
   autonomy of Christianity, was accomplished there, at anyrate in the
   time of Hadrian.

   The fusion that took place between the groups also took place with
   regard to their writings. Books were exchanged from one country to
   another. The writings passed from the Judeo-Christian school to that of
   Paul, with slight modifications. That Cerygma of Peter, which was, in
   its first shape, so offensive to Paul's disciples, became the Cerygma
   of Peter and Paul. They were supposed to have travelled together,
   sailed in company, preached the gospel everywhere in perfect harmony.
   The Church of Corinth, especially, claimed to have been founded at the
   same time by Peter and Paul. The person of Simon Magus, who in the
   first Ebionite editions of the Cerygma and of the Periodi of Peter, was
   Paul himself designated by an offensive epithet, was rather a
   formidable obstacle. In the Cerygma of Peter and Paul the name of Simon
   was preserved, and restored to its proper sense. As the symbolism of
   the Ebionite pamphlet was not evident, Simon for the future was the
   common adversary whom Peter and Paul had pursued together hand in hand.

   The fundamental condition of the success of Christianity was now
   settled. Neither Peter nor Paul could succeed separately. Peter was
   preservation, Paul revolution: both were necessary. It is told in
   Brittany that when St Peter and St Paul went to preach Christianity in
   America, they reached a deep and narrow arm of the sea. Although they
   were agreed on essential points, they determined to establish
   themselves one on one side and one on the other, so that they might
   both teach the Gospel in their own fashion; for it seems that, in spite
   of their intimate fellowship, they could not live together very well.
   Each of them, according to the custom of the saints of Brittany, set to
   work to build his chapel. They had the materials, but only one hammer,
   so that every evening the saint who had worked during the daytime threw
   the hammer across the arm of the sea to his neighbour. Thanks to the
   alternative labour resulting from this arrangement, the work went on
   well, and the two chapels, which are yet to be seen, were built.

   Above all, the death of the two apostles preoccupied the different
   parties, and gave rise to the most diverse combinations. A legendary
   tissue was woven with regard to this by an instinctive work which was
   almost as imperious as that which had presided over the formation of
   the legend of Jesus. The end of the life of Peter and Paul was ordered
   à priori. It was maintained that Christ had announced Peter's martyrdom
   just as he had foretold the death of the sons of Zebedee. A want was
   felt of associating two persons in death who had been forcibly
   reconciled. Men wished to prove, and perhaps in that they were not far
   wrong, that they were put to death at the same time, or at least in
   consequence of the same event. The spots which were looked upon as
   having been sanctified by this sanguinary drama were fixed upon at an
   early date, and consecrated by memoriæ. In such a case, what the people
   wants always gains the day in the end. There is no popular place in
   Italy where the portraits of Victor Emmanuel and Pius IX. are not seen
   side by side, and general belief will have it that those two men,
   representing principles whose reconciliation is, according to the most
   general sentiment, necessary to Italy, were really very good friends.
   If such ideas obtruded themselves into history in our time, one would
   read some day, in documents which are looked upon as serious, that
   Victor-Emmanuel, Pius IX. (most probably Garibaldi would be joined in
   with them) saw each other secretly, understood each other, and liked
   each other. The association of Voltaire and Rousseau was brought about
   by analogous necessities. The Middle Ages also tried several times, in
   order to appease the hatred between Dominicans and Franciscans, to
   prove that the founders of those two orders had been two
   brothers,living on the most affectionate terms together, that at first
   their rules were identical, that St Dominic wore the cord of St
   Francis, etc.

   The Cerygma of Peter and Paul was all the more important as it filled
   up the unfortunate gaps which the Acts of the Apostles showed. In this
   latter book Peter's preaching was cut very short, and the circumstances
   of the apostles' deaths were passed over in silence. The success of a
   book that represented Peter and Paul going everywhere in company to
   convert the Gentiles,--going to Rome, preaching there, and both finding
   the crown of martyrdom there, was assured. The doctrine which they
   taught, according to this book, was equally removed from Judaism and
   Hellenism. The Jews were treated by them as enemies of Jesus and of the
   apostles. At Rome, Peter and Paul announced the destruction of their
   city, and their perpetual exile from Judea, because they had leaped
   with joy at the trials of the Son of God.

   It seems at first sight as if such an important work ought to find a
   place in the canon of Scripture immediately after the Acts of the
   Apostles. But the wording of it was incoherent, and incapable of
   satisfying the whole Christian community in a permanent manner. The
   evangelical knowledge of the author was too incomplete. He admitted the
   most childish statements from the Gospel to the Hebrews. Jesus
   confessed his sins; his mother Mary forced him to be baptised, and at
   the moment of his baptism the water seemed to be covered with fire. In
   his discourses to the Gentiles, Paul cited the apocryphal Sibyl of the
   Jews of Alexandria and of Hystaspes, a heathen prophet who announced
   the league of the kings against Christ and the Christians, the patience
   of the martyrs, and the final appearance of Christ, as authorities that
   ought to convince them. Then, contrary to Paul's formal assertions in
   the Epistle to the Galatians, Peter and Paul are supposed to have met
   for the first time in Rome. Other singular opinions soon caused that
   old compilation to be condemned by the orthodox doctors. The Cerygma of
   Peter and Paul had only a very uncertain place amongst the canonical
   writings. The romance of Peter had, from the very beginning, contracted
   a sort of sectarian bust, which must prevent its being admitted, even
   after corrections, into the lists of the imposed dogmas.

   Thus the account of the death of the two apostles, like that of their
   preaching and journeys, was a matter of caprice, at anyrate as far as
   regarded form. Simplicity of style, which assures the eternal fortune
   of a narrative text, something decided in the outline, which makes the
   reader believe that events could not have happened differently, all
   those qualities which constitute the beauty of the Gospels and of the
   Acts of the Apostles, are wanting in the legend of the death of Peter
   and Paul. Ancient compilations about it existed which have disappeared,
   but which were not very different from those which have been preserved,
   and which have fixed the tradition on this important subject. The
   effect of the legend was abundant and rapid. Rome and all its environs,
   above all the Via Ostia, were, so to say, filled with pretended
   recollections of the last days of the apostles. A number of touching
   circumstances--Peter's flight, the vision of Jesus bearing his cross,
   the iterum crucifigi, the last farewell of Peter and Paul, the meeting
   of Peter with his wife, St Paul at the fountain of Salvian, Plautilla
   sending the kerchief which kept up her hair to bandage Paul's eyes--all
   that made a beautiful whole that only required a clever and simple
   compiler. It was too late; the vein of the first Christian literature
   was exhausted; the serenity of the historian of the Acts was lost, and
   the tone never rose above the level of story or romance. No choice
   could be made amongst a number of compilations all of which were
   equally apocryphal; in vain was it sought to cover those feeble
   accounts with the most venerated names (pseudo-Linus,
   pseudo-Marcellus); the Roman legend of Peter and Paul always remained
   in a sporadic state, and was more frequently related by pious guides
   than seriously read. It was an altogether local affair; no text was
   consecrated to be read in churches, and none obtained any authority.

   The creative vein with regard to Gospel literature also grew daily
   weaker, although it had not absolutely dried up. The Gospel of the
   Nazarenes, or of the Hebrews, or of the Ebionites, was almost as
   different in texts as it was in manuscripts. Egypt extracted from them
   its "Gospel of the Egyptians," in which the exaggeration of a sickly
   enthusiasm bordered so closely on immorality. A compilation which had a
   very great success for a long time was the Gospel of Peter, which was
   most likely composed at Rome. Justin and the author of the
   pseudo-Clementine romance seem to have made use of it. It differed
   little from the Ebionite Gospel, and already showed that prepossession
   in favour of many which is the feature of the apocryphal writings. Men
   reflected more and more on the part which would be suitable to the
   mother of Jesus. They sought to connect her with David's race; round
   her cradle miracles were created which were analogous to those which
   occurred at John Baptist's birth. A book that was later filled with
   absurdities by the Gnostics, but which perhaps, when it appeared, did
   not go beyond the main note of the Catholic Church, the Genna Marias,
   which differed but little from the writing that is called the
   Protovangelium of James, satisfied those wants of the imagination.
   Legends got more material every day. Men occupied themselves with the
   evidence of the midwife who attended Mary, and who vouched for her
   virginity. It did not suffice any longer that Jesus was born in a
   stable; men wished him, according to certain Jewish ideas which are to
   be found again in the Haggadic legend of Abraham, to be born in a cave.
   They tried to turn the journey to Egypt to some account, and as Egypt
   was the country in which there were the most idols, it was pretended
   that the mere view of the exiled child sufficed to make all the profane
   statues fall with their faces to the ground. It was known exactly what
   trade Jesus carried on. He made carts and other vehicles. They claimed
   to know the name of the woman who had the issue of blood (Berenice or
   Veronica), and the statues were shown which she had raised to Jesus in
   her gratitude.

   The desire of finding arguments which the heathen could not challenge
   was the cause of some pious frauds whose success was rapid in that
   world, which was not hard to please, and which it was intended to
   impress. The monotheistic Sibyl of Alexandria, which for centuries had
   not ceased to anounce the ruin of idolatry, was becoming more and more
   Christian. The authority that was accorded to it was of the first
   order. The ancient Sibylline collections were continually increasing,
   by additions in which no trouble was taken to keep up an appearance of
   probability. The heathen were enraged at what they looked upon as
   interpolations into venerable books. The Christians answered them with
   more humour than justice: "Show us any old copies in which those
   passages are not to be found." Men of intellect made fun equally of the
   heathen and Christian Sibyls, and parodied them cleverly, so much so
   that Origen, for instance, never makes use of these depreciated
   arguments.

   To these oracles were added those of a certain Hystaspes, under whose
   name some pretended books on the mysteries of Chaldea were current
   amongst the heathen. He was made to announce the coming of Christ, the
   Apocalyptic catastrophes, the end of the world by fire, with an amount
   of assurance that argued extreme credulity in those to whom they were
   addressed.

   About the same time, the documents which were supposed to be official,
   of Pilate's administration relating to Jesus, may have been forged. In
   a controversy with the heathen and the Jews it was a great power to be
   able to appeal to pretended reports contained in the State archives.
   Such was the origin of those Acts of Pilate which St Justin, the
   Quartodecimans, and Tertullian had quoted, and which possessed
   sufficient importance for the Emperor Maximian II., at the beginning of
   the fourth century, to look upon it as an act of fair warfare to
   counterfeit them, in order to cast ridicule and contempt on the
   Christians. From the moment that it was admitted that Tiberius was
   officially informed of the death of Jesus, it was natural to suppose
   that this notification had some effect, and from that fact sprang the
   opinion that Tiberius had proposed to the Senate to place Jesus in the
   ranks of the gods.

   Rome, as has been seen, continued to be the centre of an extraordinary
   movement. Heretics of all sorts met there, and were anathematised
   there. The centre of a future orthodoxy was evidently there. Pius had
   succeeded Hyginus, and was as firm as his predecessor had been in
   defending the purity of the faith. Pius is already a bishop in the
   proper sense of the word. Valentinus and Cerdon, although condemned by
   Hyginus, were always at Rome, trying to regain their lost ground,
   retracting at times, received as penitents, then returning to their
   dreams and continuing to have partisans. At length they were finally
   excommunicated. Valentinus would seem to have withdrawn to Cyprus; it
   is tot known what became of Cerdon. His name would have remained
   unknown if he had not left a disciple behind him who surpassed him in
   strength of intellect and in activity, and who became the greatest
   embarrassment for the Church that she had encountered hitherto, towards
   the middle of the second century.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVIII.

  EXAGGERATION OF ST PAUL'S IDEAS--MARCION.

   The great peculiarity of Christianity, the fact of a new religion
   springing from another religion, and becoming by degrees the negation
   of the one that had preceded it, naturally gave rise to the most
   opposite phenomena, till the two forms of worship were completely
   separated. The reaction would be of two kinds amongst those who did not
   exactly keep their balance on the narrow edge of orthodoxy. Some, going
   beyond Paul's principles, fancied that the religion of Jesus had no
   connection with the religion of Moses. Others, Judeo-Christians, looked
   upon Christianity as a mere continuation of the Jewish religion. In
   general, it was the Gnostics who inclined to the former idea, but those
   dreamers seemed to be attacked by a sort of practical incapacity. An
   ardent, intelligent man was found to give the necessary cohesion to the
   divergent elements, and to form a lasting Church, side by side with
   that which already called itself--

   The Universal Church, the great Church of Jesus.

   Marcion was a native of Sinope, a city full of activity, which had
   already given the two Aquilas, and would later give Theodation, as
   participators in the religious disputes of the time. He was the son of
   the bishop of that city, and appears to have been a sailor. Although
   born a Christian, he had seriously examined his faith, and had devoted
   himself to the study of Greek philosophy, especially of Stoicism. To
   that he joined an ascetic appearance and great austerity. His father,
   as is alleged, was obliged to drive him from his Church, as he was
   dangerous to the orthodoxy of his faithful hearers.

   We have already remarked several times on the sort of attraction which
   brought to Rome, under the pontificate of Hyginus and in the first
   years of Pius, all those whom the phosphorescent lights of growing
   Gnosticism seduced. Marcion arrived in the eternal city at the moment
   when Cerdon unsettled the most sincere believers by his brilliant
   metaphysics. Marcion, like all the sectaries, first of all showed
   himself a zealous Catholic. The Church of Rome possessed such great
   importance that all those who felt any ecclesiastical ambition aspired
   to govern her. The rich Sinopean apparently made the community a
   present of a large sum of money, but his hopes were disappointed. He
   had not that spirit which the Church of Rome has always required in her
   clergy. Intellectual superiority was but little valued there. His
   ardent curiosity, his vivacity of thought, and his learning, all
   appeared dangerous. It could easily be seen that they would not allow
   him to remain quietly within the narrow limits of orthodoxy. Cerdon,
   like he did, expiated his pretensions to dogmatic originality in
   isolation. Marcion became his disciple. The transcendent theories of
   Gnosticism, taught by that master, must have appeared to be the highest
   form of Christianity to a mind imbued with philosophical doctrines.
   Moreover, Christian dogma was so little settled as yet that every one
   of strong individuality aspired to impress it with his own seal. That
   is enough to explain the intricate roads in which this great man lost
   himself, without it being necessary to put any faith in the everyday
   calumnies by which ecclesiastical writers strive to show that the
   leader of every sect, when he separates himself from the majority of
   the faithful, obeys the lowest motives.

   Marcion's theology only differed from that of the Gnostics of Syria and
   Egypt by its simplicity. The distinction between the good God and the
   just God, between the invisible God and the demiurge, between the God
   of the Jews and the God of the Christians, formed the basis of his
   system. Matter was the eternal evil. The ancient Law, Jehovah's work,
   which was essentially material, interested, severe, cruel and loveless,
   had only one object: to subject the other peoples, Egyptians,
   Canaanites, etc., to Jehovah's people, and it did not even succeed in
   procuring their happiness, as Jehovah was continually obliged to
   console them by the promise of sending them his Son. It would have been
   vain to have expected that salvation from Jehovah if the Supreme God,
   who was good and invisible and unknown to the world till then, had not
   sent his Son Jesus, that is to say meekness itself under the apparent
   form of a man, to combat the influence of the demiurge and to introduce
   the law of love. The Jews will have their Messiah, son of their God,
   that is to say, of the demiurge. Jesus is by no means that Messiah; his
   mission, on the contrary, was to abolish the Law, the prophets, and the
   works of that demiurge generally; but his disciples understood him
   wrongly: Paul was the only true apostle. Marcion imposed the task upon
   himself of finding the ideas of Jesus again which had been obliterated
   and maladroitly brought back to Judaism by those who succeeded him.

   That was already Manichæism, with its dangerous antithesis, making its
   appearance in the field of Christian beliefs. Marcion supposes that
   there are two Gods, one of whom is good and gentle, the other who is
   severe and cruel. The absolute condemnation of the flesh led him to
   look upon the continuation of the human race as only serving to prolong
   the reign of the evil demiurge; he objected to marriage, and would not
   admit married people to baptism. No sect sought for martyrdom more, nor
   reckoned, proportionately, more confessors of the faith. According to
   the Marcionites, martyrdom was the highest Christian liberation, the
   most beautiful form of deliverance from this world, which is an evil.
   Bodies do not rise, only the souls of true Christians are brought back
   to existence. Besides, all souls are not equal, and only arrive at
   perfection by a series of transmigrations.

   It will be seen that the doctrine of the Epistles to the Colossians and
   Ephesians, and that of the fourth Gospel, was far exceeded. Everything
   Jewish in the Church became mere dross which must be eliminated.
   Marcion looked upon Christianity as an entirely new religion, and one
   without precedent. In that he was a disciple of Paul who had lost his
   way. Paul believed that Jesus had abolished Judaism, but he did not
   mistake the divine character of the ancient Law. Marcion, on the
   contrary, declared that there was no appearance of God in history till
   Jesus. The Law of Moses was the work of a particular demiurge (Jehovah)
   whom the Jews adored, and who, to keep them in the fetters of
   theocracy, gave them priests, and sought to retain them by promises and
   threats. Such a Law, without any superior character, was powerless
   against evil. It represented justice but not kindness. The appearance
   of Christ was the manifestation of a complete God who was kind and just
   at the same time. The Old Testament was not only different from
   Christianity, it was contrary to it. Marcion wrote a work called
   Antithesis, in which the two Testaments were put in flagrant
   contradiction. Apelles, his disciple, wrote a book to show that Moses
   had written nothing concerning God but what was false and unbecoming.

   A chief objection to that theory arose from the different Gospels which
   were then in circulation, and which more or less agreed with what we
   call the synoptic type. The fourth Gospel had as yet but very little
   circulation, and Marcion did not know it, otherwise he would have
   preferred it to the others. In the generally admitted accounts about
   Jesus, the Jewish impress can be seen on every page; Jesus speaks as a
   Jew and acts as a Jew. Marcion imposed the difficult task upon himself
   of changing all that. He composed a Gospel in which Jesus was no longer
   a Jew, or rather, was no longer a man; he wanted a life of Jesus which
   should be that of a pure won. Taking St Luke's Gospel as his basis,
   which may be called Paul's Gospel up to a certain point, he remodelled
   it according to his own ideas, and was not satisfied till Jesus had no
   more ancestors, parents, forerunners, or masters. If Jesus had only
   been known to us from texts of that nature, one might doubt whether he
   had really existed, or whether he were not an à priori fiction,
   detached from any tie with reality. In such a system, Christ was not
   born (for Marcion, birth was a stain), did not suffer, did not die. All
   the Gospel passages in which Jesus recognised the Creator as his
   father, were suppressed. After his descent into hell he took to heaven
   with him those persons who were cursed in the Old Testament--Cain, the
   Sodomites, etc. These poor wanderers, interesting, like all those who
   have revolted under an ancient fallen régime, came to meet him and were
   saved. On the other hand, Jesus left Abel, Noah, Abraham, who were
   servants of the demiurge, that is to say, of the God of the Old
   Testament, in the dark places of oblivion, as their only merit
   consisted in having obeyed a tyrant's laws. It was that God of the Old
   Testament who caused Jesus to be put to death, and thus worthily
   crowned an era which had been the reign of evil.

   It would be impossible to take up a position more utterly opposed to
   the ideas of Peter, James, and Mark. The last conclusions had been
   drawn from St Paul's principles. Marcion put no author's name to his
   Gospel, but he certainly looked upon it as "the Gospel according to
   Paul." Jesus is no more a man at all, he is the first ideal appearance
   of a good God, nearly like Schleiermacher understood it sixteen
   centuries later. A very fine system of morality, summed up in a
   striving after good, resulted from this spiritualistic and
   rationalistic philosophy. Marcion was the most original of the
   Christian masters of the second century after the author of the
   pseudo-Johannistic writings. But the belief in two gods, which was the
   foundation of his system, and the colossal historical error which it
   contained in representing a religion which sprang from Judaism as
   contrary to Judaism, were profound blemishes which must prevent such a
   doctrine from becoming those of the Catholicity.

   Its success was extraordinary at first: Marcion's doctrines spread very
   quickly over the whole Christian world, but they met with strenuous
   opposition. Justin, who was then in Rome, combated the innovator in
   writings which we have not got any longer. Polycarpus received the new
   ideas with the most lively indignation. It appears that Meliton wrote
   against them. Several anonymous priests attacked them, and furnished
   Irenæus with the weapons that he was to use later. Marcion's position
   in the Church was a very false one. Like Valentinus and Cerdon, he
   wished to be part of the Church, and doubtless to preach in it; now the
   Church of Rome much preferred docility and mediocrity to originality
   and vigorous logic. Like Valentinus, Marcion made semi-retractations,
   and retreated; all was useless: the incompatibility was too strong.
   After being condemned twice, a definite excommunication drove him from
   the Church. The sum of money which he had given in the first warmth of
   his faith was refunded to him, and he returned to Asia Minor, where he
   continued to display immense activity in the propagation of error. It
   seems that in his latter years he instituted fresh negotiations to
   attach himself to the Church again, but death prevented their success.
   Often a certain timidity of character is associated with great
   speculative boldness, and Marcion seems often to have contradicted
   himself. On the other hand, such an end answered so perfectly to the
   wants of orthodox polemics that one must suspect it of having been
   invented. Apelles restored the Marcionite school to an almost orthodox
   deism.

   In any case, Marcion remains the boldest innovator whom Christianity
   has known, not even excepting St Paul. He never denied the connection
   between the two Testaments; Marcion opposed them to each other as two
   antitheses. He even went so far as to claim the right of' re-making the
   life of Jesus according to his own fashion, and of systematically
   altering the Gospels. Even St Paul's Epistles, which he adopted, were
   arranged and mutilated by him in order to efface the quotations from
   the Old Testament, and Abraham's name, which he hated.

   This was the third attempt to make the life of Jesus the life of an
   abstract being instead of a Galilean reality. The results of different
   tendencies, which were all equally necessary,--of the wish to idealise
   a life which became that of a God,--of the desire of denying that that
   God had a family lineage or country upon earth,--of the impossibility
   for the Greek Christian to admit that Christianity had anything in
   common with Judaism, which he despised, these three attempts had very
   different successes. The author of the pseudo-Johannistic writings set
   to work in an inconsistent and incoherent manner, but which possessed
   the advantage of letting an historical biography of Jesus subsist side
   by side with the theology of the Logos. His attempt was the only one
   that succeeded, for, whilst looking upon modern Judaism as an evil, and
   imagining that Truth had descended from heaven with the Logos, he
   admits that the true Israel has had its mission, and that the world,
   far from being the work of a demiurge who was hostile to God, was
   created by the Logos. The Gnostics drowned the Gospel in metaphysics,
   eliminated every Jewish element, dissatisfied even the Deists, and so
   destroyed their future. Marcion's speculations were of a more sober
   kind; but Christianity was already too much formed, its texts were too
   settled, its Gospels too much valued, for Catholic opinion to be
   shaken. Marcion then was nothing but the mere head of a sect, though it
   is true it was by far the most numerous before that of Arius. The rage
   with which orthodoxy pursued him is the best proof of the profound
   impression that he made on the minds of his contemporaries.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIX.

  THE CATHOLIC APOLOGY--ST JUSTIN.

   A principal fact which may clearly be seen developing from this time
   forward, is that in the midst of these agitated waves there is a sort
   of immovable rock, a doctrine between the two extremes, which resists
   the most diverse attacks, Judeo-Christian and Gnostic exaggerations,
   and constitutes a central orthodoxy which is destined to triumph over
   all sects. That universal doctrine which laid claim to priority over
   all particular doctrines, and to go as far back as the apostles,
   constitutes the Catholic Church in opposition to heresies. Gnosticism,
   especially an invincible obstacle in that sort of ecclesiastical
   tribunal, this was a question of life or death for the Christian
   religion. The extravagant tendencies of the innovators would have been
   the annihilation of all unity. Now, as nearly always happens, anarchy
   created authority, and thus it may be said that in the formation of the
   Catholic Church Gnosticism and Marcionism played the principal part by
   antithesis.

   A man who is very highly esteemed for his profane studies, and his
   knowledge of the Scriptures--Justin of Neapolis, in Samaria, who had
   been residing in Rome for several years--taught Christian philosophy
   and fought energetically for the orthodox majority. He was used to and
   fond of polemics. Valentinians, Marcionites, Samaritan Jews, heathen
   philosophers, were in turn the object of his attacks. Justin was not a
   man of great intellect; he did not know much of philosophy and
   criticism, and, above all, his exegesis would be looked upon as very
   defective in our time; but he gives proof of general good sense; he had
   that sort of mediocre credulity which allows a man to reason sensibly
   from puerile premisses, and to stop in time so as only to be half
   ridiculous. His general treatise against heresies, his particular
   writings against the Valentinians and Marcionites, have been lost, but
   his works for the general defence of Christianity had an extraordinary
   success amongst the faithful, and they were copied and imitated; thus,
   Justin was, in a manner, the first Christian doctor, in the classic
   sense of the word, whose works have been preserved to no in a
   relatively complete state.

   Justin, as we have said, had not a strong intellect, but he had a noble
   and good heart. His great demonstration of Christianity was the
   persecution of which that doctrine, which was so beneficial in his
   eyes, was the ceaseless object. The fact that the other sects, the Jews
   especially, were not persecuted, the joy that the Christians evinced
   under torture, the calumnies that were spread abroad with regard to the
   faithful, the number of informers, the peculiar hatred which the
   princes of this world showed towards the religion of Jesus, a hatred
   that Justin could only explain to himself by the hatred of evil
   spirits, all that seemed to him to be a glorious sign of divine truth
   in favour of the Church. This idea inspired him to take a bold step, to
   do which he must have been encouraged by the earlier example of
   Quadratus and Aristides. This was to address himself to the Emperor
   Antoninus and his two associates, Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus, in
   order to obtain redress for a position which he rightly looked upon as
   unjust and in contradiction to the liberal principles of the
   government. The Emperor's great wisdom, the philosophical tastes of one
   at least of his associates, Marcus Aurelius, who was then twenty-nine
   years old, inspired him with the hope that such a great injustice would
   be made good. Such was the occasion of that eloquent petition which
   begins thus:--

   To the Emperor Titus Ælius Hadrianus Antoninus Pius Augustus Cæsar; and
   to his son Verissimus, a philosopher; and to Lucius, a philosopher, son
   of Cæsar according to nature, and of Pius by adoption, the friend of
   knowledge; and to the sacred senate; and to the whole Roman people, for
   a group of men of every race who are hated and persecuted unjustly, I,
   one of them, Justin, son of Prixus, grandson of Bacchius, citizens of
   Flavia Neapolis of Syria, Palestine, I have made this pleading and this
   request.

   The two titles of Pius and Philosophus obliged those who bear them only
   to love what is true, and to renounce ancient opinions if they find
   them bad. The Christians are victims of inveterate prejudice, of
   calumnies that have been circulated by a united league of all
   superstitions. They must be punished if they are found guilty of
   ordinary crimes, but no attention ought to be paid to malevolent
   rumours. A name in itself is no crime, it only becomes so by the acts
   that are attached to it. Now the Christians are punished on account of
   the name they bear, a name that only indicates upright ideas. He who
   declares that he is not a Christian when he is persecuted, is acquitted
   without inquiry; he who declares that he is one, is put to death. What
   is more unreasonable? The life of the confessor and of the renegade
   ought to be inquired into, to see what good or evil they have done.

   The reason for this hatred of the Christians is quite simple: it comes
   from demons. Polytheism was nothing more than the reign of demons.
   Socrates was the first who wished to overthrow their worship; the
   demons succeeded in having him condemned as an atheist and an impious
   man. What Socrates did amongst the Greeks in the name of reason, Reason
   itself, clothed in a form become man and called Jesus Christ, did
   amongst the barbarians. This is why the Christians are called Atheists.
   They are, if by Atheism is understood the denial of the false gods in
   which men believe, but they are not so in a true sense, since their
   religion is the pure religion of the Creator, admitting, in the second
   rank, the worship of Jesus, the Son of God, and in the third rank the
   worship of the Prophetic Spirit. They do not expect an earthly kingdom,
   but a divine one. How is it that the authorities do not see that such a
   faith is a great aid to them in maintaining order in the world? What
   stronger barrier can there be against crime than the Christian
   doctrine?

   Here Justin draws a picture of the morality inculcated by Christ
   according to the texts of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and especially
   according to Matthew. He shows how harmless it is, and how useful to
   the State. There was no school of philosophy which had not taught one
   or other of the Christian dogmas, and yet those schools had not been
   persecuted on that account. The title of Son of God was not so unusual
   as it appears. A crucified God, born of a virgin, was not unheard of
   before. Greek mythologies, the thousand religions of the world, have
   said much stronger things. Was there not a personage called Simon, of
   the little town of Gitton in Samaria, known to have passed for God at
   Rome, in the reign of Claudius, on account of his miracles, which he
   performed by the power of demons? Was not a statue erected to him on
   the island of the Tiber, between the two bridges, with this Latin
   inscription: SIMONI DEO SANCTO? Nearly all the Samaritans and some
   other nations adore him as the chief God, and look upon a certain
   Helen, who was a prostitute in her time, and who followed him
   everywhere, as his chief Ennoia. Menander, one of his disciples,
   seduced many in an extraordinary manner at Antioch by demons' arts.
   Marcion, a native of Pontus, who is alive still, another agent of
   demons, teaches a large number of disciples to rob the Father of the
   title of Creator and to transfer it to another pretended God. All those
   people call themselves Christians, as persons who profess different
   doctrines are called philosophers. Do they practise the monstrous deeds
   with which Christians are reproached, overturned lamps, nocturnal
   embraces, promiscuous intercourse, feasts of human flesh? We do not
   know, is Justin's answer; in any case, they are not persecuted for the
   mere fact of their opinions.

   The purity of Christian morals contrasts admirably with the general
   corruption of the century. The faithful who prohibit marriage live in
   perfect chastity. A striking example of this was seen at Alexandria. A
   young Christian, as he wished to give a decisive denial to the
   calumnies that were spread abroad about the alleged obscene mysteries
   of their nocturnal reunions, requested Felix, Prefect of Egypt, that a
   physician, whom he should nominate, might be allowed to castrate him.
   Felix refused; the young man persisted in his virginity, satisfied with
   the testimony of his own conscience and the esteem of his brethren.
   What a contrast to the good Antoninus!

   The picture of the Christian reunions is chaste and beautiful. First
   the introduction of those who have just received baptism, that is to
   say, the "illuminated," to their place amongst the brethren takes
   place. Then long prayers are offered up for the whole human race.

   When prayers are over we mutually kiss each other. Then the bread, a
   cup of water, and some wine, is brought to the president. He, taking
   them into his hands, gives praise and glory to the Father of all
   things, in the name of his Son and of the Holy Ghost; then he thanks
   God at some length for those gifts which he has bestowed on us. The
   people show their assent by saying Amen. Then those who are called
   deacons amongst or give the bread, the wine, and water over which the
   prayers have been pronounced, to all those who are present, and take
   them to those who are absent.

   "This food we call the Eucharist. Only those who believe in the truth
   of our doctrines, and who have been washed in the laver of regeneration
   for the remission of sins, and who live according to Christ's precepts,
   are allowed to participate in it. For we do not take this food as
   ordinary bread and wine; but as Jesus Christ, our incarnate Saviour,
   assumed flesh and blood for our salvation by the word of God, no we are
   taught that the nourishment over which the prayer composed from the
   words of Jesus has been pronounced with thanksgiving,--we are taught, I
   say, that this nourishment, by which our blood and our flesh are
   nourished by assimilation, are the flesh and blood of Christ Incarnate.
   For the Apostles, in the memoirs which they have written, and which are
   called Gospels, tell us that Jesus bade them do this. Taking the bread,
   he gave thanks, and said: "Do this in remembrance of me; This is my
   body;" likewise taking the cup be gave thanks, and said: "This is my
   blood; " and he reserved that dogma for them alone. If the same thing
   takes place in the mysteries of Mithra, it is because evil demons,
   imitating Christ's institution, have taught how it is to be done; for
   you know, or can know, that the bread and the cup full of water, with
   certain words pronounced over it, form a part of the ceremonies of
   initiation.

   During the days that follow the meetings, we continually remind each
   other of what has taken place, and those who are able supply the wants
   of the poor, and we habitually live together. In our oblations we bless
   the Creator of all things through his Son Jesus Christ and the Holy
   Spirit. And on the day which is called the Day of the Sun all those who
   live in towns or in the country assemble in the same place, and the
   memorials of the apostles and the writings of the prophets are read, as
   far as time allows. When the reader has finished, the president
   addresses words of exhortation and admonition to those who are present,
   to induce them to conform to such beautiful teaching. Then we all rise
   together, and send up our prayers to heaven, and, as we have already
   said, when the prayer is ended the bread and the wine and water is
   distributed, and he who presides prays and gives thanks with all his
   night, and the people show their assent by saying "Amen." Then the
   offerings over which thanksgivings have been pronounced are
   distributed; each one receives his share, and that of the absent is
   sent to them by the deacons. Those who are well off and who wish to
   give, give what they please, each one as he is disposed. The amount of
   the collection is handed over to the president; he succours the widows
   and orphans and those who are m distress through sickness or any other
   reason, those who are in prison, and strangers who may come; in short,
   he takes care of all those who are in want. We have this general
   meeting on the day of the Sun, in the first place, because it is the
   first day, the day on which God, having metamorphosed darkness and
   matter, made the world; in the second place, because our Saviour Jesus
   Christ rose from the dead on that day. They crucified him, in fact, on
   the day which precedes that of Saturn, and, the day that follows that
   of Saturn--that is to say, the day of the Sun--having appeared to his
   apostles and disciples, he taught them those things which we have just
   submitted to your judgment.

   Justin finished his pleading by quoting a letter of Hadrian to Minicius
   Fundanus. Believer as he was, he was naturally astonished that men
   would not yield to such clear arguments, and his manner proves that he
   thought he should have converted the Cæsars. Certainly the frivolous
   Lucius Verus did not touch this solemn writing with the tip of his
   fingers. Perhaps Antoninus and Marcus Aurelius read it; but were they
   as culpable as Justin believed in not being converted? We cannot
   pretend to say. Justin had fair game with the immoral fables of
   Paganism; he demonstrated without difficulty that the Greek and Roman
   religions were scarcely aught but a tissue of shameful superstitions.
   But was the unbridled demonology which formed the foundation of all
   these systems much more reasonable? His confidence in the argument
   drawn from the prophecies is very artless. Antoninus and Marcus
   Aurelius did not know the Hebrew literature; if they had known it, they
   would certainly have found good Justin's exegesis very trifling. They
   would have observed, for example, that the 22d Psalm (21) only includes
   the nails of the Passion by taking the puerile interpretation, contrary
   to reason, of the Septuagint. The assertion that the Greeks have
   borrowed all their philosophy from the Jews would have been incredible
   to them. They would, at best, have found that passage strange, where
   the pious writer, wishing to prove that the cross is the key to
   everything, finds this mysterious form in the masts of ships, in the
   plough and mattock of the labourer, in the workman's tool, in the human
   body when the arms are stretched out, in the ensigns and trophies of
   the Romans, in the attitude of the dead emperors consecrated by
   apotheosis. The direction in which Herod and Ptolemy Philadelphus are
   thought to have been contemporaries would also, doubtless, have
   inspired in them some doubts as to the precision of the statement
   relating to the Septuagint version, the version which serves as the
   base for all the Messianic reasonings of Justin. If they had been asked
   to search in the archives of the Empire for the registers of Zuirinius,
   the acts of Pilate relating to Jesus, they would have had difficulty in
   finding them. Indeed, the writings of the Sibyl and Hystaspes would
   have seemed to them of weak authority. They would have been amazed to
   learn that demons, afraid of the annoyance which these books were going
   to cause them, had pronounced the penalty of death on these who would
   read them.

   It appears that Justin joined to his pleading some illustrations from
   these apocryphal apologies, and imagined that they would exercise a
   decisive influence on the minds of the Cæsars. His hopes went beyond
   that: he demanded that his request should be communicated to the Senate
   and the Roman people, especially that the falsity of the divinity of
   Simon the magician should be acknowledged, and that the statue he had
   at Rome (a certain half column of Semo Sancus) should be officially
   cast down.

   Justin's ardent convictions would allow him no rest. He imagined
   himself responsible for all the errors he did not combat. The Jews who
   persisted in not becoming Christians, were the perpetual object of his
   pre-occupations. He wrote against them in dialogue form, perhaps in
   imitation of Aristo of Pella, a polemical work which may be reckoned
   among the most curious literary monuments of budding Christianity.

   Justin supposes that, in his journey from Syria to Rome, about the time
   of the war of Bar-Coziba, kept back by an accident in navigation at
   Ephesus, he walked into the alleys of the Xystus, when an unknown
   person, surrounded by a group of disciples, was struck by the dress he
   wore, and, approaching him, said, "Hail, philosopher!" He told him, at
   the same time, that a Socratic sage, whose lessons he had learned at
   Argos, had instructed him always to respect the philosopher's mantle,
   and to seek to have himself instructed by those who wore it. The
   conversation took a very literary turn, and he found that the unknown
   was no other than the Rabbi Tryphon or Tarphon, who had fled from Judea
   to escape the fury of Bar-Coziba's war, had taken refuge in Greece, and
   lived oftenest at Corinth. They spoke of God, of Providence, of the
   immortality of the soul. Justin records how, after having tried all the
   schools and systems, he has found nothing better than to adhere to
   Christ. The controversy then becomes lively. Justin accumulates against
   the Jews the most disdainful reproaches. Not content with having killed
   Jesus, they would not cease to persecute the Christians. If they did
   not kill them, it was because power prevented them; but they
   overwhelmed them with curses, chasing them from the synagogues, and, as
   often as they could, maltreating, assassinating, and punishing them.
   The prejudices which the Pagans had against Christianity were inspired
   by the Jews: they were more guilty of persecutions than even the Pagans
   who ordered them. They had sent from Jerusalem certain men chosen to
   spread abroad over the whole world the calumnies with which they sought
   to crush the Christians. They did worse than that; they mutilated the
   Bible by cutting out the passages which proved the Messiahship and
   divinity of Jesus. They repelled the LXX. translation, only because
   that contained the proofs of that very divinity. In controversies they
   threw out loud cries against the cavils, and the little details they
   did not comprehend, and refused to see the force of the whole.

   Impartiality compels us to say that if Justin was in those oral
   disputes such as we see him to be in his book (and unfortunately what
   we know of his controversies with Cresceus leads us to believe so), the
   Jews had thoroughly good reason to complain of his inexactness. There
   never had been a weaker interpreter of the Old Testament. Not only did
   Justin not know Hebrew, but he had no critical talent; he admitted the
   most manifest interpretations. His Messianic applications of the texts
   of the Bible are of the most arbitrary description, and are founded on
   the errors of the Septuagint. His book certainly did not convert a
   single Jew, but in the bosom of Catholicism he founded the apologetic
   exegesis. Almost all the arguments of this order have been invented by
   St Justin, scarcely any have been added since his time.

   It is useless to say that the gulf between Judaism and Christianity
   appears as absolute in this book. Judaism and Christianity are two
   enemies occupied in doing each other all the evil possible. The Law is
   abrogated--it has always been powerless to produce justification.
   Circumcision and the Sabbath not only are abolished things, they were
   never good things. Circumcision had been imposed by God on the Jews, in
   foresight of their crimes against Christ and the Christians. "This sign
   has been given you that you may be separated from other nations and
   ourselves, and that you should suffer alone that which you now justly
   suffer, that your country may be rendered desert, your towns delivered
   to the flames, that strangers may eat your fruits before your eyes, and
   that no one among you may be able to go up to Jerusalem." This
   pretended mark of honour is thus become for the Jews a punishment, a
   visible sign which marks them out for punishment. The law of the Mosaic
   precepts has only been instituted because of the iniquities and the
   hardness of the heart of the people. The Sabbath and the sacrifices
   have had no other cause. The impossibility which there was for a Jew
   holding to his old Scriptures, to admit that God had been born and
   become man, is not even comprehended by Justin. Tarphon would truly
   have been a most tractable man, if after such controversy he had left
   his adversary confessing, as Justin pretends, that he had profited much
   by the discussion.

   Conversions, moreover, became more and more rare. Sides were taken. The
   moment when dispute is organised is usually that in which already each
   is hardened in his own view. Transfers have been numerous, so that
   Christianity had been a badly defined colony, scarcely separate from
   Judaism. When it is a complete place, guarded by its fortifications, in
   face of its metropolis, one can no longer pass from one side to
   another. The Jew, like the Mussulman, will be the most unconvertible of
   human beings, the most Anti-Christian.

   Justin still lived for some years disputing always against the Jews,
   the heretics, and the Pagans, writing polemical works without end. An
   act of juridic severity on the part of Q. Lollius Urbicus, prefect of
   Rome, will place again the advocate's pen in his band in the last years
   of Antoninus' reign. Like nearly all the apologists, he was not a
   member of the hierarchy. This position without responsibility suits the
   volunteers of the faith better, and at a pinch allows the Church to
   disavow them. Justin was always dear to the Catholics. His distance
   from the sects preserved him from the aberrations which Tatian and
   Tertullian could not escape. His theology is far from being the
   orthodox theology of the following ages, but the sincerity of the
   author made that to be easily shown on his behalf. The Trinity,
   according to St Justin, was in a state of badly formed embryo; his
   angels and his demons were conceived in a prodigiously materialistic
   and infantine fashion; his millenarianism is naive as that of Papias;
   he systematically grieved St Paul. He believed that Jesus was born in a
   supernatural fashion, but he knew some Christians who did not admit it.
   His Gospel differed considerably from some texts held sacred to-day; he
   made no use of the Gospel called that of John; and the writing that he
   quotes although approaching most frequently Matthew, sometimes Luke, is
   not precisely any of the three synoptists. It was probably the Gospel
   of the Hebrews, called "the Gospel of the Twelve Apostles," or of
   Peter, not without analogy with the Gemma Marias, or Protevangel of
   James, and perhaps identical with the Gospel of the Ebionites. Fables,
   in any case, abounded in these: they were only a few steps from the
   puerilities which filled the apocryphal Gospels. But a certain correct
   sense made Justin avoid these extreme errors. His pagan erudition, all
   adulterated as it was, struck under-educated people. In fact, he was a
   splendid pleader. All the apologists who followed him were inspired by
   him.

   His admiration for the Greek philosophy could not be to the taste of
   everyone, but it appeared to be good policy. The time had not yet
   arrived when insults were hurled against the sages of antiquity: people
   took the good where they found it; they saw in Socrates a forerunner of
   Jesus, and in Platonic idealism or sort of pre-Christianity. Justin was
   as much a disciple of Plato and Philo as he was of Moses and Christ;
   Moses was older than the Greek sages, and they had borrowed from him
   their dogmas of natural religion, hence its whole superiority. No
   theologian had ever opened so widely as Justin the portals of
   salvation. Revelation, according to him, is a permanent fact in
   humanity; it is the eternal fruit of the Logos spermaticos, who
   enlightens naturally the human understanding. All that philosophers and
   legislators--the Stoics, for instance--ever discovered of good, they
   owed to the contemplation of the Logos. The Logos is nothing else than
   reason universally diffused; all who, in whatever country or time they
   may be, have loved and cultivated reason, have been Christians.
   Socrates shines in the first rank in this phalanx of the Christians
   before Jesus. He knew Christ partly. He did not perceive the whole
   truth, but what he saw was a fraction of Christianity; the combated
   polytheism, as the Christians do, and be had the honour, like them, to
   give up his life in the conflict. The Logos descended and resided
   absolutely in Jesus. He is disseminated among the human souls who have
   loved the truth and practised good; in Jesus, the Logos is absolutely
   concentrated.

   With such an idea of reason, it was natural to admit philosophy as an
   element in the composition of the Christian dogmas. The traces of Greek
   philosophy are still weak in St Paul and in the pseudo-Johannic
   writings. In the gnosis, on the contrary, according to Marcion,
   according to the author of the psuedo-Clementine romance, according to
   Justin, the Greek philosophy runs with full stream. It was found quite
   natural to mingle in the Jewish theory of the Logos ideas of the same
   kind as were believed to be met in Stoicism. Far from renouncing
   reason, they pretended to give it its share. They held sound philosophy
   to be the surest ally for Christianity; the great men of the past were
   considered as the anticipative disciples of Christ, who had come not to
   overthrow but to purify, complete, and accomplish their work. They
   admired Socrates and Plato; they were proud of the courage of their
   great contemporaries, such as Musonius. They said, with a just and
   large sentiment of truth: "What has been thought or felt before among
   the Greeks and barbarians, belongs to us."

   A sort of eclecticism, founded on a mystical rationalism, was the
   character of this first Christian philosophy. The apologist applied
   himself to show that the fundamental points of Christianity had not
   been strange to Pagan antiquity,--that the dogmas on the divine
   essence, on the Logos, the divine spirit, special providence, prayer,
   angels, demons, the future life, and the end of the world, might be
   established by certain profane texts. Even the teaching, most specially
   Christian, on the birth, the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus
   Christ, had analogues in the religions of antiquity. It was maintained
   that Plato had expressed in the Timæus the doctrine of the Son of God.
   It was remarked that, in all religions, the ceremonies resembled each
   other--that the morale is the same throughout all. Far from finding in
   that an objection, they concluded from this universality the existence
   of a permanent revelation, of which Christianity had been the most
   brilliant act.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XX.

  ABUSES AND PENITENCE--NEW PROPHECIES.

   The Church was like the pious Israel at the time when it built its new
   temple; with the one hand they fought, with the other they built. The
   philosophic prepossessions were the act of a very small number. The
   great Christian work was moral and popular. The Church of Rome
   especially showed Itself more and more indifferent to these extravagant
   speculations which delighted minds full of the intellectual activity of
   the Greeks, but corrupted by the reveries of the East. The disciplinary
   organisation was the principal work at Rome; that extra-ordinary city
   applied to that its thoroughly practical genius and its strong energy.

   Penitence had always been a fundamental institution of Christianity.
   The elect of the future city of God should be absolutely pure. To avoid
   sin was impossible; it was therefore necessary that means should be
   found for recovering lost grace. The Church accordingly at an early
   period erected itself into a tribunal, and transformed repentance into
   public penitence, imposed by authority and accepted by the delinquent.
   A mass of questions which were to trouble the Church for a century and
   a half date from that time. How could people, after having fallen
   often, become penitent again? Do those means of reconciliation apply to
   all time? The hypothesis of murder was scarcely thought of; the gentle
   and timid manners of the sect forbade the idea of a Christian assassin;
   but adultery in a little congregation of brethren and sisters was
   common enough. Apostacy, indeed, seeing the bitterness of the
   persecutions, was not rare. Some, to avoid punishment, went even so far
   as to curse Christ; some became the denouncers of their brethren; while
   others contented themselves with a simple denial, "I am not a
   Christian." They were ashamed of Christ without exactly blaspheming
   him.

   It was this last category of persons who caused the greatest
   embarrassment. The Church was a source of such gentleness, that the day
   after their fall, the apostates, the denouncers of their brethren,
   experienced cruel remorse. They would have desired to re-enter the
   assembly they had betrayed. The situation of those unfortunates was
   distressing. Despairing of their salvation, they became the prey of
   frightful terrors. They could be seen prowling around the Church where
   they had tasted so many spiritual joys. There was no connection between
   them and the faithful. With a severity which Jesus would not have
   approved, but which the gravity of the circumstances excused, they were
   treated as people infected by the itch, and were called by a cruel
   pleasantry "the savages, the solitary ones." Many went to see the
   confessors in prison and found a sort of austere joy in the hard words
   which those addressed to them. The larger portion of the faithful
   considered them as totally dead to the Church, and would not admit that
   there could be any place of penitence for them there. Some, less harsh,
   distinguished between those who had blasphemed Christ or denounced
   their brethren and those who had simply denied their faith; these
   latter could be admitted to repentance. Others, more indulgent still,
   accorded penitence to those who had denied with the mouth and not with
   the heart. There was a danger of pushing rigour too far, for the Jews
   sought to gain to the synagogue those the Church had thus expelled.

   Besides those great culprits, there were the weak, the uncertain, the
   worldly--Christians in some sense ashamed, and who dissembled as to
   their faith, and were thus led unceasingly into semi-apostacies. The
   Christian profession was something so strict that, if the Christian did
   not live in the society of his brethren, he was exposed to continual
   mockery. As he existed only with the end of the world before his mind,
   the Christian of that time was quite sequestered from public life.
   Those who were obliged to mix themselves in temporal affairs were led
   more and more to forsake the society of the saints, and soon to disdain
   them, to blush for them as brethren, to hear them laughed at without
   replying. Half-dead to the spiritual life, they fell into doubt. They
   became rich; they made a separate company, in virtue of the principle
   that man is led almost necessarily to cultivate the society of persons
   who have the same fortune as himself. They shunned meeting with the
   servants of God, fearing that they would ask for alms. The company of
   the faithful appeared humble; those quitted it in order to lead a more
   brilliant life with the Gentiles. These worldlings did not abandon God,
   but they deserted the Church; they kept the faith, but ceased to
   practise it. Some became repentant, and gave themselves up to works of
   charity; others, brought into the society of the Pagans, became like
   them, and abandoned themselves to pleasure. This equivocal middle
   course did not dispose them to martyrdom. At the least sound of
   persecution they made an appearance of returning to idols, to escape
   being disturbed.

   In the very bosom of the Church what imperfection! Such were constantly
   associated with the congregation, and did not cease to be slanderous,
   envious, blundering, bold, and presumptuous. The administration of the
   funds of the Church gave place to such abuses; certain deacons took the
   supplies of the widows and orphans for themselves. Then the teachers of
   strange doctrines abounded and seduced the faithful. Placed as judges
   in the midst of all these troubles, the saints inclined sometimes to
   indulgence and sometimes to severity. What was serious was that certain
   sectarian doctors flattered those who had sinned, in the view of
   personal interest. They sold them indulgence, after a fashion; and in
   the hope of being recompensed for their casuistry, they told them that
   they had no need of penitence, and that the pastors were people of an
   exaggerated severity.

   The fact is that, in such an assembly of saints, there was scarcely
   room for lukewarmness. An enthusiastic piety made them believe
   everything. Prophecy and revelations flourished as in the palmiest
   days. There resulted serious abuses from this. The individual prophets
   became the plague of the Church. People went to interrogate them as to
   the future, even as to temporal affairs. These men received money, and
   gave the replies which were desired of them. The orthodox admitted that
   the devils sometimes revealed certain things to impostors, the better
   to try the righteous; but they maintained that they could always
   distinguish the prophets of God from frivolous prophets. Naturally this
   caused serious embarrassment, for he whom one called frivolous the
   other believed guided by "the angel of the prophetic spirit."

   The orthodox scrupled no more than the heterodox to provide as food for
   the pious public the most audaciously fabricated revelations, and these
   revelations were greedily received. Such especially was a prophecy
   whose title alone marked sufficiently its tendency of spirit. It is
   related in the book of Numbers that Eldad and Modad, clothed with a
   portion of the prophetic power of Moses, prophesied out of the ranks
   and in their entirely individual capacity. Joshua wished them to be
   silenced. Moses stopped him. "Are you jealous for me?" he asked. "Would
   to God that all the people of Jehovah were prophets, and that Jehovah
   sent his spirit upon all!" Eldad and Modad were thus the
   representatives, among the ancient people, of the individual prophet.
   They were credited with a book which made much impression on many, and
   was quoted as inspired Scripture.

   The symbolism of these new prophets appears sometimes strange and in
   bad taste. The exhaustion of their species was visible. All these
   used-up machines produce on us nothing but a result of fatigue and
   disgust. But for the simple the effect was great; such prophecies
   fortified the hesitating and warmed the cool. They believed they heard
   admonitions directly from God.

   An apocalypse attributed to Peter was a very great success; it was
   admitted into the canon, beside that of John, and read in the greater
   number of the Churches. Like all apocalypses, it told the faithful of
   terrors and future calamities; like the Shepherd, of which we shall
   soon speak, it insisted on the punishment of different sins; like the
   apocalypse of Esdras, it treated, it would seem, of the state of souls
   after death. A particular idea of the author is that abortions are
   entrusted to a guardian angel, who charges himself with their education
   and development. They suffer the share of sufferings they would have
   endured if they had lived, and they are saved. The milk that women
   lose, and which coagulates, is changed into little animalculæ, which
   devour them at once. From the beginning, the bizarre aspects of the
   book provoked a strong opposition, and many wished it not to be read in
   public. This opposition only increased with time. The gloomy images
   which were to be found in it, however, made them keep it for the
   readings of the holy week. Then the antipathy of the Greek orthodox
   Church against apocalypses--an antipathy which was powerless against
   the apocalypse of John--succeeded in expelling this, and even in
   destroying it altogether.

   The habit of public reading of the apostolical and prophetical readings
   in the Churches consumed, if one may so express it, many books: the
   circle of received writings was quickly run through, and the readers
   were thrown with earnestness on the new books which appeared, even when
   their titles to theopneusty were not very correct. There resulted from
   this a certain style of habit which went on for ten or twenty years.
   Sometimes, when the book was out of vogue, they limited its reading to
   one fixed day yearly.

   This may be seen clearly in a curious little writing of that time,
   which has been preserved to us. It is a sort of homily, evidently for
   the use of the Roman Church, which the anagnost read after the large
   readings drawn from the sacred pages. This homily is itself a tissue of
   quotations taken from the Gospels, the ancient prophecies, and writings
   which it is now impossible to determine. The most compromising passages
   of the Gospel of the Egyptians are there quoted side by side with
   Matthew and Luke, and framed in a style of language destined to excite
   the piety of the "brethren and sisters." The writing was attached, as a
   Roman document, to the epistle of Clement, and, with it, was copied
   accordingly into a great number of Bibles.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXI.

  ROMAN PIETISM--THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS.

   One book had in this fashion a durable success, and served during
   several centuries for the nourishment of Christian piety. It had as its
   author a brother of Pius, the bishop of Rome. This personage, who
   doubtless occupied a considerable place in the Church, conceived the
   project of striking a great blow, sufficient to awaken the saints. He
   pretended that, fifty or sixty years before, in the time of the
   persecution of Domitian, a certain Hermas, an elder of the Church of
   Rome, had had a revelation. Clement, the guarantee for all the pious
   frauds of Roman Ebionism, covered the book with his authority, and was
   believed to have it addressed to the churches of the whole world.

   Hermas, a foundling born in slavery, had been sold, by the proprietor
   of slaves who had brought him up, to a Roman lady named Rhoda. He had
   doubtless succeeded in buying his liberty, and setting himself up in
   life; for at the opening of the work, he is under the blow of
   annoyances which his wife, his children, and his affairs have caused
   him, as these last, in consequence of the disagreement of his family,
   proceed very badly. His sons had even committed the greatest crime of
   which a Christian could be culpable; they had blasphemed Christ to
   escape persecution, and had denounced their parents. In the midst of
   these sorrows, poor Hermas found out Rhoda, whom he had not seen for
   many years. The small consolation he had in her household rendered his
   heart sensitive, it would appear; he began to love his old mistress
   like a sister. One day, seeing her bathe in the Tiber, he presented his
   hand to her to help her out of the river, and said to her, "Howhappy
   should I be if I had a wife as beautiful and accomplished!" His thought
   did not go further, and such a reflection was all the more excusable
   that his wife was bitter, disagreeable, and full of defects. But the
   severity of Christian morals was so great that the quiet Platonic love
   of Hermas was remarked in heaven by the jealous watcher of pure souls;
   and he was to be convicted of it as of a crime.

   Some time after--in fact, as he was going to his country house,
   situated at Cuma, ten stadia from the Campanian Way, and while he
   admired the beauty of God's works, he slept when travelling. In spirit
   he traversed rivers, ravines, mountain crevasses, and, returning to the
   plain, began to pray to the Lord and to confess his sin.

   Now, while he prayed, the heaven was opened, and he saw the woman he
   had desired saying to him, "Good day, Hermas." Having looked at her,
   "Mistress, what are you doing here?" asked he. And she replied, "I have
   been brought here to accuse you of your sins before the Lord." "What!
   are you my accuser?" "No; but listen to the words I am speaking to you.
   God, who dwells in heaven, who has created all things that exist out of
   nothing, and has made them great for the holy Church, is angry with
   you, because you have sinned in regard to me." "I have sinned in regard
   to you!" replied Hermas; "and in what way? Have I ever said an improper
   word to you? Have I not always treated you as my mistress? Have I not
   always respected you as my sister? Why do you represent me falsely, oh,
   woman, for wicked and impure acts?" And then, smiling, she said to him,
   "For a righteous man like you desire alone is a great sin; but pray to
   God and he will pardon your sins and those of all your household and
   those of all the saints." After she had said these words, the heavens
   were closed, and Hermas was afraid. "If this is to be looked on as sin,
   how is it possible to be saved?"

   As he was plunged in these reflections, he saw before him a great
   armchair covered with white cloth. An aged female, richly dressed,
   having a book in her hand, came and sat down in it. Having saluted
   Hermas by name, "Why are you sad, Hermas--you who are usually so
   patient, equable, and always smiling?" "I am," said Hermas, "under the
   stroke of reproaches from a very virtuous woman, who has told me that I
   have sinned regarding her." "Ah, fie!" said she to me, "that this evil
   should be on the part of one of God's servants--a man respectable and
   well tried, the chaste, simple, and innocent Hermas! Perhaps, indeed,
   there has some sentiment taken possession of your heart on the subject.
   But that is not the reason God is angry with you." The good Hermas
   breathed hard while the old woman informed him that the true cause of
   God's anger was his weakness as the father of a family. He did not
   restrain his wife and children with sufficient severity; this was the
   cause of the ruin of his temporal affairs. The old woman then read out
   of her book some terrible words which Hernias did not remember, and
   finished by some good words which he recollected.

   The following year, at the same period, as he went to his country house
   at Cuma, Hermas saw the same old woman walking and reading a little
   book. She explained to him the object of the book, which was to exhort
   all men to repentance, for the times of persecution were drawing very
   near. A handsome young man appeared. "Who, do you think, is that old
   woman from whom you have received the book?" "The sibyl perhaps,"
   answered Hermas, his mind pre-occupied by the neighbourhood of Cuma.
   "No; she is the Church." "Why then is she old?" "Because she has been
   first created, and the world has been made for her." The old woman
   enjoined Hermas to send two copies of the book--the one to Clement, the
   other to the Deaconess Grapte. "Clement," said she, "will address the
   book to the cities without, for there is in that his special work.
   Grapte will send it to the widows and orphans, and you will read it in
   the city for the elders who preside over the Church. This little book
   is naturally the work of the pretended Hermas. The heavenly origin of
   it is thus attested."

   The third vision is more mysterious. The old woman appeared again to
   Hermas, after some fasts and prayers. They arranged to meet in the
   country. Hermas arrived first; to his great astonishment he found
   himself in front of an ivory bench; on the bench was placed a linen
   pillow, covered with very fine gauze. He began to pray and confess his
   sins. The old woman arrived with six young people. She made Hermas sit
   at her left (the right being reserved for those who have suffered for
   God the lash, the prison, tortures, the cross, the wild beasts). Hermas
   then saw the six young men build a square tower, emerging from the
   bosom of the water. Some thousands of men served them, and brought the
   stones to them. Among the stones, those drawn from the channel of the
   water were hewn. Those were the most perfect; they joined so well that
   the tower appeared a monolith. Among the others, the young men made a
   selection. Around the tower was a pile of rubbishy materials, either
   because they had defects, or because they were not cut as they should
   have been.

   "The tower," said the old woman, "is the Church--that is, I, who have
   appeared to you, and who shall appear to you again. . . The six young
   men are the angels created first, to whom the Lord has entrusted the
   care of developing and governing his creation; those who carry the
   stones are the inferior angels. The beautiful white stones, which are
   dressed no finely, are the apostles, bishops, doctors, deacons, living
   or dead, who have been chaste, and who have lived on a good
   understanding with the faithful. The stones which are drawn from the
   channel of the water, represent those who have suffered death for the
   name of the Lord. Those which have been rejected, and remain near the
   tower, represent those who have sinned, and who wish to repent. If they
   did this while the building was going on they might be employed in it;
   but once the building is completed, they are of no more use. The stones
   which are broken and rejected are the wicked there is no more place for
   them. Those which are thrown to a distance from the tower, which roll
   into the road, and from thence into the wilderness, are the unsteady,
   who, after they have believed, have quitted the true path. Those which
   fall near the water and cannot enter it, are the souls who desire
   baptism, but recoil before the holiness of religion and the necessity
   of renouncing their lusts. As to the beautiful white but round stones,
   and which cannot in consequence be used in a square building, these are
   the rich who have embraced the faith. When persecution comes, their
   riches and business make them renounce the Lord. They will be useless
   to the building except when their riches are curtailed, just as to make
   a round stone enter into a square construction, it would be necessary
   to cut off a large portion. Judge this by yourself, Hermas; when you
   were rich you were useless, now that you are ruined, you are useful and
   fit to live."

   Hermas asks his informant as to the proximity more or less of the
   consummation of the times. "Fool," replies the old woman, "do you not
   see that the tower is yet being built? When it shall be finished, the
   end will be; now it advances towards completion. Ask no more!"

   The fourth vision is again on the Campanian Way. The Church, which has
   appeared up till now throwing aside all the signs of old age, and with
   all the marks of rejuvenation, now appears in the style of a girl
   wonderfully arrayed. A frightful monster (perhaps Nero) would have
   devoured her, but for the help of the angel Thegri, who presides over
   the fierce beasts. This monster is the herald of a fearful persecution
   which is at hand. Some tortures shall be passed through which nothing
   but purity of heart can enable one to escape. The world shall perish in
   fire and blood.

   There is here only the mise en scene, in some sense preliminary. The
   essential part of the book commences with the appearance of a venerable
   personage in shepherd dress, clothed with a white beast's skin, with a
   scrip hung on his shoulders, and a crook in his hand. It is the
   guardian angel of Hermas, clothed as the angel of penitence, who is
   sent by the venerable angel to be his companion all the rest of his
   life. This shepherd, who now takes speech till the end of the book,
   recites a little treatise on Christian morals, embellished with symbols
   and apologues. Chastity is the favourite virtue of the author. To think
   of another woman than one's own wife is a crime. A man ought to take
   back his wife after her first act of adultery, expiated by repentance,
   but not after her second. Second marriages are permissible, but it is
   better not to involve oneself in them. The good conscience of Hermas
   shows in his taste for gaiety. Gaiety is a virtue, sadness distresses
   the Holy Spirit, and chases him from a soul, for the spirit is given
   joyfully to man. The continually sad prayer of a man does not go up to
   God. Sadness is like the drop of vinegar, which spoils the good wine.
   God is good, and the commandments impossible without him are easy with
   him. The devil is powerful, but he has no power over the true believer.

   An affecting asceticism filled up the entire life of the Christian. The
   cares of business hindered from the service of God: it was necessary to
   withdraw from these. Fasting is recommended: now fasting consists in
   withdrawing every morning to one's retreat; in purifying one's thoughts
   from the remembrances of the world; in not eating all day anything but
   bread and water; in saving what you might have spent, and giving it to
   the widows and orphans, who will pray for you. Repentance is necessary
   even to the righteous for their venial sins. Certain severe angels are
   charged with over-looking them, and with punishing not only their sins
   but even those of their family. All the misfortunes of life were held
   to be chastisements inflicted by these angels on "penitenital pastors."
   The penitent should afflict himself voluntarily, should humble himself,
   seek adversities and sorrows, or at least accept those which come upon
   him, as expiations. It would seem, according to this view, that
   penitence imposes on God--forces his hand. No, penitence is a gift of
   God. To those whom God foresees to be going to sin still, he does not
   accord the favour.

   In the weighty questions relating to public penitence, Hermas avoids
   exaggerated severity; he has comparisons which shall irritate
   Tertullian, and give him, on the part of that fanatic, the name of "the
   friend of adulterers." He explains the delay in the appearing of Christ
   by a decree of the mercy of God which allows sinners the chance of a
   last and definitive appeal. He who has blasphemed Christ to escape
   punishment, those who have denounced their brethren, are dead for ever:
   they resemble dry branches into which the sap can no longer ascend; but
   yet is their lot irrevocable? In certain cases, mercy is brought into
   the author's mind; for the sons of Hermas, who were blasphemers of
   Christ and traitors to the Church, were admitted to pardon, for their
   father's sake. Those who have simply denied Jesus can repent. "As to
   him who has denied from the heart," says Hermas, "I do not know if he
   can live." It is necessary also to distinguish the past from the
   future. To those who henceforth would deny Christ, there is no pardon;
   but those who had this misfortune before may be admitted to penitence.
   Sinners who have not blasphemed God nor betrayed his servants may
   return to penitence; but they hasten onwards; death threatens; the
   tower is about to be finished, and then the stones which have not been
   employed would be irrevocably rejected. For great crimes, there is but
   one repentance; for the lesser faults, it is allowable to repent more
   than once; but he who is constantly falling is a suspected penitent,
   and penitence will serve him in no wise.

   A perfume of chastity, somewhat unhealthy, is breathed from the vision
   of the mountain of Arcadia, and the twelve virgins. The fêtes which are
   given in the dream, one would say, were the imagination of a poor
   faster. Twelve beautiful girls, fine and strong as caryatides, stand at
   the gate of the future temple, and pass the stones for the construction
   with their open arms.

   "Thy shepherd will not come to-night," they said "if he does not come
   thou wilt remain with us." "No," said I to them; "if he does not come,
   I shall return home, and to-morrow I will come back." "Thou shouldst
   confide in us," they replied; "thou canst not leave as!" "Where would
   you have me remain?" "Thou shalt sleep with us like a brother, and not
   as a man," they answered; "for thou art our brother henceforth; we
   shall remain with you, for we love you very much" I blushed to remain
   in their company, but, lo! she who seemed to be their leader, began to
   embrace me; seeing which, the others imitated, causing me to make the
   tour of the building, and to play with me. And, as I was young, I began
   also to play with them. Some executed choruses, some danced, and others
   sang. As for me, I walked silently with them round the building, and
   was joyful with them. As it was late, I wished to return to the house,
   but they would not allow me, and I remained with them over night,
   sleeping by the side of the tower. The virgins had stretched out their
   linen tunics on the ground, and did nothing but pray. I prayed also
   with them incessantly, and the virgins rejoiced to see me pray thus:
   and I remained there till next morning at the second hour with the
   virgins. Then the shepherd arrived, and he addressed himself to them,
   "You have not done him any harm?" asked he, looking at them. "My lord,"
   I said to him, "I have only had the pleasure of abiding with them." "Of
   what have you eaten? said he. "My lord," said I to him; "I have lived
   all the night on the words of the Lord." "Did they receive you well?"
   asked he. "Yes, my lord," said I to him.

   Those virgins are the "holy spirits," the gifts of the Holy Ghost, the
   spiritual powers of the Son of God, and also the fundamental virtues of
   the Christian. A man cannot be saved except through these. The guardian
   angel of Hermas giving good testimony to the purity of his house--the
   twelve virgins who wish to have extreme propriety around them, and are
   repelled by the slightest defilement, consent to dwell there. Hermas
   promises that they shall always have with him a residence suited to
   their tastes.

   The author of Hermas is a pure Ebionite. The only good use of a fortune
   is to redeem slaves--captives. The Christian, as to himself, is
   essentially a poor man; to practise hospitality towards the power, the
   servants of God, that washes out even great crimes. "One does not
   imagine," says he, "what torment is in the punishment; it is worse than
   prison; so that we even see people committing suicide to escape it.
   When such a misfortune occurs, he who, knowing the unfortunate one,
   does not save him, is guilty of his death." The antipathy of Hermas to
   people of the world is extreme. He is not pleased except when in a
   circle of simple people, not knowing what wickedness is, without
   differences among themselves, and looking on one another's affairs, and
   mingling with each other; rejoicing in each other's virtues, always
   ready to share with him who has nothing the result of their labours.
   God, seeing the simplicity of the holy child-likeness of these good
   workers, is pleased with their little charities. Childlikeness is that
   which, to Hermas as to Jesus, takes the first place in God's sight.

   The Christianity of the author of Hermas suggests Gnosticism. He never
   names Jesus in any other way than as Christ. He always calls him the
   Son of God, and makes him a being before the creatures, a counsellor of
   the plans on which God made his creation. At the same time as this
   Divine assessor has created all things, he maintains all things. His
   name is beyond comparison with every other name. Sometimes, in the
   style of the Elkasaites, Hermas would conceive Christ as a giant.
   Oftener still he identifies him with the Holy Spirit, the source of all
   the gifts. Like the Gnostics, Hermas plays with abstractions. At other
   times, the Son of God is the law preached throughout all the earth. The
   dead will receive the seal of the Son of God, baptism, when the
   apostles and the Christian preachers, after their death, descend into
   hell and baptise the dead.

   A parable explains this singular Christology, and gives it much analogy
   with that which, later on, constituted Arianism. A master (God) plants
   in a certain corner of his property (the world) a vine (the circle of
   the Elect). Leaving for a journey, he has entrusted it to a servant
   (Jesus), who attends to it with wonderful care, roots out the weeds
   (blots out the sin of believers), and endures extreme pain (an allusion
   to the sufferings of Jesus). The master filled with joy at his return
   (on the day of judgment), calls his only Son and his friends (the Holy
   Spirit and the angels) and communicates to them the idea he has of
   associating this servant as an adopted son in the privileges of the
   only Son (the Holy Spirit). All consent to this by acclamation. Jesus
   is introduced by the resurrection into the divine circle; God sends him
   a part of the feast, and he, remembering his old fellow-servants,
   shares with them his heavenly gifts (the charisma). The divine rôle of
   Jesus is thus conceived as a sort of adoption and co-optation which
   places him beside a former Son of God. Moreover, Hermas sets forth a
   theology analogous to that which we have found among the Ebionites. The
   Holy Spirit pre-existed before all, and has created all. God chose him
   a body in which he could dwell in all purity, and realises for him a
   completed humanity: it is the life of Jesus. God takes counsel of his
   Son and of his angels, so that this flesh which has served the Spirit
   without reproach should have a place of rest, that this body without
   stain, in which the Holy Spirit dwells, would appear not to remain
   without reward.

   All the chimeras of the times came into collision with each other, we
   can see, without succeeding in coming into agreement in the head of
   poor Hermas. Some grotesque theories, such as the descent of the
   apostles into hell, are peculiar to him. He was an Ebionite in his
   fashion of comprehending the kingdom of God and the position of Jesus.
   He was a Gnostic in his tendency to multiply beings and to give angels
   even to one who has never existed. A guardian angel is not enough for
   him; each man has two angels--the one to care for his well-being, the
   other to seek his hurt. Indeed, in many points of view, he is a
   Montanist in advance. He has no trace of episcopacy about him. The
   elders of the Church are, in his eyes, all equal; he appears to have
   been of the number of those who made opposition to the growing
   institution which reversed the equality of the presbyteri. Hermas is an
   experienced pneumatist; he is an anchorite, an abstainer. He shows
   himself severe on the clergy. He complains of the general laxity. The
   name of Christian, according to him, is not enough to save one; a man
   is saved above all by the spiritual gifts. The Church is a body of
   saints, and it must be disembarrassed of all impure alliance. Martyrdom
   completes the Christian. Prophecy is a personal gift, free, and not
   subjected to the Church; those who receive it, communicate its
   revelation to the leaders; but they do not require their permission.
   Eldad and Modad were two prophets without mission, and beyond the
   authority of superiors. The great objection which the orthodox have to
   the Shepherd, as to the Montanist revelations, is that it comes too
   late,--"that the number of the prophets is complete already."

   The intention of the pseudo-Hermas has been, in fact, simply and well
   to introduce a new book into the body of the sacred writings. Perhaps
   his brother Pius lent himself as his support in this. The attempt of
   the pseudo-Hermas was very nearly the last of this kind; it did not
   succeed, for the author was known; the origin of the book was too
   clear. The writing pleased by what was edifying in it; the better minds
   advised that it should be specially read, but not permitted to be read
   in the Church, nor as an apostolic writing (it was too modern), nor as
   a prophetic writing (the number of these scriptures was closed). Rome
   especially never admitted it; the East was more easy, Alexandria
   especially. Many Churches held it to be canonical, and did it the
   honour of having it read from the pulpit. Some eminent men--Irenæus,
   Clement of Alexandria--gave it a place in their Bible, after the
   apostolic writings. The more reserved conceded to it an angelic
   revelation and an ecclesiastical authority of the first order. There
   had always been some doubts and protestations; some even went as far as
   scorn. At the beginning of the fourth century, the Shepherd was no
   longer looked on but as a book for edification, very useful for
   elementary instruction. Piety and art made considerable borrowings from
   it. The Roman council of 494, under Gelasus, placed it among the
   Apocrypha, but did not take it out of the hands of the believers, who
   found in it a help for their piety.

   The work has in some parts a charm; but a certain want of taste and
   talent are to be felt in it. The symbolism so energetic and so just in
   the old apocalypses, is here feeble, ill-adjusted, and without precise
   adaptation. The vein of Christian prophecy is altogether weakened. The
   language, simple, and in some sense flat, is nearly that of modern
   Greek as to the syntax; the choice of expression, on the contrary, is
   happy enough. It is the eloquence of a country curé, simple and
   grumbling, mingled with the cares of a sacristan concerned as to
   gauzes, cushions, and everything which serves to ornament his church.
   Hermas, in spite of his temptations and his pecadilloes, is certainly
   chastity itself, although the way he insists on this point makes us
   smile a little. To the terrible images of the old apocalypses, to the
   gloomy visions of John, and the pseudo-Esdras, succeed the gentle
   imaginations of a little pious romance, at once affecting and simple,
   and whose childish style is not free from insipidity.

   The prophetic attempt of pseudo-Hermas was not, moreover, an isolated
   fact; it belonged to the general state of the Christian conscience. In
   fifteen years the same causes will produce facts of the same order in
   the most remote districts of Asia Minor, against which the episcopacy
   will employ much greater severity.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXII.

  ORTHODOX ASIA--POLYCARPUS.

   Although Asia was already disturbed by the sectarian spirit, it
   nevertheless continued to be, next to Rome, the province in which
   Christianity flourished the most. It was the most pious country in the
   world; the country in which credulity offered to the inventors of new
   religions the most fertile field. To become a god was a very easy
   matter; incarnations, the terrestrial alternations of the immortals,
   were looked upon as ordinary events: every kind of imposture succeeded.
   People were still full of the recollection of Apollonius of Tyana--the
   legend regarding him increased day by day. An author, who took the name
   of Moeragenes, wrote the most marvellous stories about him; then a
   certain Maximus of Æges composed a book exclusively devoted to the
   extraordinary things which Apollonius had done at ages in Cilicia. In
   spite of the railleries of Lucian, "the tragedy," as he calls it,
   succeeded astonishingly. Later, about the year 200, Philostratus wrote
   at the request of the Syrian lady, Julia Domna, that insipid romance
   which passed for an exquisite hook, and which, according to a very
   serious Pagan writer, should have been entitled, "Sojourn of a God
   among Men." Its success was immense. Because of it, Apollonius came to
   be considered as the first of sages, a veritable friend of the gods, as
   a god himself. His image was to be seen in the sanctuaries; temples
   were even dedicated to him. His miracles, his beautiful speeches,
   afforded edification for all classes. He was a sort of Christ of
   Paganism; and undoubtedly the intention of opposing an ideal of
   beneficent holiness to that of the Christians was not foreign to his
   apotheosis. In the last days of the struggle between Christianity and
   Paganism he was compared only to Jesus, and his life, as revealed in
   his letters, was preferred to the Gospels, the work of grosser minds. A
   Paphlagonian charlatan, Alexander of Abonoticus, attained through his
   assurance a success no less prodigious. He was a very handsome man. He
   had a superb presence, a most melodious voice, hair of enormous length,
   which it was pretended he had inherited from Perseus, and passed as one
   who predicted the future with the frantic enthusiasm of the ancient
   soothsayers. He enclosed a small serpent in a goose's egg, broke the
   egg before the multitude, and made believe that it was an incarnation
   of Esculapius, who had chosen for his abode the city of Abonoticus. The
   god attained maturity in a few days. The people of Abonoticus were
   astonished soon to see on a canopy an enormous serpent with a human
   head, splendidly clothed, opening and closing its mouth and brandishing
   its sting. It was Alexander himself who was thus decked out, he having
   coiled round his chest and about his neck a tame serpent, whose tail
   hung down in front. He had made himself a head of linen, which he had
   besmeared artistically enough; and by means of horse hair he made the
   jaws and the sting move. The new god was called Glycon, and people came
   from every part of the empire to consult it. Abonoticus became the
   centre of unbridled thaumaturgy. The result was an abundant manufacture
   of painted images, talismans, idols of silver and of bronze, which had
   an extraordinary popularity. Alexander was powerful enough to raise in
   his district a genuine persecution against the Christians and the
   Epicureans who refused to believe in him. He established a cult which,
   in spite of its wholly charlatanistic and even obscene character, had
   much vogue, and attracted a multitude of religious people. But the most
   singular thing of all was that Romans of high standing, such as
   Severian, legate of Cappadocia, and Rutilianus, a man of consular
   dignity, one of the first men of his time, were his dupes, and that the
   impostor succeeded in having the name of Abonoticus changed to
   Ionopolis. He required also that the coinage of that city should bear
   henceforth on the one side the effigy of Glycon, on the other his own,
   with the arms of Perseus and of Esculapius. Actually the coins of
   Abonoticus, at the time of Antonine and Marcus Aurelius, bore the
   figure of a serpent with the head of a man with long hair and beard,
   and on the obverse the word GLUKON. The coins of the same city, with
   the medal of Lucius Verus, bore the serpent and the name IONOPOLEITON.
   Under Marcus Aurelius we shall see this ridiculous religion assume an
   incredible importance. It lasted until the second half of the third
   century.

   Nerullinus, at Troas, succeeded in a fraudulent enterprise of the same
   kind. His statue uttered oracles, cured maladies; sacrifices were
   offered to it, and it was crowned with flowers. It was especially the
   absurd ideas about medicine, the belief in medical dreams, in the
   oracles of Esculapius, etc., which kept the minds of people in that
   state of superstition. We are dumfounded at seeing Galian himself
   addicted to similar follies. More incredible still is the career of
   that Ælius Aristides, religious sophist, devout Pagan, a sort of bishop
   or saint, pressing pious materialism and credulity to its utmost
   limits; yet this did not prevent him from being one of the most admired
   and most honoured men of his age. The Epicureans alone repudiated these
   follies unreservedly. There were still some men of intellect, such as
   Celsus, Lucian, Demonax, who could laugh at it. Soon, however, there
   shall be no more such, and credulity will reign mistress over a debased
   world. The name of Atheist was dangerous, for it put him to whom it was
   attributed without the pale of the law, and exposed him even to the
   scaffold; yet one was an Atheist because he denied the local
   superstitions and stood up against charlatans. We can conceive how such
   devices must have been favourable to the propagation of Christianity.
   We do not perhaps exaggerate much when we admit that nearly the half of
   the population had avowed Christianity. In certain cities, such as
   Hierapolis, Christianity was publicly professed. Some inscriptions,
   still decipherable, attest beneficent foundations which were to be
   distributed at Easter and at Pentecost. Co-operative associations of
   workmen, societies for mutual succour, were there skilfully organised.
   These manufacturing cities, which contained for a long time colonies of
   Jews, who perhaps had carried with them thence the industries of the
   East, were ready to receive every social idea of the age. Works of
   charity were wonderfully developed. Nursing institutions and
   establishments for foundlings were there. The labourer, so depised in
   ancient times, attained, through association, to dignity of existence
   and to happiness. That interior life, all the more active because it
   was not disturbed by politics, made of Asia Minor a field closed to all
   the religious strifes of the times. The directions in which the Church
   was divided there were singularly visible; for nowhere else was the
   Church in such a state of fermentation, or showed its internal labour
   more distinctly. Conservatives and Progressists, Judeo-Christians and
   enemies of Judaism, Millenarians and Spiritualists, were there opposed
   as two armies, who, after having fought, finished by breaking their
   ranks and fraternising together. There had lived, or was still living,
   a whole Christian world which did not know St Paul. Papias, the most
   narrow-minded of the Fathers of his times; Melito, almost as
   materialistic as he; the ultra-conservative Polycarpus; the presbyteri
   who taught Irenæus his unpolished Millenarianism; the chiefs of the
   Montanist movement, who pretended to have witnessed again the scenes of
   the first supper at Jerusalem. There too were to be found, or had come
   thence, the men who had most boldly launched themselves into
   innovations--the author of the fourth Gospel, Cerdo, Marcion, Praxeas,
   Noetus, Apollinarius of Hierapolis, the Aloges, who, full of aversion
   for the Apocalypse, Millenarianism, Montanism, gave the hand to
   Gnosticism and to philosophy. Spiritual exercises which had disappeared
   elsewhere, continued to flourish in Asia. They had prophets there--a
   certain Quadratus, and one Amnia of Philadelphia.

   People gloried especially over the considerable number of martyrs and
   confessors. Asia Minor witnessed numerous executions, in particular
   crucifixions. The different Churches made a boast of this, alleging
   that persecution was the privilege of truth; a matter that is
   debateable, seeing that all those sects had martyrs; at times, the
   Marcionites and Montanists had more than the orthodox. No calumny then
   was spared by the latter in order to depreciate the martyrs of their
   rivals. These enmities endured to the death. We see the confessors,
   while expiring for the same Christ, turning their backs on one another,
   in order to avoid all that might resemble a mark of communion. Two
   martyrs, born at Eumenia, namely, Caine and Alexander, who were
   executed at Apamea Kibotos, went the length of taking the most minute
   precautions in order that it might not be thought that they adhered to
   the inspirations of Montanus and of his wives. Such conduct shocks us,
   but we must not forget that, according to the opinions of the times,
   the last words and the last acts of martyrs possessed a high
   importance. Martyrs were consulted on questions of orthodoxy; from the
   depths of their dungeons they reconciled dissentients, and gave
   certificates of absolution. They were regarded as being charged by the
   Church with the rôle of pacificators, and with a sort of doctrinal
   mission.

   Far from being hurtful to propagandism, these divisions were
   serviceable to it. The churches were rich and numerous. Nowhere else
   did the episcopate contain so many capable, moderate, and courageous
   men. We may cite Thraseas, Bishop of Eumenia; Sagaris, Bishop of
   Laodicea; Papirius, whose birthplace is not known; Apollinaris of
   Hierapolis, who was destined to play a considerable part in the capital
   controversies which were soon to divide the Churches of Asia;
   Polycrates, the future Bishop of Ephesus, the descendant of a family
   seven members of which before him had been bishops. Sardis possessed a
   real treasure, the learned Bishop Melito, who already had prepared
   himself for the vast labours which, later on, rendered his name
   celebrated. Like Origen, at a subsequent date, he was anxious that his
   chastity should be distinctly attested. His erudition resembled much
   that of Justin and of Tatian. His theology had also a little of the
   materialistic dulness which was a characteristic of these two doctors;
   for he thought that God had a body. He appears to have been reproached
   by Papias for his apocalyptic ideas. Miltiades, on his part, was a
   laborious author, a zealous polemic, who struggled against the heathen,
   the Jews, the Montanists, the ecstatic prophets, and made an apology
   for Christian philosophy, which he addressed to the Roman authorities.

   The aged Polycarpus, in particular, enjoyed high authority at Smyrna.
   He was more than an octogenarian, and it would seem that he was
   believed to have inherited his longevity from the Apostle John. He was
   accredited with the gift of prophecy: it was alleged that each word
   that he uttered would come to pass. He himself lived in the belief that
   the world was full of visions and of presages. Night and day he prayed,
   including in his prayers the wants of the entire world. As everybody
   admitted that he had lived several years with the Apostle John, people
   believed that they still possessed in him the last witness of the
   apostolic age. People surrounded him; everybody sought to please him; a
   mark of his esteem was regarded as a high favour. His person was
   charming in the extreme. The docile Christians adored him; a band of
   disciples and of admirers pressed around him, eager to render him every
   service. But he was not popular in the city. His intolerance, the pride
   of orthodoxy, which he did not pretend to dissimulate, and which he
   communicated to his disciples, wounded deeply both the Jews and the
   heathen; the latter knew but too well that the disdainful old man
   looked upon them as wretches.

   Polycarpus had all the peculiarities of an old man; he had a certain
   manner of acting and speaking which made a vivid impression on young
   auditors. His conversation was fluent, and when he went to sit down on
   the place which he affected--doubtless one of the terraces of the
   slopes of Mount Pagus, whence one could see the sparkling gulf, and its
   beautiful surrounding of mountains, it was known beforehand what he was
   going to say. "John and others who have seen the Lord;" this was the
   way in which he always commenced. He would tell about the intimacy he
   had had with them, what he had heard them say about Jesus, and about
   his preaching. An echo of Galilee was thus made to resound, at a
   distance of a hundred and twenty years, upon the shores of another sea.
   He repeated constantly that those men had been ocular witnesses, and
   that he had seen them. He made no more difficulty than did the
   Evangelists in regard to borrowing from the presbyteri the maxims best
   adapted to the second century, at the epoch in which they were reputed
   to have lived. To so many other obscure traditions in regard to the
   origins of Christianity, a new source, more troublesome than the
   others, was now about to be added.

   The impression which Polycarpus produced was not less profound. A long
   time after, his disciples would remind one another of the bench on
   which he sat, his gait, his habits, his bodily peculiarities, his
   manner of speaking. Every one of his words were graven on their hearts.
   Now in the circle which surrounded him there was a young Greek, of
   about fifteen years of age, who was destined to play one of the leading
   parts in ecclesiastical history. His name was Irenæus, who afterwards
   transmitted to us the image--doubtless often false, yet, at the same
   time, in many respects very vivid--of the last days of the apostolic
   world, whose setting sun he had, in a sort of way, been a witness of.
   Irenæus was born a Christian, which did not prevent him from
   frequenting the schools of Asia, where he acquired an extensive
   knowledge of the poets, and of the profane philosophers, especially of
   Homer and of Plato. He had for a young friend and co-disciple, if one
   may so express oneself, near the old man, a certain Florinus, who held
   a somewhat important posit on at court, and who, subsequently, embraced
   at Rome the Gnostic ideas of Valentinus.

   Polycarpus, in the eyes of every one, was regarded as the perfect type
   of orthodoxy. His doctrine was the materialistic Millenarianism of the
   old apostolic school. Far from having broken with Judaism, he conformed
   to the practices of the moderate Judeo-Christians. He resented the
   foolish embellishments which the Gnostics had introduced into the
   Christian teaching, and appears to have ignored the Gospel which in his
   time already circulated under the name of John. He held to the simple
   and unctuous manner of the apostolic catechesis, and would not have
   anything at all added to it. Everything that had the resemblance of a
   new idea put him beside himself. His hatred of heretics was intense,
   and some of the anecdotes which he delighted to tell about John were
   destined to make the violent intolerance which, in his opinion, formed
   the basis of the apostle's character, appear in a strong light. When
   any one dared to give vent in his presence to some doctrine analogous
   to that of the Gnostics, some theory calculated to introduce a little
   of rationalism into the Christian theology, he would get up, stop his
   ears, and take to flight, exclaiming, "Oh, good God, to what times hast
   thou reserved me, that I should have to put up with such language!"
   Irenæus was permeated to a large extent with the same spirit, but the
   sweetness of his character served to correct it in practice. The idea
   of holding fast to the apostolic teaching became the basis of
   orthodoxy, in opposition to the presumption of the Gnostics and
   Montanists, who pretended to have re-discovered the actual doctrine of
   Jesus, which, in their opinion, had been corrupted by his immediate
   disciples.

   Following the example of Paul, Ignatius, and other celebrated pastors,
   Polycarpus wrote many letters to the neighbouring Churches and to
   individuals, in order to instruct and exhort them. Only one of these
   letters has been preserved to us. It is addressed to the faithful at
   Philippi, as touching some confessors who were destined to martyrdom,
   who chanced to be with them on their way from Asia to Rome. Like all
   the apostolic or pseudo-apostolic writings, it is a short treatise
   addressed to each of the classes of the faithful which composed the
   Church. Some serious doubts might be raised against the authenticity of
   this epistle if it were not certain that Irenæus had known it, and held
   it to be a work of Polycarpus. Without this authority, we should rank
   this short treatise with the epistles of St Ignatius, in that class of
   writings of the end of the second century by which it was sought to
   cover, by the most revered names, the anti-Agnostic doctrines, and
   those which were favourable to the episcopate. The document, which is
   somewhat commonplace, possesses nothing that is specially befitting the
   character of Polycarpus. The imitation of the apostolic writings,
   particularly the false Epistles to Titus and Timothy, the first of
   Peter, and the Epistles of John, makes itself fully felt in it. The
   author makes no distinction between the authentic writings of the
   apostles and those which have been attributed to them. He evidently
   knew the Epistle of St Clement by heart. The way in which lie reminds
   the Philippians that they have an epistle from Paul, is suspicious.
   What singular things all those hypotheses are! The Gospel attributed to
   John is not cited, whilst a phrase of the pseudo-Johannine epistle is
   brought in. Docility, submission to the bishop, enthusiasm for
   martyrdom, after the example of Ignatius, horror of heresies, which,
   like Docetism, overthrew the faith in the reality of Jesus; such were
   the dominant ideas of the author. If Polycarpus is not the author, we
   can at least say that if he had been resuscitated a few years after his
   death, and had seen the compositions which were read as his, he would
   not have protested, and would have even found that people had correctly
   enough interpreted his thoughts. Irenæus at Lyons may have been
   deceived in this matter like every one else. If it was an error, he
   recognised in this fragment the perfect character of the faith and the
   teaching of his master.

   Polycarpus, in those years of extreme old age, was regarded as the
   President of the Church of Asia. Some grave questions, which at first
   had barely been stated, began to agitate these Churches. With his ideas
   of hierarchy and of ecclesiastical unity, Polycarpus naturally thought
   of turning towards the Bishop of Rome, to whom almost the whole world
   about that time acknowledged a certain authority in composing the
   divisions in Churches. The controversial points were numerous; it
   appears, moreover, that the two heads of the Churches--Polycarpus and
   Anicetus--had some petty grievances against one another. One of the
   questions in controversy was in regard to the celebration of Easter. In
   the early days, all the Christians continued to make Easter their
   principal feast. They celebrated that feast on the same day as the
   Jews, the 14th Nisan, no matter on what day of the week that day fell.
   Persuaded, according to the allegations of all the ancient Gospels,
   that Jesus, on the eve of his death, had eaten the Passover with his
   disciples, they regarded such a solemnity rather as a commemoration of
   the supper than as a memorial of the resurrection. When Christianity
   became separated more and more from Judaism, such a manner of viewing
   it was found to be much out of place. First, a new tradition was
   circulated, according to which Jesus before his death had not eaten the
   Passover; but died on the same day as the Jewish Passover, thus
   substituting himself for the Paschal Lamb. Besides this, that purely
   Jewish feast wounded the Christian conscience, especially in the
   Churches of St Paul. The great feast of the Christians was the
   resurrection of Jesus, which occurred, in any case, the Sunday after
   the Jewish Passover. According to this idea, the feast was celebrated
   on the Sunday which followed the Friday next after the 14th of Nisan.

   At Rome this practice prevailed, at least from the pontificates of
   Xystus and Telesphoros (about 120). In Asia, people were much divided.
   Conservatives like Polycarpus, Melito, and all the old school, held to
   the ancient Jewish practice, in conformity with the first Gospels and
   with the usage of the Apostles John and Philip. It hence happened that
   people did not pray or fast on the same days. It was not till about
   twenty years after that this controversy attained in Asia the
   proportions of a schism. At the epoch in which we now are, it had only
   just had its birth, and was no doubt one of the least important among
   the questions about which Polycarpus felt himself obliged to go to Rome
   to have an interview with Pope Anicetus. Perhaps Irenæus and Florinus
   accompanied the old man on that journey, which being undertaken during
   the summer, according to the customs of navigation of the age, had
   nothing fatiguing about it. The interview between Polycarpus and
   Anicetus was very cordial. The discussion upon certain points appears
   to have been somewhat lively; but they understood one another. The
   question of Easter had not yet reached maturity. For a long time before
   this, the Church of Rome had acted upon the principle of exhibiting in
   this matter great tolerance. Conservatives of the Jewish order, when
   they came to Rome, practised their rites without anybody finding fault
   with them, or without causing any one to cease fraternising with them.
   The Bishops of Rome sent the Eucharist to some of the bishops who
   followed in this particular another rule. Polycarpus and Anicetus
   observed between them the same rule. Polycarpus could not persuade
   Anicetus to renounce a practice which the Bishops of Rome had followed
   before him. Anicetus, on his part, forebore when Polycarpus said to him
   that he held by the rule of John and the other apostles with whom he
   had lived upon a footing of familiarity. The two religious chiefs
   continued in full communion with one another, and Anicetus even
   bestowed on Polycarpus an honour almost unexampled. He was willing, in
   fact, that Polycarpus should, in the assembly of the faithful at Rome,
   pronounce instead of him, and in his presence, the words of the
   eucharistic consecration. These ardent men were full of too passionate
   a sentiment to rest the unity of souls upon the uniformity of rites and
   exterior observances. Later, Rome will display the greatest pertinacity
   to make her rites prevail To speak the truth, the point at issue, in
   this matter of Easter, was not merely a simple difference of calendar.
   The Roman rite, in choosing for its base the grand Christian festival
   the anniversaries of the death and the resurrection of Jesus, created
   the holy week--that is to say, a whole cycle of consecrated days, to
   the mysterious commemorations during which fasting was continued. In
   the Asiatic rite, on the contrary, the fast terminated on the evening
   of the 14th Nisan: Good Friday was no longer a day of sadness. If that
   usage had prevailed, the scheme of the Christian festivals would have
   been arrested in its development.

   The orthodox bishops had still too many common enemies for them to pay
   attention to pitiful liturgic rivalries. The Gnostic and Marcionite
   sects inundated Rome, and threatened to put the orthodox Church in a
   minority. Polycarpus was the declared adversary of such ideas. Like
   Justin, with whom he was probably in accord, he inveighed fiercely
   against the sectaries. The rare privilege which he possessed of having
   seen the immediate disciples of Jesus, gave him an immense authority.
   He pleaded, as was his custom, the teaching of the apostles, of which
   he alleged he was the only living auditor, and maintained as a simple
   rule of faith the tradition which ascended by an unbroken chain to
   Jesus himself. Nor was he free from rudeness. One day he encountered in
   a public place a man who, for a thousand reasons, should have commanded
   his respect--Marcion himself. "Do you not recognise me? " said the
   latter to him. "Yes," responded the passionate old man; "I recognise
   the first-born of Satan." Irenæus cannot enough admire this response,
   which shows how very narrow the Christian mind had already become.
   Jesus had much more wisely remarked: "He who is not for you is against
   you." Is one always quite sure of not being oneself the first-born of
   Satan? How much more wise it is, instead of anathematising at first him
   who chooses a different path from oneself, to apply oneself to discover
   in what points one may be right, what method he employs in looking at
   things, and if there is not in his manner of observing some grain of
   truth that one ought to assimilate.

   But that tone of assurance exercises a great efficacy upon
   semi-cultured men. Many Valentinians and Marcionites saw Polycarpus at
   Rome, and returned to the orthodox Church. Polycarpus hence left in the
   capital of the world a venerated name. Irenæus and Florinus in all
   probability remained at Rome after the departure of their master; these
   two minds, so different from one another, were destined to pursue paths
   the most opposite.

   An immense result was accomplished. The rule of' prescription was laid
   down. The true doctrine will henceforth be that which is generally
   professed by the apostolic Churches, which it has always been. Quod
   semper quod ubique. Between Polycarpus and Valentin the matter is quite
   clear. Polycarpus held to the apostolic tradition; Valentin, whatever
   he may say himself, has not got it. Individual Churches formed by their
   union the Catholic Church, the absolute depository of the truth. He who
   prefers his own ideas to those of this universal authority is a
   sectary, a heretic.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXIII.

  MARTYRDOM OF POLYCARPUS.

   Polycarpus returned to Symrna, as far as we can make out, in the autumn
   of 154. A death worthy of him awaited him there. Polycarpus had always
   professed the doctrine that one ought not to court martyrdom; but many
   people who were not possessed of his virtue were not so prudent as he.
   To be in the vicinage of the sombre enthusiasts of Phrygia was
   dangerous. A Phrygian named Quintus, a Montanist formerly, came to
   Smyrna and attracted a few enthusiasts, who followed his example of
   self-denunciation, and provoked penal condemnation. Sensible men blamed
   them, and said, with good reason, that the Gospel did not demand such a
   sacrifice. Besides these fanatics, several Smyrniote Christians were
   also imprisoned. Amongst them were found some Philadelphians, whom
   either accident had conducted to Smyrna or whom the authorities, after
   arresting them, had caused to be transferred to Smyrna--a city of very
   considerable importance, in which were celebrated great games. The
   number of those so detained was about a dozen. According to the hideous
   usage of the Romans, it was in the stadium, in default of an
   amphitheatre, that their execution took place.

   The tortures endured by these unfortunates were of the most horribly
   atrocious character. Some were so lacerated by whips that their veins,
   their arteries, and the whole of their intestines were exposed.
   Onlookers wept over them, but they could not extort from them either a
   murmur or a plaint. The idea was hence spread abroad that the martyrs
   of Christ, during the torture, were separated from the body, and that
   Christ himself assisted them, and spoke with them. Fire produced on
   them the effect of a delicious coolness. Exposed to wild beasts,
   dragged over sand full of jagged shells, they appeared insensible to
   pain.

   One only succumbed, and that was rightly the one who had compromised
   the others. The Phrygian was punished for his boasting. In sight of the
   wild beasts he began to tremble. The men of the pro-consul who
   surrounded him urged him to give in; he consented to take the oath and
   the sacrifice. In that the faithful saw a sign from heaven, and the
   condemnation of those who of their own accord sought for death. Such
   conduct, arising from pride, was considered as a sort of defiance of
   God. It was admitted that the courage to endure martyrdom came from on
   high, and that God, in order to demonstrate that he was the source of
   all strength, was pleased sometimes to show the greatest examples of
   heroism in those who, put to the proof, had been, distrustful of
   themselves, almost cowards.

   People admired especially a young man named Germanicus. He gave to his
   companions in agony an example of superhuman courage. His struggle with
   the wild beasts was admirable. The pro-consul, Titus Statius Quadratus,
   a philosophic and moderate man, a friend of Ælius Aristides, exhorted
   him to take pity on his own youth. He thereupon set himself to excite
   the wild beasts, to call to them, to tease them, in order that they
   might despatch him more quickly from a perverse world. Such heroism,
   far from touching the multitude, only irritated it. "Death to Atheists!
   Let Polycarpus be brought!" was the general cry.

   Polycarpus, although blaming the foolish act of Quintus, had not at
   first any desire to flee. Yielding to eager solicitations, he
   consented, however, to withdraw into a small country house, situated at
   no great distance from the city, where he passed several days. They
   came thither to arrest him. He quitted the house precipitately and took
   refuge in another; but a young slave, when put to the torture, betrayed
   him. A detachment of mounted police came to take him. It was a Friday
   evening, the 22d February, at dinner-hour, the old man was at table in
   an upper room of the villa; he might still have escaped, but he said,
   "Let God's will be done!" He quietly came downstairs, spoke with the
   police, gave them something to eat, and asked only an hour in which to
   pray unmolested. He made then one of those long prayers to which he was
   accustomed, in which he included the whole Catholic Church. The night
   was passed in this manner. The following morning, Saturday, 23d
   February, he was placed upon an ass, and they departed with him.

   Before reaching the city, Herod, the Irenach, and his father Nicetas,
   appeared in a carriage. They had had some relations with the
   Christians. Alces, sister of Nicetas, appears to have been affiliated
   with the Church. They, it is said, placed the old man in the carriage
   between them, and attempted to gain him over. "What harm can it be,"
   said they, "in order to save one's life, to say Kyrios Kesar, to make
   sacrifice, and the rest?" Polycarpus was inflexible. It seems that the
   two magistrates then flew into a passion, said hard words to him, and
   ejected him so rudely from the carriage as to peel the skin off his
   leg.

   He was taken to the stadium, which was situated about midway up Mount
   Pagus. The people were already assembled there; there was a tumultuous
   noise. At the moment the old man was brought in, the noise redoubled;
   the Christians alone heard a voice from heaven saying: "Be strong, be
   manly, Polycarpus!" The bishop was led to the pro-consul, who employed
   the ordinary phrases in such circumstances.

   "From the respect that thou owest to thy age, etc., aware by the
   fortune of Cæsar, cry as every one does, Death to Atheists'"

   Polycarpus thereupon cast a severe look upon the multitude which
   covered the steps, and pointed to them with his hand.

   "Yes, certainly," said he, "no more Atheists," and he raised his eyes
   to heaven with a deep sigh. "Insult Christ," said Statius Quadratus.

   "It is now eighty-six years that I have served him, and he has never
   done me any injury," said Polycarpus. "I am a Christian. If thou
   wishest to know what it is to be a Christian," added he, "grant me a
   day's delay, and give me thy attention."

   "Persuade, then, the people to that," responded Quadratus.

   "With thee it is worth one's while to discuss," responded Polycarpus.
   "We hold it as a principle to render to the powers and to the
   established authorities, through God, the honours which are their due,
   provided that these marks of respect do no injury to our faith. As for
   these people there, I will never deign to condescend to make my apology
   to them."

   The pro-consul threatened him in vain with wild beasts and with fire.
   It was necessary to announce to the people that Polycarpus held
   obstinately to his faith. Jews and Pagans cried out for his blood.

   "Look at him, the doctor of Asia--the father of the Christians," said
   the former.

   "Behold him, the destroyer of our gods, he who teaches not to
   sacrifice, not to adore," said the latter. At the same time they
   demanded of Philippe of Tralles, asiarch and high priest of Asia, to
   let loose a lion upon Polycarpus. Philippe drew attention of the
   multitude to the fact that the games with the wild beasts were at an
   end.

   "To the fire, then!" So was the shout which went up from all sides. The
   people dispersed themselves amongst the shops and the baths to search
   for wood and fagots. The Jews, who were numerous at Smyrna, and always
   strongly incensed against the Christians, exhibited in this work, as
   usual, a zeal wholly peculiar to them.

   While the funeral pile was being made ready, Polycarpus took off his
   girdle, divested himself of all his garments, and attempted also to
   take off his shoes. This was not accomplished without some difficulty;
   for in ordinary times the faithful who surrounded him were in the habit
   of insisting on relieving him from that trouble, as they were jealous
   of the privilege of touching him. He was placed in the centre of the
   apparatus which was used for fixing the victim, and they were about to
   begin to nail him to it.

   "Leave me thus," said he; "He who gives me the fortitude to endure the
   fire will bestow on me also the strength to remain immovable on the
   pile, without its being necessary for you to nail me to it."

   They did not nail him, they simply bound him. So, with his hands tied
   behind his back, he had the look of a victim; and the Christians who
   watched him from afar saw in him a ram chosen from amongst the whole
   flock to be offered up to God as a burnt-offering. During this time he
   prayed and thanked God for having included him in the number of the
   martyrs.

   The flames then began to rise. The exaltation of the faithful witnesses
   of this spectacle was at its height. As they were some distance from
   the pile, they might indulge in the most singular illusions. The fire
   seemed to them to round itself into a vault above the body of the
   martyr, and to present the aspect of a ship's sail filled with the
   wind. The old man, placed amidst that chapelle ardent, appeared to them
   not as flesh which burned, but as bread being baked, or as a mass of
   gold and silver in the furnace. They imagined that they felt a
   delicious odour like that of incense, or of the most precious perfumes
   (probably the vine branches, and the light wood of the pile had
   something to do with this). They even declared afterwards that
   Polycarpus had not been burned, that the confector was obliged to give
   him a thrust with a poignard, and that there flowed from the wound so
   much blood that the fire was extinguished by it.

   The Christians naturally attached the greatest value to their
   possessing the body of the martyr. But the authorities hesitated to
   give it to them, fearing that the martyr would become the object of a
   new worship. "They might be capable," said they, laughing, "of
   abandoning the Crucified One for him." The Jews mounted guard near to
   the funeral pile, to watch what they were going to do. The centurion on
   duty showed himself favourable to the Christians, and allowed them to
   take these bones, "more precious than the most precious stones, and
   than the purest gold." They were calcined. In order to reconcile this
   fact with the marvellous recital, they pretended that it was the
   centurion who had burned the body. They put the ashes into a
   consecrated place, where people resorted every year to celebrate the
   anniversary of the martyrdom, and to incite one another to walk in the
   steps of the holy old man.

   The fortitude of Polycarpus made a deep impression on the Pagans
   themselves. The authorities, not wishing a renewal of similar scenes,
   put an end to executions. The name of Polycarpus continued to be
   celebrated at Smyrna, whilst people soon forgot the eleven or twelve
   Smyrniotes or Philadelphians who had suffered before him. The Churches
   of Asia and of Galatia, at the news of the death of their great pastor,
   asked the Smyrniotes for the details of what had taken place. Those of
   Philomelium, in Phrigian Parorea, exhibited, in particular, a touching
   zeal. The Church of Smyrna caused one of the elders to write down the
   account of the martyrdom, in the form of a circular epistle, which was
   addressed to the different Churches. The faithful of Philomelium, who
   were not far off, were charged with transmitting the letter to the
   brethren at a distance.

   The copy of the Philomelians, copied by a certain Evarestur, and
   carried by one named Marcion, served subsequently as the basis of the
   original edition. As happens frequently in the publication of circular
   letters, the finales of the different copies were made to dovetail the
   one into the other. This rare fragment constitutes the most ancient
   example known of the Acts of Martyrdom. It was the model which people
   imitated, and which furnished the form and the essential parts of those
   kinds of compositions. Only the imitations had not the naturalness and
   simplicity of the original. It seems that the author of the false
   Ignatian letters had read the Smyrniote epistle. There is the closest
   connection between these writings, and a great similarity of thought.
   After Ignatius, Polycarpus was the person who copied the most of the
   thoughts of the false letters and it is in the true or supposed epistle
   of Polycarpus that he seeks his point d'appui. The idea that martyrdom
   is the supreme favour that one ought to seek after, and to request of
   Heaven, found in the Smyrniote encyclical its first and perfect
   expression. But the enthusiasm for martyrdom is there kept within the
   limits of moderation. The author of this remarkable writing loses no
   occasion to show that true martyrdom, the martyrdom conformable with
   the Gospel, is that which one does not seek after, but which one
   expects. The provocation appeared to him so blameable, that he
   experiences a certain satisfaction in showing that the Phrygian fanatic
   yielded to the entreaties of the pro-consul, and became an apostate.

   Frivolous, light-headed, prone to whimsicalities, Asia turned these
   tragedies into stories, and made a caricature of martyrdom. About that
   time there lived a certain Peregrinus, a cynic philosopher of Parium,
   upon the Hellespont, who called himself Protéus, and in regard to whom
   people boasted of the facility with which he could assume any
   character, and undertake any adventure. Among these adventures was that
   of posing as a bishop and a martyr. Having begun life by committing the
   most frightful crimes, parricide even, he became a Christian, then a
   priest, a scribe, a prophet, a thiasarch, and chief of the synagogue.
   He interpreted the sacred books, as composed by himself; he passed for
   an oracle, for a supreme authority, in fact, on ecclesiastical rules.
   He was arrested for that offence, and put in chains. This was the
   commencement of his apotheosis. From that hour he was adored; people
   raised heaven and earth to affect his escape, and manifested the
   greatest anxiety in regard to him. In the mornings, at the prison gate,
   the widows and orphans gathered to see him. The notables obtained, by
   means of money, the privilege of passing the night in his society. It
   was a constant succession of dinners and of sacred feasts; people
   celebrated the Mysteries in close proximity to him; he was called only
   "the excellent Peregrinus," and was looked upon as a new Socrates.

   All this took place in Syria. These public scandals delighted the
   Christians; they spared no effort in such a case to render the
   manifestation a brilliant affair. Envoys arrived from every town in
   Asia for the purpose of rendering service to the confessor, and of
   condoling with him. Money flowed in upon him. But it was found that the
   governor of Syria was a philosopher; he penetrated the secret of our
   subject, saw that he had but one idea, that of dying in order to render
   his name celebrated, and he set him free without punishment. Everywhere
   in his travels Peregrinus revelled in abundance, the Christians
   surrounded him, and gave him an escort of honour.

   "These imbeciles," adds Lucian, "were persuaded that they were
   absolutely immortal, that they would live eternally, which was the
   reason that they held death in contempt, and that many amongst them
   offered themselves up as sacrifices. Their first legislator had
   persuaded them that they were all brothers, from the moment that,
   denying the Hellenistic gods, they adored the Crucified One, their
   sophist, and lived according to his laws. They had, then, nothing but
   disdain for things terrestrial, and they held the latter as belonging
   to all in common But it were useless to say that they had not a serious
   reason for believing all this. If, then, some impostor, some crafty
   man, capable of making use of the situation, came to them, they
   immediately laid their riches at his feet, while he laughed in his
   sleeve at the silly fools."

   Peregrinus having exhausted his resources, sought, by means of a
   theatrical death at the Olympian Games, to satisfy the insatiable
   desire that he had, to wit: to make people speak of him. Pompous and
   voluntary suicide was, it is well known, the great reproach which the
   sage philosophers brought against the Christians.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXIV.

  CHRISTIANITY AMONGST THE GAULS--THE CHURCH OF LYONS.

   For a short time it was believed that the death of Polycarpus had put
   an end to persecution, and it would seem that there was in fact an
   interval of calm. The zeal of the Smyrniotes was but redoubled; and it
   is about this time that must be placed the departure of a Christian
   colony, which, setting out probably from Smyrna, carried the Gospel
   with a bound into distant countries, where the name of Jesus had not
   yet penetrated. Pothinus, an old man of seventy, probably a Smyrniote
   and a disciple of Polycarpus, was, it seems, the chief of this new
   departure.

   For a long time a course of reciprocal communication had been
   established between the ports of Asia Minor and the shores of the
   Mediterranean of Gaul. The ancient traces of the Phoenicians were not
   yet wholly effaced. These populations of Asia and Syria, for whom
   emigration to the East possessed a great attraction, were fond of
   ascending the Rhone and the Saone, carrying with them a portable bazaar
   of divers merchandise, or else stopping on the banks of these great
   rivers, at spots which held out to them the hope of making a living.
   Vienne and Lyons, the two principal towns of the country, were mostly
   the points aimed at by the emigrants, who went into Gaul as merchants,
   servants, workmen, and even as physicians, whom the peasants amongst
   the Allobroges and Segusiavii did not possess to the same extent. The
   laborious and industrial population of the great towns on the banks of
   the Rhone was in a great part composed of those Orientals, who are more
   gentle, more intelligent, less superstitious than the indigenous
   population, and, by reason of their insinuating and amiable manners,
   capable of exercising upon the former a profound influence. The Roman
   Empire had broken down the barriers of national sentiment, which
   prevented different peoples from coming into contact. Certain
   propaganda which the ancient Gaulish institutions, for example, had
   laid down from the beginning, had become possible. Rome persecuted, but
   did not use preventive means, so that, far from being hurtful to the
   development of an opinion aspiring to be universal, she aided it. These
   Syrians and Asiatics arrived in the East not knowing any tongue except
   the Greek. Among themselves they did not cast aside that language; they
   made use of it in their writings, and in all their personal relations;
   but they quickly acquired Latin, and even Celtic. Greek, moreover,
   which continued to be spoken in the region of the lower Rhone, was
   known to a great extent in Vienne and in Lyons.

   These Christians of Lyons and Vienne, in setting out from a very
   limited region, Asia and Phrygia, being almost all compatriots, and
   having been instructed by the same books and by the same teachings,
   afford an instance of rare unity. Their intercourse with the Churches
   of Asia and Phrygia was frequent: in grave circumstances it was to
   these Churches that they wrote. Like Phrygians generally, they were
   ardent pietists; but they had not that sectarian tinge which soon made
   the Montanists a danger, almost a plague, in the Church. Pothinus, who
   was at first recognised as the head of the Church of Lyons, was a
   respectable old man, and moderate even in his enthusiasm.

   Attains of Pergamos, who like him was a very old man, appears to have
   been, after the former, the pillar of the Church and the principal
   authority. He was a Roman citizen and a rather important personage: he
   knew Latin, and was recognised in every city as the principal
   representative of the little community. A Phrygian named Alexander,
   practising the medical profession, was loved and known by all.
   Initiated into the pious secrets of the saints of Phrygia, he possessed
   some of the graces, that is to say, the supernatural gifts, of the
   apostolic age, which had been revived in his native land. Like
   Polycarpus, he had reached the highest state of the internal spiritual
   communion. It was, as we see, a corner of Phrygia which chance had
   transported bodily into Gaul. The continual accessions coming from Asia
   maintained that first hold and conserved there the spirit of mysticism
   which had been its primitive character. As soon as he was able,
   Irenæus, wearied out perhaps by his struggles with Florimus and
   Blastus, quitted Rome for this Church, composed entirely of the
   countrymen, disciples, and the friends of Polycarpus.

   Communication between Lyons and Vienne was constant: the two Churches,
   in reality, were but one, and in both the Greek dominated; but in both
   likewise there existed between the emigrants of Asia and the indigenous
   population, who spoke Latin or Celtic, the closest relations. The
   effect of this familiar preaching in the house and in the workshop was
   rapid and profound. The women especially felt themselves vehemently
   carried away by it. The Gaulish nature, naturally sympathetic and
   religious, promptly embraced the new ideas brought by the strangers.
   Their religion, at once most idealistic and most materialistic, their
   belief in perpetual visions, their habit of transforming lively and
   delicate sensations into supernatural intuitions, suited those races
   very well which were carried away by religious dreams, and which the
   insufficient worships of Gaul and Rome could not satisfy. The evangelic
   ministry was sometimes exercised in the Celtic tongue. It is remarkable
   that amongst the new converts a great number were Roman citizens.

   One of the most important conquests was that of a certain Vettius
   Epagathus, a young noble Lyonese, who, when he had hardly been
   affiliated to the Church, excelled everybody in piety and in charity,
   and became one of the most distinguished amongst them. He led so chaste
   and so austere a life that he was, in spite of his youth, compared to
   the aged Zacharias, an ascetic who was constantly visited by the Holy
   Spirit. Devoted to works of mercy, he became the servant of all, and
   employed his life to the succour of his neighbours with admirable zeal
   and fervour. It was believed that the Paraclete dwelt in him, and that
   he acted in all circumstances under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit.
   The recollection left by the virtues of Vettius became a popular
   tradition, which pretended to ascribe to his family the evangelisation
   of the neighbouring countries. He was in truth the first-fruits of
   Christ in Gaul. Sanctus, the deacon of Vienne, and especially the
   maid-servant Blandina, who was much inferior to him in social dignity,
   equalled him in earnestness. Blandina, above all, worked miracles. She
   was so slender of body that it was feared she had not the physical
   strength sufficient to confess Christ. She displayed, on the contrary,
   the day when the struggle came, an unexampled nervous force; she
   wearied out the torturers for a whole day; and it might be said that at
   each torment she experienced a recrudescence of faith and of life.

   Such was this Church, which in a bound attained to the highest
   privileges of the Christian Churches of Asia, and stood out in the
   centre of a still semi-barbarous country, like a shining beacon. The
   Christians of Lyons and Vienne, entrusted with the Gospel of John and
   of the Apocalypse, without having need of the stammering schools
   through which Christianity had passed, were carried at the very first
   to the summit of perfection. Nowhere was life more austere, enthusiasm
   more serious, the desire to create the kingdom of God more intense.
   Chilasmus, which had its home in Asia Minor, was not less loudly
   proclaimed in Lyons. Gaul hence entered the Church of Jesus through a
   triumph hitherto unequalled. Lyons was designated as the religious
   capital of that country. Fourvieres and Ainai are the two sacred points
   of our Christian origins. Fourvieres, at the time of the ecclesiastical
   annals of which we now speak, was still a city wholly Pagan; as for
   Ainai (Athanacum) it is allowable to suppose that the Christian
   souvenirs have some reason for attaching themselves to it. This suburb,
   situated on the islands at the confluence of the rivers, down the river
   from the Gaulish and Roman city, came to be the lower part of the town,
   the place where the Orientals disembarked, and where probably they made
   some sojourn before settling down. But this was undoubtedly the first
   Christian quarter, and the very ancient church which is to be seen
   there, is perhaps of all the edifices in France the one which those who
   love antique souvenirs ought to visit with the most respect. The
   Lyonese character from this time forth was sketched with all the
   features which distinguish it--need of the supernatural, fervour of
   soul, a taste for the irrational, perversity of judgment, ardent
   imagination, and a profound and sensual mysticism. With this passionate
   race, high moral instincts do not spring from reason, but from the
   heart and the bowels. The origin of the Lyonese school in art and
   literature was already fully traced in that admirable letter upon the
   frightful drama of 177. It is beautiful, odd touching, sickly. There is
   mixed up in it a slight aberration of the senses, a something
   resembling the nervous quivering of the saints of Pepuza.

   The relations of Epagathus with the Paraclete savoured already of the
   city of spiritualism, the city in which, towards the end of the last
   century, Cagliostro had a temple. The anæstheses of Blandina, her
   familiar conversations with Christ, whilst the bull is tossing her into
   the air; the hallucination of the martyrs, believing that they saw
   Jesus in their sister, at the end of the arena bound naked to a
   stake--the whole of this legend which on the one hand transports you
   away from stoicism and where on the other one approaches the cataleptic
   state, and to the experiences of Salpetriere, seems a subject invented
   for those poets, painters, thinkers, wholly original and idealistic,
   who imagine themselves to paint only the soul, but in reality only
   dupes of the body. Epictetus deports himself better; he has shown in
   the battle of life as much heroism as Attalus and as Sanctus, but there
   is no legend concerning him. The hegemonikon alone says nothing to
   humanity. Man is a very complex being. One can never charm or arouse
   the multitude with pure truth: one has never made a great man out of a
   eunuch, nor a great romance without love.

   We shall soon witness the most dangerous chimeras of Gnosticism Ending
   at Lyons a prompt reception, and almost by the side of Blandina the
   victims of the seductions of Marcus flee from the Church, or come there
   to confess their sin, in habits of mourning. The charm of the Lyonese,
   living in a sort of tender decency and of voluptuous chastity; her
   seductive reserve, implying the secret idea that beauty is a holy
   thing; her strange facility for letting herself be captivated by the
   appearances of mysticism and of pity, produced under Marcus Aurelius
   scenes which might lead one to think they had taken place in our own
   times. Marseilles, Arles, and the immediate environs received alike
   under Antonius a first Christian preaching; Nîmes, on the contrary,
   appeared to have resisted as long as possible the cult which came from
   the East.

   It was about the same time that Africa witnessed the formation of
   stable Churches which were soon to constitute one of the most original
   parties of the new religion. Amongst the first founders of African
   Christianity, the mystic tinge which in a few years was denominated
   Montanist was no less strong than amongst the Christians of Lyons. It
   is probable, nevertheless, that the teaching of the kingdom of God was
   in this case brought from Rome and not from Asia. The Acts of St
   Perpetua, and in general the Acts of the Martyrs of Africa--Tertullian,
   and the other types of African Christianity--have an air of fraternity
   with Pastor Hermas. Assuredly the first bearers of the good news spoke
   Greek at Carthage, as they did everywhere else. Greek was almost as
   widespread in that city as Latin; the Christian community at first made
   use of both languages; soon, however, the language of Rome
   predominated. Africa thus gave the first example of a Latin Church. In
   a few years a brilliant Christian literature was produced in that
   eccentric idiom which the rude Punic genius had drawn, by the twofold
   influence of barbarism and rhetoric, from the language of Cicero and of
   Tacitus. A translation of the works of the Old and New Testaments in
   that energetic dialect responded to the requirements of the new
   converts, and was for a long time the Bible of the West.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXV.

  THE STRIFE AT ROME--MARTYRDOM OF ST JUSTIN--FRONTON.

   Distressing scenes, the consequence of a vicious legislation, under the
   reign of one of the best of sovereigns, were taking place everywhere.
   Sentences of death and the denial of justice multiplied. The Christians
   were often in the wrong. Severity, and the ardent love of the good, by
   which they were animated, carried them sometimes beyond the bounds of
   moderation, and rendered them odious to those whom they censured. The
   father, the son, the husband, the wife, the neighbour, irritated by
   these prying spies, revenged themselves by denouncing them. Atrocious
   calumnies were the consequence of these accumulated hatreds. It was
   about this time that rumours, which up till then had no particular
   force, assumed a definite form, and became a rooted opinion. The
   mystery attaching to the Christian reunions, the mutual affection which
   reigned in the Church, gave birth to the most foolish notions. They
   were supposed to form a secret society, to have secrets known only to
   the initiated, to be guilty of shameful promiscuity, and of loves
   contrary to nature. Some spoke of the adoration of a god with the head
   of an ass, others of the ignoble homage rendered to the priest. One
   story which received general currency was this: They presented to the
   person who was being initiated an infant covered over with paste, in
   order to train his hand by degrees to murder. The novice struck, the
   blood poured forth, all drank eagerly, they divided the trembling
   limbs, and cemented thus their alliance through complicity, and bound
   themselves to absolute silence. Then they became drunk, lights were
   extinguished, and in the darkness they all gave themselves up to the
   most hideous embracements. Rome was a city much given to slander: a
   multitude of newsmongers and gossips were on the watch for bizarre
   tales. Those silly tales were repeated, passed off as being of public
   notoriety, were transformed into outrages and into caricatures. The
   serious part about it was this, that in the legal processes to which
   those accusations gave rise they put to the question slaves belonging
   to Christian houses--women, young boys--who, overcome by the tortures,
   said all that was wished of them, and afforded a judicial basis for
   many odious inventions.

   The calumnies, moreover, were reciprocal, the Christians retorting on
   their adversaries the lies invented against themselves. These
   sanguinary feasts, these orgies, were practised only by the Pagans. Had
   not their god set them the example in every kind of vice? In some of
   the most solemn rites of the Roman worship, in the sacrifices to
   Jupiter Latiaris, did they not indulge in the shedding of human blood?
   The accusation was inaccurate, but, for all that, it became one of the
   bases of apologetic Christianity. The immorality of the gods of ancient
   Olympus afforded the controversialists an easy triumph. When Jupiter
   himself was only the pure blue sky, he was immoral like nature herself,
   and this immorality had no results. But morals had now become the
   essence of religion; people required of the gods examples of
   citizen-like integrity; examples like those of which mythology is full
   yielded only scandalous and irrefutable objections.

   Above all things it was the public discussions between the philosophers
   and the apologist which embittered the minds of people, and led to the
   gravest disturbances. In those discussions people insulted one another,
   and, unhappily, the parties were not equal. The philosophers had a sort
   of official position and state function; they received emoluments for
   making profession of a wisdom which they did not always teach by their
   example. They ran no risks, and they were wrong in making their
   adversaries feel that by saying a word they could extinguish them. The
   Christians, on their side, jeered at the philosophers for accepting
   emoluments. Those were insipid pleasantries, analogous to those which
   we have seen exhibited in our times against salaried philosophers.
   "Could they not," said people to one another, "wear their beards
   gratis!" People affected to believe that they rolled in gold, treated
   them as sordid wretches, as parasites; people objected to their
   doctrine, on the ground that they knew how to do without men of their
   manner of life--a life which appeared as one of opulence to some people
   even poorer than themselves were.

   The ardent Justin was at the head of these noisy altercations, where we
   see him, towards the end of his life, seconded by a disciple more
   violent yet than himself, we mean the Assyrian Latianus, a man of a
   gloomy disposition, and filled with hatred against Hellenism. Born a
   Pagan, he studied literature extensively, and kept a public school of
   philosophy, not without obtaining a certain reputation as a teacher.
   Endowed with a melancholy imagination, Latianus was anxious to possess
   clear ideas upon things which human destiny interdicted him from
   acquiring. He had traversed, like his master Justin, the whole circle
   of existing religions and philosophies, had travelled, wished to be
   initiated into all the pretended religious secrets, and attended the
   different schools. Hellenism offended him by its apparent levity of
   morals. Destitute of all literary sentiment, he was incapable of
   appreciating their divine beauty. The Scriptures of the Hebrews had
   alone the privilege of satisfying him. They pleased him by their severe
   morality, their simple style and assurance, by their monotheistic
   character, and by the peremptory manner in which they put to one side,
   by means of the creation dogma, the restless curiosities of physics and
   metaphysics. His contracted and dull mind had found in them that which
   it wanted. He became a Christian, and met in St Justin the doctor best
   fitted to comprehend his passionate philosophy; he attached him closely
   to him, and was in a manner his second in the contests which he
   sustained against the sophists and the rhetoricians.

   Their usual antagonist was a cynic philosopher named Crescentius, a
   personage, it seems, contemptible enough, who had made a position at
   Rome by his ascetic appearance and by his long beard. His declamations
   against the fear of death did not impede him from often menacing Justin
   and Tatian, and of denouncing them: "Ah, you own, then, that death is
   an evil!" said they to him in turn, wittily enough. Certainly
   Crescentius was wrong in abusing thus the protection of the State to
   his adversaries. But it must be confessed that Justin did not in that
   case show him all the consideration he deserved. He treated his
   adversaries as gourmands and impostors; he was right, nevertheless, in
   reproaching them with the emoluments they accepted. One can be a
   pensioner without being, for all that, a niggardly and covetous person.
   A circumstance which occurred about that time in Rome, showed how
   dangerous it is to oppose persecution to fanaticism, even where
   fanaticism is aggressive and tantalising.

   There was in Rome a very wicked household, in which the husband and the
   wife seemed to be rivals in infamy. The wife was converted to
   Christianity by one Ptolemy, abandoned her evils ways, made every
   effort to convert her husband, and not succeeding in this, thought of a
   divorce. She was afraid at being accomplice in the impieties of him
   with whom she lived united by society, sitting at the same table, and
   sharing the same couch. In spite of the counsels of her family, she
   sent to him the notifications required by law, and quitted the conjugal
   abode. The husband protested, entered an action, pleading that his wife
   was a Christian. The wife obtained several delays. The husband,
   irritated, directed, as was natural, all his anger against Ptolemy.

   He succeeded through a centurion, a friend of his, in having Ptolemy
   arrested, and whom he persuaded to ask simply of Ptolemy whether he
   were a Christian. Ptolemy confessed that he was, and was put in prison.
   After a very cruel detention he was taken before Quintus Lollius
   Urbicus, prefect of Rome. He was questioned afresh, and made fresh
   avowals. Ptolemy was condemned to death. A Christian, named Lucius,
   present at the hearing, interpellated Urbicus. "How can you condemn a
   man who is neither adulterer, thief, nor murderer, who is guilty of no
   other crime than of avowing himself a Christian? Your judgment is
   indeed little in accord with the piety of our Emperor, and with the
   sentiments of the philosopher son of Cæsar" (Marcus Aurelius). Lucius
   having avowed himself a Christian, Urbicus condemned him likewise to
   death. "Thank you," responded Lucius; "I am obliged to you; I am about
   to exchange wicked masters for a father who is king of heaven." A third
   auditor was seized with the same contagious fury for martyrdom. He
   proclaimed himself a Christian, and was ordered to be executed with the
   two others, Justin was moved extremely by this sanguinary drama. As
   long as Lollius Urbicus was perfect of Rome, he could not protest; but
   as soon as that function passed to another, Justin addressed to the
   senate a fresh apology. His own position became precarious. He felt the
   danger of having for an enemy a man like Crescentius, who by a word
   could put him out of the way. It was with the presentiment of a near
   death that he committed to writing that eloquent defence against the
   exceptional situation to which the Christians were reduced.

   There is something bold in the attitude which an obscure philosopher
   takes before the powerful body which the provincials never designated
   otherwise than hiera syncletos, "the holy assembly." Justin brings back
   these arrogant people to a sentiment of justice and of truth. The éclat
   of their pretended dignity may create an illusion in them; but whether
   they like it or like it not they are the brothers and the
   fellow-creatures of those whom they prosecute. This persecution is the
   proof of the truth of Christianity. The best among the Pagans have in
   like manner been persecuted--Musonius, for example--but what a
   difference! Whilst Socrates has not had a single disciple who has been
   put to death for him, Jesus has a multitude of witnesses--artisans,
   common people, as well as philosophers, men of letters--who have
   offered up their lives for him.

   It is to be regretted that some of the enlightened men of which the
   senate was then composed did not study these beautiful pages. Perhaps
   they were turned from them by other passages less philosophic, in
   particular by the absurd demonomania which bristled in each page.
   Justin challenges his readers to prove a notorious fact, which was,
   that people brought to the Christians the possessed whom the Pagan
   exorcists were unable to heal. He held that to be a decisive proof of
   the eternal fires in which demons shall one day be punished along with
   the men who have adored them. One page which ought to shock wholly
   those whom Justin wished to convert, is the one in which, after having
   established that the violent measures of Roman legislation against.
   Christianity were the work of demons, he announces that God will soon
   avenge the blood of his servants, in annihilating the power of the
   genii of evil, and in consuming all the world by fire (an idea that the
   worst wretches made use of for the purpose of disorder and pillage). If
   God differs, said he, it is only to wait until the number of the elect
   be complete. Till then, he will allow demons and wicked men to do all
   the evil that they wish.

   That which shows indeed what an amount of simplicity of mind Justin
   combined with his rare sincerity, is the petition by which he finishes
   his apology. He requests that there should be given to his writing an
   official approbation, in order to correct the opinion as to what
   concerns the Christians. "At least," says he, "such a publicity would
   be less objectionable than that which is given every day to foolish
   farces, obscene writings, ballets, Epicurean books, and other
   compositions of the same sort, which are represented or are read with
   entire freedom. We see already how much Christianity shows itself
   favourable to the most immoderate exercise of authority, when this
   authority shall have been acquired by it"

   Justin touches us more, when he regards death with impassability:--

   I fully expect, says be, to see myself denounced some day, and put into
   the stocks by the people whom I have mentioned, at least by this
   Crescentius, more worthy of being called the friend of noise and of
   vain show than the friend of wisdom, who goes about every day affirming
   of as things of which he knows nothing, accusing us in public of
   atheism and of impiety, in order to gain the favour of an abused
   multitude. He must have a very wicked soul to decry us thus, since even
   the man of ordinary morality makes a point of not passing judgment upon
   things of which he is ignorant. If he pretends that he is perfectly
   instructed in our doctrine, it must be that the baseness of his mind
   has prevented him from comprehending its majesty. If he understood it
   thoroughly, there is nothing which obliges him to decry it, if it be
   not the fear of being himself regarded as a Christian. Understand, in
   fact, that I, having proposed some questions to him on the subject,
   have clearly perceived, and I have even convinced him that he knows
   nothing about them. And to demonstrate to the whole world that what I
   say is the truth, I declare that if you are still ignorant of this
   dispute I am ready to renew it in your presence. The latter would
   indeed be a truly royal work. For, if you were to see the questions
   which I proposed to him and the responses he made to them, you could
   not doubt his ignorance, nor his little love for the truth.

   The forecasts of St Justin were but too well justified. Crescentius
   denounced him when he ought to have contented himself by refuting him,
   and the courageous doctor was put to death. Tatian escaped the snares
   of the Cynic. We cannot enough regret, for the sake of the memory of
   Antonine (or, if it is wished, of Marcus Aurelius), that the courageous
   advocate of a cause which was then that of liberty of conscience should
   have suffered martyrdom under his reign. If Justin called his rival
   "impostor," or "shark," as Tatian informs us, he deserved the full
   penalty which attached to the crime of proffering insults in public.
   But Crescentius may have been no less offensive, and he escaped
   punishment. Justin was therefore punished for being a Christian. The
   law was formal, and the conservators of the Roman common weal hesitated
   to abrogate it. How many precursors of the future suffered similarly
   under the reign of the just and pious St Louis!

   The attacks of Crescentius were but an isolated circumstance. In the
   first century, some of the most enlightened men were wholly ignorant of
   Christianity; but this is no longer possible. Everybody has an opinion
   on the subject. The first rhetorician of the times, L. Cornelius
   Fronton, certainly wrote an invective against the Christians. That
   discourse is lost; we do not know in what circumstances it was
   composed, but we can form some idea of it from that which Municius
   Felix puts into the mouth of his Cæcilius. The work was not like that
   of Celsus, consecrated to exegetical discussion; it was nothing more
   than a philosophical treatise. It consisted of several considerations
   on the man of the world, and on politics. Fronton accepted without
   examination the most calumnious rumours against the Christians. He
   believed or affected to believe what was told of their nocturnal
   mysteries and of their sanguinary repasts. A very honest man, but an
   official man, he had a horror of a sect of men of no social standing.
   Satisfied with a sort of vague belief in Providence, which he
   capriciously associated with a polytheistic devotion, he held to the
   established religion, not because he alleged it was true, but because
   it was the ancient religion, and formed part of the prejudices of a
   true Roman. There is no doubt that in his declamation he only took up a
   patriotic point of view, so as to preach the respect that was due to
   national institutions, and that be only stood up in his conservative
   zeal against the foolish pretension of illiterate people of mean
   condition aspiring to reform beliefs. Perhaps he wound up ironically in
   regard to the impotence of that unique God who, too much occupied to be
   able to govern everything well, abandoned his worshippers to death, and
   with a few railleries upon the resurrection of the flesh.

   The discourse of Fronton appealed only to the lettered. Fronton
   rendered a very bad service to Christianity in inculcating his ideas on
   the illustrious pupil whom he educated with so much care, and who came
   to be called Marcus Aurelius.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXVI.

  THE APOCRYPHAL GOSPELS.

   If we accept the apologists, such as Aristides, Quadratus, and Justin,
   who addressed themselves to the Pagans, and the pure traditionists,
   such as Papias and Hegesippus, who regarded the new revelation as
   essentially consisting in the words of Jesus, almost all the Christian
   writers of the age we have just left had the idea of augmenting the
   list of sacred writings susceptible of being read in the Church.
   Despairing of succeeding in this through their private authority, they
   assumed the name of some apostle or of some apostolic personage, and
   made no scruple in attributing to themselves the inspiration which was
   indiscriminately enjoyed by the immediate disciples of Jesus. This vein
   of apocryphal literature was now exhausted. Pseudo-Hermas only half
   succeeded. We shall see the Reconnaissances of pseudo-Clementine and
   the pretended Constitutions of the twelve apostles equally stamped with
   suspicion in respect of canonicity. The numerous Acts of Apostles which
   were produced everywhere had only a partial success. No Apocalypse
   appeared again to disturb seriously the masses. The success of public
   readings had, up to this point, been the criterions of canonicity. A
   Church admitted such a writing imputed to an apostle or to an apostolic
   personage to the public reading. The faithful were edified. The rumour
   was spread in the neighbouring Churches that a very beautiful
   communication had been made in such a community, on such a day; people
   wished to see the new writing, and thus, little by little, this writing
   came to be accepted, provided that it did not contain some
   stumbling-block. But as time went on people became critical, and
   successes such as those which the Epistles to Titus and to Timothy, the
   Second Epistle to Peter, obtained, were no longer renewed.

   The fertility of evangelical invention was in reality exhausted; the
   age of great legendary creation was past; people no longer invented
   anything of importance; the success of psuedo-John was the last. But
   the liberty of remodelling was sufficiently extensive, at least outside
   the Churches of St Paul. Although the four texts which became
   subsequently canonical, had already a certain vogue, they were far from
   excluding similar texts. The Gospel of the Hebrews retained all its
   authority. Justin and Tatian probably made use of it. The author of the
   Epistles of St Ignatius (second half of the second century) cites it as
   a canonical and accepted text. No text, in fact, destroyed the
   tradition or suppressed its rivals. Books were rare, and badly
   preserved. Dionysius of Corinth, at the end of the second century,
   speaks of the falsifiers of the "Scriptures of the Lord," which induces
   the belief that the retouching continued for more than a hundred years
   after the compilation of our Mathew. Hence the indecisive form in the
   sayings of Jesus which is to be remarked in the apostolic fathers. The
   source is always vaguely indicated; great variations are produced in
   the citations up to the time of St Irenæus. Sometimes the words of
   Isaiah and Enoch are put forth for the words of Jesus. There is no
   longer any distinction between the Bible and the Gospel, and some words
   of Luke are cited with this heading, "God says."

   The Gospels thus were until about the year 160 and even beyond that,
   private writings designed for small circles. Each of the latter had its
   own, and for a long time individuals did not scruple to complete and to
   continue already accepted texts. The compilation had not taken a
   definite form. The texts were added to, they were abridged; such and
   such a passage was discussed, and the Gospels in circulation were
   amalgamated, so as to form a single and more portable work. The oral
   transmission, on the other hand, continued to play a part. A multitude
   of sayings were not written down: it would have been necessary to
   determine the whole tradition. Many of the evangelical elements were
   yet sporadic. It was thus that the beautiful anecdote of the woman
   taken in adultery circulated. It was made use of as best it might in
   the fourth Gospel. The phrase, "Be good money changers," which is cited
   as being "in the Gospel," and as "scripture," did not find a corner
   anywhere in it.

   Certain abridgements which were threatened to be made were much more
   serious. Every detail which represented Christ as a man, appeared
   scandalous. The fine verse of Luke, where Jesus weeps over Jerusalem,
   was condemned by the uncultured sectaries who pretended that weeping
   was a token of weakness. The consoling angel and the bloody sweat on
   the Mount of Olives provoked objections and analogous mutilations. But
   orthodoxy, already dominant, prevented these individual conceits from
   seriously compromising the integrity of the texts already sacred.

   In truth, amidst all this chaos, order was established. In like manner,
   between opposing doctrines an orthodoxy was designed, just as from
   amongst a multitude of Gospels four texts tended to become more and
   more canonical, to the exclusion of others. Mark, pseudo-Matthew, Luke,
   and pseudo-John, tended towards an official consecration. The Gospels
   of the Hebrews, which at first equalled them in value, but of which the
   Nazarenes and the Ebionites made a dangerous use, began to be
   discarded. The Gospels of Peter and the twelve apostles appeared to
   have various defects, and were suppressed by the bishops. How was it
   that people did not go still further, and were not tempted to reduce
   the four Gospels to one only, either by suppressing three, or in making
   a unity of the four, after the manner of the Diatesseron of Tatian, or
   in constructing a sort of Gospel a priori, like Marcion? The honesty of
   the Church never appears to greater advantage than in this
   circumstance. With a light heart she placed herself in the most
   embarrassing situation. It was impossible that some of these
   contradictions of the Gospels should have escaped observation. Celsus
   was already keenly alive to them. People preferred for the future to be
   exposed to the most terrible objections, than that the writings
   regarded by so many persons as inspired should be condemned. Each of
   the four great Gospels had its clientèle, if one may thus express
   oneself. To wrench them out of the hands of those who admired them
   would have been an impossibility. Besides, it might have resulted in
   condemning to oblivion a multitude of beautiful details in which we
   recognise Jesus, although the order of the narration was different. The
   tetractys gained the day, except in imposing upon ecclesiastical
   criticism the strangest of tortures--that of making a text accord with
   four texts discordant.

   In any case, the Catholic Church no longer now accords to any person
   the right to revise from top to bottom the anterior texts, like as has
   been done by Luke and pseudo-John. We have passed from the age of
   living tradition to the age of moribund tradition. The book, which
   until now had been nothing, became everything for the people, who were
   already removed from the ocular witnesses by two or three generations.
   Towards the year 180, the revolution will be complete. The Catholic
   Church will declare the last of the Gospels rigorously closed. There
   are four Gospels. Irenæus tells us it is necessary to have four, and it
   is impossible there can be more than four; for there are four climates,
   four winds, four corners of the world, calling each for a defender;
   four revelations, that of Adam, of Noah, of Moses, and of Jesus; four
   animals in the cherub, and four mystic beasts in the Apocalypse. Each
   of these monsters who for the prophet of the year 69 were simple
   animated ornaments of the throne of God, became the emblem of one of
   the four accepted texts. It was admitted that the Gospel was like the
   cherub, tetramorphous. To put the four texts in accord, to harmonise
   the one with the other, was the difficult task which shall henceforth
   be pursued by those who attempt to form to themselves a conception, be
   it ever so little reasonable, of the life of Jesus.

   The most original endeavour to get out of this confusion was certainly
   that of Tatian, the disciple of Justin. His Diatesseron was the first
   essay at harmonising the Gospels. The Synoptics, together with the
   Gospel of the Hebrews and the Gospels of Peter, were the basis of his
   labour. The text which resulted from it resembled closely enough the
   Gospel of the Hebrews; the genealogies, as well as everything which
   connected Jesus with the race of David, were wanting in it. The success
   of the book of Tatian was at first very considerable; many of the
   Churches adopted it as a convenient résumé of evangelical history, but
   the heresies of the author rendered the orthodoxy suspicious; in the
   end, the hook was withdrawn from circulation, and the diversity of
   texts finally gained the day in the Church Catholic.

   It was not thus with the numerous sects which sprang up everywhere. It
   did not please the latter that evangelical productions had in a manner
   become crystalised, and that there was no longer any reason for writing
   new lives of Jesus. The Gnostic sects desired to renew continually the
   texts, in order to satisfy their ardent fantasy. Almost all the heads
   of sects had Gospels bearing their names, after the example set by
   Basilides, or after the manner of Marcion, according to their good
   pleasure. That of Apelles was drawn, like so many others, from the
   Gospel of the Hebrews. Markos drew from every source the authentic and
   the apocryphal. Valentinus, as we have seen, pretended to ascend to the
   apostles through personal traditions given to him. People quoted a
   Gospel according to Philip, which was greatly prized by certain sects,
   and another that they called "The Gospel of Perfection." The names of
   the apostles furnished a sufficient guarantee for all these frauds.
   There was hardly one of the twelve who had not a Gospel imputed to him.
   No more Gospels were invented, it is true, but people wanted to know
   the details which had been omitted in the four inspired ones. The
   infancy of Christ, in particular, excited the liveliest curiosity.
   People would not admit that he, whose life had been a prodigy, had
   lived for some years as an obscure Nazarene.

   Such was the origin of that which is called "Apocryphal Gospels," a
   long series of feeble productions, the commencement of which may be
   safely placed about the middle of the second century. It would be doing
   an injury to Christian literature to place those insipid compositions
   on the same footing with the masterpieces of Mark, Luke, and Matthew.
   The apocryphal Gospels are the Pouranas of Christianity; they have for
   their basis the canonical Gospels. The author takes these Gospels as a
   theme from which he never deviates; he seeks simply to elucidate and
   perfect by the ordinary processes of the Hebraic legend. Luke already
   had followed the same course. In his deductions in regard to the
   infancy of Jesus, and the birth of John the Baptist, he uses processes
   of amplification; his pious mechanism of mise en scene is the prelude
   to the apocryphal Gospels. The authors of the latter make the utmost
   use of the sacred rhetoric, which, however, was employed by Luke with
   discretion. Their innovations were few, imitated, and exaggerated. They
   did for the canonical Gospels what the authors of the Post-Homerica
   have done for Homer, what the comparatively modern authors of
   Dionysiacso or Argonautics have done for the Greek epopee. They dealt
   with those parts which the canonists, for good reasons, neglected; they
   added that which might have happened, that which appeared probable;
   they developed the situations by means of artificial reconciliations
   borrowed from the sacred texts. Finally, they sometimes proceeded by
   monographs, and sought to construct legend out of all the evangelical
   personages in the scattered details which had reference to them. They
   thus limited themselves in everything to embroidering on a given
   canvas. This was so different from the assurance of the old
   evangelists, who spoke as if inspired from on high, and pushed boldly
   forward, each in his way, the details of their narratives, without
   troubling themselves whether they contradicted one another. The
   fabricators of the apocryphal Gospels were timid. They cited their
   authorities; they were restricted by the canonists. The faculty for
   creating the myth was altogether wanting; they could no longer even
   invent a miracle. As for details, it is impossible to conceive anything
   more contemptible, more pitiful. It is the tiresome verbiage of an old
   gossip, the vulgar and familiar style of a literature of wet nurses and
   nursery maids. Like the degenerate Catholicism of modern times, the
   authors of the apocryphal Gospels on their part descended to the
   puerile side of Christianity--the infant Jesus, the Virgin Mary, Saint
   Joseph. The veritable Jesus, the Jesus of public life, was beyond them,
   and frightened them.

   The real cause of this sad debasement was a total change in the manner
   of comprehending the supernatural. The canonical Gospels maintained
   themselves with a rare dexterity on the verge of a false situation,
   which, however, was full of charm. Their Jesus is not God, since his
   whole life is that of a man. He weeps, and allows himself to be moved
   by pity: he is filled with deity: his attitude is compatible with art,
   with imagination, and with moral sense. His thaumaturgy, in particular,
   is that which is becoming to a divine envoy. In the apocryphal Gospels,
   on the contrary, Jesus is a supernatural spectre, without bodily
   corporeity. In him humanity is a lie. In his cradle you would take him
   for an infant: but wait a little: miracles start up round about him;
   this infant calls out to you, "I am the Logos." The thaumaturgy of this
   new Christ is material, mechanical, immoral; it is the juggleries of a
   magician. Wherever he passes, he acts as a magnetic force. Nature is
   unhinged, and beside itself by the effect of his vicinage. Each word of
   his is followed by miraculous effects, "for good as well as for evil."
   Doubtless the canonical Gospels were sometimes not free from this
   defect; the episodes of the swine of the Gergesenes, of the fig-tree
   that was cursed, could have only inspired in contemporaries a rather
   barren moral reflection: "The author of such acts must indeed be
   powerful." But these cases are rare, whilst in the apocryphal the true
   notion of Jesus, at once human and divine, is perfectly obliterated. In
   becoming a pure déva, Jesus lost all which had rendered him amiable and
   affecting. People were constrained, logically enough, to deny his
   personal identity, to make of him an intermittent spectre, which showed
   itself to his disciples now young, now old, now an infant, now an old
   man, now tall, now short, and sometimes so tall that its head touched
   the sky.

   The oldest and the least objectionable of these insipid rhapsodies is
   the narrative of the birth of Mary, of her marriage, of the birth of
   Jesus, reputed to be written by a certain James, a narrative to which
   has been given the erroneous title of Protevangel of James. A Gnostic
   book, the Genna Marias, which appears to have been known to St Justin,
   may have served as the first foundation of it. No book has had so much
   importance as the latter as regards the history of the Christian
   festivals and Christian art. The parents of the Virgin, Anne and
   Joachim; the Presentation of the Virgin in the Temple, and the idea
   that she had been brought up as if in a convent; the marriage of the
   Virgin; the meeting of the widowers, the circumstance of the miraculous
   wands, the picture of which, in certain parts, has been sketched so
   admirably. The whole of this comes from this curious writing. The Greek
   Church regarded it as semi-inspired, and admitted it in the public
   readings in the churches, at the feasts of St Joachim, of St Anne, of
   the Conception, of the Nativity, of the Presentation of the Virgin. Its
   Hebrew colouring is still sufficiently distinct. Some pictures of the
   manners of the Jews recall at times the Book of Tobias. There are
   distinct traces of Ebionite Judeo-Christianity and of Docetism; in it
   marriage is almost reprobated.

   Many passages of that singular book are not destitute of grace, nor
   even of a certain naïveté, The author applies to the birth of Mary, and
   to all the circumstances of the infancy of Jesus, the methods of
   narration the germ of which was already to be found in Luke and
   Matthew. The anecdotes in regard to the infancy of Jesus in Luke and in
   Matthew are ingenious imitations of what is recounted in the ancient
   books and in the modern agadas about the birth of Samuel, Samson,
   Moses, Abraham, and Isaac. In this class of writings there was an
   habitual introduction giving the history of all the great men, several
   species of commonplaces, always the same, and topics of pious
   invention. The infant destined to play an extraordinary part must be
   born of aged parents for long sterile, "so as to demonstrate that the
   child was a favour bestowed by God, and not the fruit of an unbridled
   passion." It was held that the Divine power shone out to more advantage
   when human agency was absent. The result of long expectation and of
   assiduous prayers, the future great man was announced by an angel, at
   some solemn moment. It was thus in the case of Samson and of Samuel.
   According to Luke, the birth of John the Baptist occurred under such
   conditions. It is believed that it was the same in the case of Mary.
   Her birth, like that of John and of Jesus, was preceded by an
   annunciation, accompanied with prayers and with canticles. Anne and
   Joachim are the exact counterparts of Elizabeth and Zacharias. Some go
   even beyond that, and embellish the infancy of Anne. This retrospective
   application of the methods of evangelical legend becomes a fruitful
   source of fables responding to the requirements, constantly springing
   up, of Christian piety. People could no longer consider Mary, Joseph,
   and their ancestors as ordinary personages. The cult of the Virgin,
   which later on attained so enormous proportions, had already made
   invasions in every quarter.

   A multitude of details, sometimes puerile yet always conforming to the
   sentiment of the times, or susceptible of removing the difficulties
   which the ancient Gospels presented, were disseminated by means of
   these compositions, at first not avowed, or even condemned, but which
   finished soon in being right. The case of the nativity was completed;
   the ox and the ass take definitely their places in it. Joseph is
   depicted as a widower four score years old, the simple protector of
   Mary. We could have wished that the latter had remained a virgin after
   as well as before the birth of Jesus. She was made to be of a royal and
   sacerdotal race, being descended at once from David and from Levi.
   People cannot represent to themselves that she died like a simple
   woman. They already speak of her ascension to heaven. The assumption
   was created, like so many other festivals, by the cycle of apocryphas.

   An accent of lively piety distinguishes all the compositions of which
   we have just been speaking, whilst one cannot read without being
   disgusted the Gospel of Thomas--an insipid work, which does as little
   honour as possible to the Christian family, very old though it be,
   which produced it. It is the point of departure of these flat
   merveilles in regard to the infancy of Jesus which, by reason of their
   very dullness had a success so disastrous in the East. In them Jesus
   figures as an enfant terrible, wicked, rancorous, the dread of his
   parents and of everybody. He kills his companions, transforms them into
   he-goats, blinds their parents, confounds his masters, demonstrates to
   them that they know nothing about the mysteries of the alphabet, and
   forces them to ask pardon of him. People flee from him as from a
   pestilence. Joseph in vain beseeches him to remain quiet. This
   grotesque image of an omnipotent and omniscient gamin is one of the
   greatest caricatures that was ever invented, and certainly those who
   wrote it had too little wit for one to credit them with the intention
   of having meant it as a piece of irony. It was not without a
   theological design, that, contrary to the perfect system of tact of the
   old evangelists as regards the thirty years of obscure life, it was
   desired to be shown that the divine nature in Jesus was never idle, and
   that he continually performed miracles. Everything which made the life
   of Jesus a human life was vexatious. "This infant was not a terrestrial
   being," says Zachæus of him; he can subdue fire; perhaps he existed
   before the creation of the world. He is either something great, or a
   god, or an angel, or one I don't know what. This deplorable Gospel
   appears to be the work of the Marcosians. The Nessenes and the
   Manicheans appropriated it to themselves, and spread it over the whole
   of Asia. The inept Oriental Gospel, known by the name of the Gospel of
   the Infancy, brought into vogue especially by the Nestorians of Persia,
   is only, in act, an amplification of the Gospel according to Thomas. It
   passes in all the East as the work of Peter, and as the Gospel par
   excellence. If India knew any Gospel, it was this one. If Krechnaism
   embraced any Christian element, it is from this source that it came.
   The Jesus of whom Mahomet heard speak, is that of the puerile Gospels,
   a fantastic Jesus, a spectre proving his superhuman nature by means of
   an extravagant thaumaturgy.

   The passion of Jesus owed likewise its development to a cycle of
   legends. The pretended Acts of Pilate were the framework which was made
   use of in which to group this order of ideas, with which were readily
   associated the better polemics against the Jews. It is only in the
   fourth century that the episodes, of an almost epic character, which
   were supposed to have taken place in the descent of Jesus to Hades,
   were put into writing. Later, these legends in regard to the
   subterranean life of Jesus were joined to the false Acts of Pilate, and
   formed the celebrated work called the Gospel of Nicodemus.

   This base Christian literature, borrowed from a wholly popular state of
   mind, was in general the work of the Judaising and Gnostic sects. The
   disciples of St Paul had no part in them. It was created, to all
   appearances, in Syria. The apocryphal of Egyptian origin, The History
   of Joseph the Carpenter, for example, are more recent. Although of
   humble origin, and tainted with an ignorance truly sordid, the
   apocryphal Gospels assumed very early an importance of the first order.
   They pleased the multitude, offered rich themes for preaching on,
   enlarged considerably the circle of the evangelic personnel--St Anne,
   St Joachim, the Veronica, St Longinus--from that somewhat tainted
   source. The most beautiful Christian festivals--the Assumption, the
   Presentation of the Virgin--have no basis in the canonical Gospels; but
   they have in the apocryphas. The rich chasing of the legends which have
   made Christmas the jewel of the Christian year, is drawn for the most
   part from the apocryphas. The same literature has created the infant
   Jesus. The devotion to the Virgin finds there almost all its arguments.
   The importance of St Joseph proceeds entirely from them. Christian art
   finally owes to these compositions--very feeble, from a literary point
   of view, but singularly simple and plastic--some of its finest
   subjects. Christian iconography, whether Byzantine or Latin, has all
   its roots there. The Peregrine school would not have had any
   Sposalizio; the Venetian school no assumption, no presentation; the
   Byzantine school no descent of Jesus into limbo, without the
   apocryphas. The crib of Jesus without them would have lacked its most
   beautiful details. Their recommendation was their very inferiority. The
   canonical Gospels were too strong a literature for the people. Some
   vulgar narratives, often base, were nearer the level of the multitude
   than the Sermon on the Mount, or the discourses of the fourth Gospel.

   So the success of these fraudulent writings was immense. From the
   fourth century the most instructed Greek fathers--Epiphanes, Gregory of
   Nyssa--adopted them without reserve. The Latin Church hesitated, even
   put forth efforts to take them out of the hands of the faithful, but
   did not succeed. The Golden Legend draws largely upon it. In the Middle
   Ages the apocryphal Gospels enjoyed an extraordinary popularity; they
   have even an advantage over the canonical Gospels, which is this: not
   being a sacred Scripture, they can be translated into the vulgar
   tongue. Whilst the Bible is in a manner put under lock and key, the
   apocryphas are in everybody's hands. The Miniaturists were ardently
   attached to them; the Rhymers seized upon them; the Mystics represented
   them dramatically in the porches of the Churches. The first modern
   author of a life of Jesus--Ludolphe le Chartreux--made them his
   principal document. Without theological pretension these popular
   Gospels have succeeded in suppressing, in a certain measure, the
   canonical Gospels; Protestantism also has declared war against them,
   and devotes itself to proving that they are the work of the devil.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXVII.

  APOCRYPHAL ACTS AND APOCALYPSES.

   The literature of the false Acts pursues a line quite different from
   that of the false Gospels. The Acts of the Apostles, the individual
   work of Luke, were not produced, like the narrative of the life of
   Jesus, from the diversities of parallel compilations. Whilst the
   canonical Gospels served as a basis for the amplifications of the
   apocryphal Gospels, the apocryphal Acts have little connection with the
   Acts of Luke. The narratives of the preaching and of the death of Peter
   and Paul never received a final revision. Pseudo-Clement has used them
   as a literary pretext rather than a direct subject of narrative. The
   apostolic history was thus the roof of a romantic tissue which never
   assumed a definite literary form, and which people never cease
   revising. A sort of résumé of these fables, tainted with a strong
   Gnostic and Manichean colour, appeared under the name of a pretended
   Leucius or Lucius, a disciple of the apostles. The Catholics, who
   regretted that they could not make use of the book, sought to amend it.
   The final result of that successive emendation was the compilation made
   in the fifth or sixth centuries under the name of the false Abdias.

   Almost all those who compiled this sort of works were heretics; but the
   orthodox, after subjecting them to corrections, soon adopted them.
   These heretics were very pious people, and at the same time highly
   imaginative. After they had been anathematised, their books were found
   to be edifying, and the Churches did their very best to have them
   introduced into their religious readings. It is in this way that many
   of the books, many of the saints, many of the festivals of the orthodox
   Church are the productions of heretics. The fourth Gospel was in this
   respect one of the most striking examples. This singular book made its
   way amazingly. It was read more and more, and, apart from the Churches
   of Asia, which were too well acquainted with its origin, it was
   accepted on all hands with admiration, and as being the work of the
   Apostle John.

   The false Acts of the Apostles have no more originality than the
   apocryphal Gospels. In this order, similarly, the individual fancy did
   not succeed much better in making itself felt. This was plainly visible
   in that which concerned the legend of Paul. A priest of Asia, a greet
   admirer of the apostle, thought to satisfy his piety by constructing a
   short charming romance in which Paul converted a beautiful young girl
   of Iconium, named Hecla, who was drawn to him by an invincible
   attraction, and made of her a martyr of virginity. The priest did not
   conceal his game well; he was questioned, nonplussed, and finished by
   avowing that he had done all this out of love for Paul. The book
   succeeded none the lees for this, and it was only banished from the
   Canon with the other apocryphal writings about the fifth or sixth
   centuries.

   St Thomas, the apostle preferred by Gnostics, and later, by the
   Manicheans, inspired in the same way acts in which the horror of
   certain sects for marriage is set forth with the utmost energy. Thomas
   arrived in India while the nuptials of the daughter of the king were in
   preparation. He so strongly persuaded the fiancés as to the
   inexpediency of marriage, the wicked sentiments which result from the
   fact of having begotten children, the crimes which are the consequence
   of esprit de famille, and the troubles of housekeeping, that they
   passed the night seated by the side of one another. On the morrow their
   relations were astonished at finding them in this position, full of a
   sweet gaiety, and free from any of the ordinary embarrassments incident
   to such circumstances. The young couple explain to them that
   bashfulness has no longer any meaning for them, since the cause of it
   has disappeared. They have exchanged the transient nuptials for the
   joys of a never-ending paradise. The strange hallucinations to which
   these moral errors gave scope, are all vividly depicted throughout the
   entire book. The first outline of a Christian hell, with its categories
   of torments, is found traced there. This singular writing, which
   constituted a part of certain Bibles, recalls the theology of the
   pseudo-Clementine romance, and that of the Elkasaites. In it the Holy
   Ghost is, like as with the Nazarenes a feminine principle, the mother
   misericordiæ.' Water represents the purifying element of the soul and
   of the body; the unction of oil is then the seal of baptism, like as
   with the Gnostics. The sign of the cross already possesses all its
   supernatural virtues, as well as a sort of magic.

   The Acts of St Philip have also a theosophic colouring, and a very
   pronounced Gnosticism. Those of Andrew were one of the parts of the
   compilation of the pretended Leucius, who merits the most anathemas.
   The orthodox Church was at first a stranger to these fables; then she
   adopted them, at least for popular use. Iconography especially found in
   them, as in the apocryphal Gospels, an ample repository of subjects and
   of symbols. Almost all the attributes which have been made use of by
   imaginative writers to distinguish the apostles, comes from the
   apocryphal Acts.

   The apocalyptic form served also to express how much there existed in
   the heterodox Christian sects of insubordination, of unruliness, and of
   dissatisfaction. An ascension or anabaticon of Paul, which set forth
   the mysteries that Paul was reputed to have seen in his ecstasy, was in
   great vogue. An apocalypse of Elias enjoyed considerable popularity. It
   was amongst the Gnostics in particular that the apocalypses, under the
   name of apostles and prophets, germinated. The faithful were on their
   guard, and the moderate Church party, who at once feared the Gnostic
   excesses and the excesses of the pious, admitted only two
   apocalypses--that of John and of Peter. Nevertheless, writings of the
   same kind, attributed to Joseph, Moses, Abraham, Habakkuk, Zephaniah,
   Ezekiel, Daniel, Zacharias, and the father of John, were in
   circulation. Two zealous Christians, preoccupied with the substitution
   of a new world for an old world, excited by their persecutions, greedy,
   like all the fabricators of apocalypses, of the evil news which came
   from the four corners of the earth, took up the mantle of Esdras, and
   wrote under that revered name a number of new pages, which were joined
   to those which the pseudo-Esdras of 97 had already accepted. It has
   also been thought that the apocalyptic books attributed to Enoch
   received in the second century some Christian additions. But this
   appears to us little probable; those books of Enoch, formerly so
   esteemed, and which Jesus had probably read with enthusiasm, had
   fallen, at the time of which we now speak, into universal discredit.

   The Gnostics, in like manner, could show psalms, pieces of apocryphal
   prophets, revelations under the name of Adam, Seth, Noria, the
   imaginary wife of Noah, recitals of the nativity of Mary, full of
   improprieties, and great and small interrogations of Mary. Their gospel
   of Eve was a tissue of chimerical equivocations. Their Gospel of Philip
   presented a dangerous quietism, clothed in a form borrowed from
   Egyptian rituals. The ascension or anabaticon of Isaiah was made up of
   the same stuff, in the third century, and was a true source of
   heresies. The Archonties, the Hieracities, the Messalians, proceeded
   from that. Like the author of the Acts of Thomas, the author of the
   Ascension of Isaiah is one of the precursors of Dante, by the
   complaisance with which he expatiates upon the description of heaven
   and hell. This singular work, adopted by the sects of the Middle Ages,
   was the cherished book of the Hogomites of Thrace and of the Cathares
   of the West.

   Adam had likewise his apocryphal revelations. A testament addressed to
   Seth, a mystic apocalypse borrowed from Zoroastrian ideas, circulated
   under his name. It is a clever enough book, which recalls many of the
   Jeschts, Sadies, and Sirouzé of the Persians, and also at times the
   books of the Mendaites. Adam therein explains to Seth, from his
   recollections of Paradise and the signs of the angel Uriel, the mystic
   liturgies of day and night which all creatures celebrate from hour to
   hour before the Eternal. The first hour of the night is the hour of the
   adoration of demons; during that hour they cease to annoy man. The
   second hour is the hour of the adoration of fish; then comes the
   adoration of abysses; then the thrice holy of the seraphim: before the
   Fall men heard at that hour the measured beating of their wings. At the
   fifth hour of the night the adoration of the waters takes place. Adam
   at that hour heard the prayer of the great billows. The middle of the
   night is marked by an accumulation of storms, and by a great religious
   terror. Then all nature reposes, and the waters sleep. At this hour, if
   one takes water, and if the priest of God mixes it with holy oil and
   anoints with this oil the sick who cannot sleep, the latter are cured.
   At the time the dew falls, the hymn of herbs and grain is sung. At the
   tenth hour, at the full early dawn, comes the turn of men, the gates of
   heaven are opened, so as to let enter the prayers of all living beings.
   They enter, prostrate themselves before the throne, then depart.
   Everything that one asks at the moment when the seraphim are beating
   their wings and when the cock crows, one is sure to obtain. Great joy
   is shed over the world when the sun shines forth from the paradise of
   God upon creation. Then comes an hour of expectation and of profound
   silence, until the priests have offered incense to God.

   At each hour of the day the angels, the birds, every creature, rises up
   in like manner to adore the Supreme Being. At the seventh hour there is
   a repetition of the ceremony of entering and retiring. The prayers
   (Priéres) of all living beings enter, prostrate themselves, and walked
   out again. At the tenth hour the inspection of the waters takes place.
   The Holy Spirits descends over the waters and springs. Without this, in
   drinking the water, one would be subject to the malignity of the
   demons. At this hour again water mixed with oil cures all manner of
   sickness. This naturalism, which recalls that of the Elkasaites, was
   attenuated by the Catholic Church, but the principle it contained was
   not entirely rejected. The exorcisms of water and of the different
   elements, the division of the day into canonical hours, the employment
   of holy oils, conserved by the orthodox Church, had their origin in
   ideas analogous to those which the Adamite Apocalypse has complaisantly
   developed.

   The Christian Sibyl women do little more than repeat without
   comprehending the ancient oracles. Those of the Apocalypse, in
   particular, she never ceases vatianating, though, and announcing the
   near destruction of the Roman Empire. The favourite idea at that epoch
   was that the world, before it came to an end, would be governed by a
   woman. The sympathy of the old sibyllists for Judaism and Jerusalem is
   now changed to hatred; but the horror for the Pagan civilisation is no
   less. The domination of Italy over the world has been the most fatal of
   all dominations: it will be the last. The end is near. Wickedness
   springs from the rich and the great, who plunder the poor. Rome is to
   be burned; wolves and foxes are to live amongst its ruins; it will be
   seen whether her gods of brass will save her. Hadrian, when the
   Sibyllists of the year 117 saluted with so much expectation, was an
   iniquitous and avarcious king, a despoiler of the entire world, wholly
   occupied with frivolous devices, an enemy of true religion, the
   sacreligious instituter of an infamous cult, the abettor of the most
   abominable idolatry, Like the sibyllists of 117, he of whom we have
   been speaking asserts that Hadrian could have but three successors.
   Their names (Antonine) recall that of the Most High (Adonai). The first
   of the three will reign a long time, and this evidently refers to
   Antoninus Pius. This prince, in reality so admirable, is treated as a
   miserable king, who out of pure avarice despoiled the world and heaped
   up at Rome treasures which the terrible exile, the assassin of his
   mother (Nero, the Antichrist), will abandon to the pillage of the
   peoples of Asia.

   Oh! how thou shalt weep then, despoiled of thy brilliant garments and
   clad in habits of mourning, O proud queen, daughter of old Latinus!
   Thou shalt fall, no more to rise again. The glory of thy legions, with
   their proud eagles, will disappear. Where will be thy strength! what
   people will be allied to thee, of those whom thou hast overcome by thy
   follies.

   Every plague, civil war, invasion, and famine announces the revenge
   that God prepares on behalf of his elect. It is towards Italy
   especially that the judge will show himself severe. Italy will be
   reduced to a pile of black volcanic cinders, mixed with naphtha and
   asphalte. Hades will be its portion. Then finally equality will exist
   for all; no longer will there be either slaves or masters, or kings, or
   chiefs, or advocates, or corrupt judges. Rome will endure the ills she
   has inflicted on others: those whom she has vanquished will triumph in
   their turn over her. That will take place in the year in which the
   figures cast up will correspond to the numerical value of the name of
   Rome, that is to say, in the year of Rome 948 (195 of J. C.).

   The author calls this the day which he longs for. He employs epic
   accents to celebrate Nero, the Antichrist, preparing in the shades or
   beyond the seas the ruin of the Roman world. The contests between the
   Antichrist and the Messiah will come to pass. Men, far from becoming
   better, will only grow more wicked. The Antichrist is to be finally
   vanquished, and shut up in the abyss. The resurrection and the eternal
   happiness of the just will crown the apocalyptic cycle. Attached to the
   initials of the verses which express these terrible images, the eye
   distinguishes the acrostic IESOUS ChRISTOS ThEOU UIO OGER STAUDOS; the
   initial letters of the first five words give in their turn IChThUE
   "fish," a designation under which the initiated were early accustomed
   to recognise Jesus. As people were persuaded that the acrostic was one
   of the processes which the old sibyls had employed to make known their
   secret meaning, people were struck with astonishment to see so clear a
   revelation of Christianity delineated upon the margins of a writing
   that was thought to have been composed in the sixth generation which
   followed the deluge. There was an old translation of this singular
   production in barbarous Latin verse, which gave rise to another fable.
   It was pretended that Cicero had found his Erythrean fragment so
   beautiful that he had translated it into Latin verse before the birth
   of Jesus Christ.

   Such were the sombre images which, under the best of sovereigns,
   assailed the sectarian fanatics. We must not blame the Roman police for
   treating such books at times with severity; they were now puerile, then
   full of menaces: no modern state would tolerate their like. The
   visionaries dreamed only of conflagrations. The idea of a deluge of
   fire, in contradistinction to the deluge of water, and distinct from
   the final conflagration, was accepted by many amongst them. There was
   also a talk about a deluge of wind. These chimeras troubled more than
   one bead, even outside of Christianity. Under Marcus Aurelius an
   impostor attempted, in making use of the same species of terrors, to
   provoke disorders which might have led to the pillage of the city. It
   is not wise to repeat too often Judicare seculum per ignem. People are
   subject to strange hallucinations. When the tragic scenes which he
   imagined were slow in coming, he sometimes took upon himself to realise
   them. At Paris the people formed the Commune because the fifth act of
   the siege, which had been promised, did not come to pass.

   The Antichrist continued to be the great preoccupation of the makers of
   apocalypses. Although it was evident that Nero was dead, his shadow
   haunted the Christian imagination -- people continued to announce his
   return. Often, however, it was not Nero that people saw behind this
   fantastic personage; it was Simon Magus.

   From Sebaste was to issue Belial, who commands the high mountains, the
   sea, the blazing sun, the brilliant moon, the dead themselves, and who
   was to perform numerous miracles before men. It is not integrity, but
   error which will be in him. He will lead astray many mortals, both of
   the Hebrew faithful and of the elect, and others belonging to the
   lawless race who have not yet heard tell of God. But whilst the threats
   of the great God are being put into execution, and whilst the
   conflagration will roll over the earth in huge floods, fire will also
   devour Belial and the insolent men who have put their faith in him.

   We have been struck, in the Apocalypse, with this mysterious personage
   of the False Prophet, a thaumaturgic seducer of the faithful and the
   Pagans, allied to Nero, who follows him to the region of the Parthians,
   who must reappear and perish with him in the lake of brimstone. We are
   led to surmise that this symbolical personage designates Simon Magus.
   In seeing in the Sibylline Apocalypse "Belial of Sebaste" playing an
   almost identical part, we are confirmed in that hypothesis. The
   personal relations of Nero and Simon Magus are perhaps not no fabulous
   as they appear. In any case, this association of the two worst enemies
   that nascent Christianity had encountered, was well adapted to the
   spirit of the times, and to the taste for apocalyptical poetry in
   general. In the Ascension of Isaiah Belial is Satan, and Satan assumes
   in some sort the human form of a king, the murderer of his mother, who
   is to reign over the world, in order to establish the empire of evil.
   The author of the pseudo-Clemen tine romance believes that Simon will
   reappear as Antichrist at the end of time. In the third century a still
   greater trouble was introduced into that order of fantastic ideas.
   People distinguished two Antichrists, the one for the East, the other
   for the West--Nero and Belial. Later, Nero finished by becoming, in the
   eyes of the Christians, the Christ of the Jews. The suppulations of the
   works of Daniel came to complicate these chimeras. St Hippolytus, in
   the time of Severus, is wholly engrossed with them. A certain Juda
   proved by Daniel that the end of the world was to come about the year
   10 of Septimus Severus (of J. C. 202-203). Every persecution appeared
   to be a confirmation of the dismal prophecies which had accumulated.
   From all these confused data, the Middle Ages drew the grandiose myth
   which remains, amidst transformed Christianity, as an incomprehensible
   relic of primitive Messianism.
     __________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX. I.

   It is admitted pretty generally that the Jewish war under Hadrian
   entailed a siege and a final destruction of Jerusalem. So large a
   number of texts represent this view, that it at the first glance rash
   to call the fact in question. Nevertheless, the chief critics who have
   considered it--Scaliger, Henry de Valois, and P. Pazi--had perceived
   the difficulties of such an assertion, and rejected it.

   And to commence with, what is it that Hadrian should have besieged and
   destroyed? The demolition of Jerusalem under Titus was entire, even
   exceeding that usual to military operations.

   In admitting that a population of so many thousands of persons was able
   to dwell within the ruins which the victor of 70 left behind, it is
   clear in such a case that this heap of ruins was incapable of
   supporting a siege. Even while admitting that from the time of Titus to
   Hadrian some timid attempts of Jewish restoration might have been
   brought about, in spite of the "Legio Xa. Fratensis" who encamped on
   the ruins, one is not inclined to suppose that these attempts were of
   such a nature as to give the place any importance whatever in a
   military point of view.

   It is also very true that a great many savants, with whose opinions we
   coincide, think that the restoration of Jerusalem, under the name of
   "Ælie Capitolina," began in the year 122 or thereabouts.

   It is of no use to the adversaries of our theme to lay great stress on
   that argument, because they unhesitatingly admit that Ælia Capitolina
   was not commenced to be built till after the last destruction of
   Jerusalem by Hadrian. But no matter! If, as we think, Ælia Capitolina
   had been in existence for about ten years at the time that the revolt
   of Bar-Coziba broke out, about 133, how can one conceive that the
   Romans would have had occasion to take it! Ælia would not again have
   possessed walls capable of sustaining a siege. How, moreover, suppose
   that the "Legio Xa. Fratensis" had left their positions knowing that it
   would be obliged to reconquer them. It may be said that the same thing
   occurred under Nero, when Gessius Florus abandoned Jerusalem, but the
   situation was totally different.

   Gessius Florus found himself in the midst of a great city in
   revolution. The "Legio Xa. Fratensis" was situated in the midst of a
   population of veterans and squatters, all friendly to the Roman cause.
   Their retreat would not have explained itself in any fashion, and the
   siege which would have followed would have been a siege in a manner
   without purpose.

   When one examines the texts, very scarce, which relate to the War of
   Hadrian, it is necessary to make a large distinction. The texts really
   historical not only do not speak of a capture and a destruction of
   Jerusalem, but by the style in which they are couched, they exclude
   such an event.

   The oratorial and apologetic texts, on the contrary, where the second
   revolt of the Jews is cited, "non ad narrandum, sed ad probandum," for
   the purpose of serving the arguments and the declamations of the
   preacher or of the polemic, imply that all the events that happened
   under Hadrian were as if they happened under Titus. It is clear that it
   is the first series of texts that deserves the preference. Criticism
   has for a long time refused to trust to the precision of documents
   drawn up in a style whose essence is to be inaccurate.

   The historical texts reduce themselves unhappily into two in the
   question which concerns us, but both are excellent. There is, to
   commence with, the narrative of Dion Caasius, who appeared not to have
   been here abridged by Xiphilin; there is in the second place, that of
   Eusebius, who copied Ariston de Pella, a contemporary writer of events,
   and living close at hand to the seat of the war. These two narratives
   are in accord with one another. They do not speak a single word of a
   siege, nor of a destruction of Jerusalem. For an attentive reader of
   the two tales cannot admit that such a fact would have passed
   unnoticed. Dion Cassius is very particular; he knows that it was the
   construction of Ælia Capitolina which occasioned the revolt; he gives
   well the character of the war, which happened to be a war of little
   cities, of fortified market towns, of subterranean works--or rural war,
   if one is permitted thus to express oneself.

   He insists on facts so secondary as that of the ruin of the pretended
   tomb of Solomon. How is it possible that he could have neglected to
   speak of the catastrophe of the principal city?

   The omission of all notice about Jerusalem is still less understood in
   the narrative of Eusebius or rather of Ariston de Pella. The great
   event of the war for Eusebius is the siege of Bether, "the neighbouring
   town to Jerusalem;" of Jerusalem itself not a word. It is true that the
   chapter of the "Historie Ecclesiastique" relative to that event has for
   the title: He kata Andrianon hustate Ioudaion poliorchias, as the
   chapter relative to the war of Vespasian; and of Titus has for title
   (I. III. C.V.) Peri tes meta ton Christon hustates Ioudaion
   poliorchias; but the word adapts itself well to the whole of the
   campaign of Julius Severus, which consisted in sieges of little cities.
   In section 3 of the chapter relative to the war of Adrian, the word
   poliorchia is used to designate the operations of the capture of
   Bether.

   In his "Chronique" Eusebius follows the same plan. In his
   "Demonstration Evangélique," and in his "Theophaive," on the contrary,
   he points to that fact, and when he is no longer borne out by the very
   words of Ariston de Pella, he allows himself to be led away by the
   resemblance which has deranged nearly all the Jewish and Christian
   tradition. He pictures the events of the year 135 on the model of the
   events of the year 70, and he speaks of Hadrian as having contributed
   with Titus to the accomplishment of the prophecies on the annihilation
   of Jerusalem. This double destruction doubly serves him to realise a
   passage of Zacharias, [2] and to furnish a basis for the theory which
   he advances of a Church of Jerusalem lasting from Titus to Hadrian. [3]
   St Jerome presents the same contradiction. In his "Chronique," mapped
   out on that of Eusebius, he follows Eusebius as an historian. Then he
   forgets that solid base, and speaks, as do all the fathers of the
   orator school, of the siege and destruction of Jerusalem under Hadrian.
   [4] Tertullian [5] and St John Chrysostom [6] express themselves in the
   same way. One knows how dangerous it is to introduce into history these
   vague phrases, well known to preachers and to apologists of all times.
   Still less is it necessary that we should examine the passages in the
   Talmud where the same assertion presents itself, mixed up with those
   historical monstrosities which destroy the value of the mentioned
   passages. In the Talmud the confusion of the war of Titus and that
   which took place under Hadrian is constant. The description of Bether
   is copied from that of Jerusalem--the duration of the siege is the
   same.

   Is not this the proof that he had not separate mementoes of a new siege
   of Jerusalem, for the good reason that there had not been one. When the
   tale was started of a siege by a sort of argument a priori, it is
   possible that one a posteriori should be started also to give it in
   history a basis which it had not. Naturally, for it is on the first
   siege on which one falls back for that. That confusion has been the
   trap where the whole popular history of the Jewish mishaps has suffered
   itself to be taken. How can we prefer such blunders to strong arguments
   which, drawn from solitary historical evidence, we now have in the
   question Dion Cassibus or Ariston de Pella?

   Two grave objections remain for me to solve: only can they smooth away
   the doubts on the theory which I maintain. The first is derived from a
   passage of Appius. This historian, enumerating the successive
   destructions which overthrew the walls of Jerusalem, puts one before
   the other, and on the same line the destruction of Titus and that of
   Hadrian.

   The passage of Appius furnishes in every case a strong inaccuracy--he
   supposes that Jerusalem was walled under Hadrian. Appius foolishly
   supposes that the Jews, after Titus, re-erected their town, and
   fortified it. His ignorance on that point shows that he is not guided
   by the aforesaid comparison, but by the coarser similarity which has
   deceived every one. The difficulties of the campaign, the numberless
   poliorchiai of which it is full, show that even a contemporary who had
   not proof of the facts was able to commit a like error.

   Assuredly more grave is the objection derived from the study of the old
   coins. It is certain that the Jews during the revolt did not coin nor
   stamp money. Such an operation seems at the first glance not to have
   been possible at Jerusalem. The types of these moneys lead to that
   idea. The "legend" is most often, "For the liberation of Jerusalem;" on
   some others, the figure of a temple surmounted by a star.

   Jewish coin study is full of uncertainties, and it is dangerous to
   oppose it to history; it is history, on the contrary, which serves to
   throw a light upon it. Besides, the objection about which we speak has
   emboldened certain numismatic students of our days to deny absolutely
   the occupation of Jerusalem by the followers of Bar-Coziba. One will
   admit that the insurgents were able to coin money at Bether quite as
   well as at Jerusalem, if one thinks of the miserable plight in which in
   that supposition Jerusalem was. On the other hand, it seems that the
   types of coins of the second revolt had been imitated or taken directly
   from those of the first revolt, and on those of the Asmoneans. There is
   here an important point which deserves the attention of numismatists;
   for one could find here a means of solving the difficulties which yet
   hover over the entire groups of the autonomous coinage of Israel.

   We wish to speak chiefly of the coins with the "impression" of Simeon
   Nasi of Israel. We fall into the greatest misrepresentation when we
   seek to find this Simeon in Bargioras, in Bar-Coziba, in Simeon, son of
   Gamaliel, etc. None of these persons could coin money. They were
   revolutionaries, or men of high authority, but not sovereigns. If one
   or the other had placed his name on the money, he would have marred the
   republican spirit and jealousy of the rebels, and so, up to a certain
   point, their religious ideas.

   A similar matter would be mentioned by Josephus in the first revolt,
   and the identity of that Simeon would not be so doubtful as this is. It
   is never asked if the French Revolution had any coins with the effigy
   of Marat, or of Robespierre. This Simon, I believe, is no other than
   Simon Maccabeus, the first Jewish sovereign who coined money, and whose
   coins ought to be much sought after by orthodox persons. As the aim
   which they established was to overcome the scruples of the religious,
   such a counterfeit would suffice for the exigencies of the time. It had
   also the advantage of not putting into circulation only those types
   acknowledged by all. I think then, that neither in the first nor in the
   second revolt, that they had money struck in the name of a person then
   alive. The "Eleaser-Hac-Cohen" of certain coins ought probably to
   explain this in an analogous manner, which the numismatists will hit
   upon. I strongly think that the latter revolt had not a proper stamp,
   and they could best imitate the earlier ones. A material circumstance
   confirms that hypothesis. On the coins in question, in fact, one never
   sees smvn--one frequently sees smnv or smts. These two forms are so
   frequent that one can see a simple fault as to the position of the
   letters. In the second, in a great many cases, we cannot help thinking
   that the last two letters have disappeared. It is not impossible that
   the alteration of the name of Simeon was made expressly to imply a
   prayer,--"Hear me" or "Hear us." It is, at all events, contrary to all
   probability that one sees in the name of Simeon the true name of
   Bar-Coziba. How is it that this royal name of the false Messiah,
   written on an abundant coinage, would remain unknown to St Justin, to
   Aristion de Pella, to the Talmudists, who clearly speak of the money of
   Bar-Coziba. Still less can on see any president of the Sanhedrim whose
   authority would have been recognised by Bar-Coziba.

   So anyway, one is led to think that the coinage of Bar-Coziba did not
   consist but in impressions done from a religious motive, and that the
   types which bear these impressions were of the ancient Jewish types,
   which I conclude were for the rebellion of the time of Hadrian. By this
   are raised some enormous difficulties which the Jewish numismatism
   presents:--Firstly. That these persons unknown to history or these
   rebels should have coined money like sovereigns. Secondly, The
   unlikelihood that there is that these miserable insurgents caused
   issues of money so handsome and so considerable. Thirdly. The
   employment of the archaic Hebrew character, which was out of use in the
   second century of our era. Supposing that it had been attempted to
   bring back the national character, they would not have given them
   fashioned so grand and handsome. Fourthly, The form of the temple
   tetrastyle surmounted by a star. This form does not correspond either
   more or less to that of the temple of Herod. For one knows the
   scrupulous nicety that the ancient masters took to reproduce the
   features of the principal temple of the city exactly, by slight but
   very expressive touches.

   The temple of the Jewish money, on the contrary, without the triangular
   pediment, and with its gate of a singular fashion, represents the
   second temple, that of the time of the Maccabees, which appears to have
   been tolerably shabby. If we reject that hypothesis, and which must
   belong to the second revolt, the types which bear the figure of the
   temple, and the era of "the liberation of Jerusalem," we say that the
   deliverance of Jerusalem, and the reconstruction of the temple, were
   the only object of the revolts. It is not impossible that they
   portrayed these two events upon their money before they were realised.
   One takes for a fact that which one aspires to with such efforts.
   Bether, before all, was a sort of provisionary Jerusalem, a sacred
   asylum of Israel.

   The numismatism of the Crusades presents, besides, identically the same
   phenomena. After the loss of Jerusalem, in fact, the later authority,
   transported to St Jean de Acre, continued to mint money bearing the
   effigy of the Holy Sepulchre, with the words "+Sepulchri Domini," or
   "REX IERLM." The moneys of John of Brienne, who never possessed
   Jerusalem, present, also the image of the Holy Sepulchre. "This
   markedly characteristic type," says M. de Vogüé, "seems to be on the
   part of deposed kings a protestation against the invasion, and a
   maintenance of their rights in misfortune and exile." There are also
   moneys with the title Tvrris Davit, struck a long time after the taking
   of Jerusalem by the Mussulman. It must be admitted, however, that much
   of the Jewish money of the second revolt was struck away from
   Jerusalem. Every one, in fact, agrees that if the revolted were masters
   of Jerusalem, they were quickly driven out. One finds coins of the
   second and third year of the revolt. M. Caxdoni explained by this
   difference of the situation, the difference of the legends ysr'l
   lchrvt, and lchrvt yrvslm, the second only answering to the epoch when
   the rebels were masters of Jerusalem.

   Be that as it may, the possibility of a coinage struck at Bether is
   placed beyond doubt.

   That at one moment of the revolt, and amidst the numberless incidents
   of a war which occupied two or three years, the revolted occupied Ælia,
   and were speedily driven out; that the occupation of Jerusalem, in a
   word, was a brief episode of the aforesaid war, is strictly possible;
   it is little probable nevertheless.

   The "Legio Xa. Fratensis" which Titus left to guard the ruin, was there
   in the second and in the third century, and even to the time of the
   Lower Empire, as if nothing had happened in the interval. If the
   insurgents had been for a day masters of the sacred space, they would
   have clung to it with fury, they would have come running there from all
   directions; all the fighting men of Judea would above all bend their
   steps there; the height of the war would have been there; the temple
   would have been restored; the religion re-established; there would have
   been fought the last battle; and as in 70 the fanatics would have
   caused a general slaughter on the ruins of the temple, or, failing
   them, on its site. Now it is nothing of the sort. The grand siege
   operation took place at Bether, nigh to Jerusalem; no trace of the
   scuffle on the site of the temple in the Jewish tradition, not a
   memento of a fourth temple, nor of a return to the religious
   ceremonials.

   It seems certain, then, that under Hadrian Jerusalem did not suffer a
   serious siege, did not undergo a fresh destruction.

   How could it be destroyed, I again repeat?

   On the supposition that Ælia did not begin to exist until 136, after
   the end of the war, how could one destroy a heap of ruins?

   On the supposition that there was an Alia, dated either 122 or a little
   after, one would destroy the beginnings of a new city which the Romans
   would substitute for the old one. What good would such a destruction
   effect, seeing that, far from relinquishing the idea of a new Jerusalem
   as irreverent, the Romans resume that idea from that time with more
   vigour than ever? What has been carelessly repeated about the plough
   which the Romans had passed over the soil of the temple and city, has
   no other foundations than the false Jewish traditions, referred to by
   the Talmud and St Jerome, wherein Terentius Rufus, who was charged by
   Titus to demolish Jerusalem, has been confounded by Tinlius Rufus, the
   imperial legate of the time of Hadrian. Here again the error has arisen
   from the historical delusion which has transferred to the war of
   Hadrian, which one knows is a trifle, the circumstances much better
   known of the war of Titus. It has often been attempted to find in the
   two bulls which are on the reverse of the medal of the foundation of
   Ælia Capitolina, a representation of a "Templum Aratum." These two
   bulls are simply a colonial emblem, and they represent the earnest
   hopes which the new "Coloni " entertained for the agriculture of Judea.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2] Zach. xiv. 1 et seq.

   [3] Euseb. H.E., iv. 5.

   [4] In Dan. xiv., Joel i., Habakkuk ii., Jerem. xxxi., Ezekiel v. 24.,
   Zach. viii. 14.

   [5] Contra, Jud. 13.

   [6] In Judæos, Homil. v. 2. Opp. 1, pp. 64-5 (Montf.) Cf. Seudas at the
   word bdelugma; Chronique d'Alex, year 119.
     __________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX II.

   The epoch when the book of Tobit was composed is very difficult to fix.
   In our time, the distinguished critics M. M. Hitzig, Volkmar Grætz,
   have ascribed that writing to the time of Trajan or of Hadrian. M.
   Grætz connects it with the circumstances which followed the war of
   Bar-Coziba, and in particular to the interdiction which according to
   him was made by the Romans as to the interment of the corpses of the
   massacred Jews. But besides the fact of a similar interdiction is not
   founded except upon that of passages of the Talmud stripped of serious
   historical value, the characteristic importance attributed in our book
   to the good work of interring the dead, explained itself in a manner
   much more profound, as we are just now going to show.

   Three great reasons, in our opinion, preclude us from accepting the
   Book of Tobit as being at a date so early,--forbid us to descend, at
   least for the composition of the book, beyond the year 70.

   Firstly, The prophecy of Tobit (xiii. 9 et seq., xiv. 4 et seq.), which
   ought naturally to be taken as a "prophetia post eventum," clearly
   mentions the destruction of Jerusalem by Nabuchodnosor (xiv. 4); the
   return of Zerubabel; the construction of the second temple, a temple
   very little to be compared to the first, very unworthy of the divine
   majesty (xiv. 5). But the dispersion of Israel would have its end, and
   again the temple would be rebuilt, with all the magnificence described
   by the prophets, to serve as a centre for the religion of the whole
   world.

   For the old prophet there was no destruction of the second temple; that
   temple would be the advent of the glory of Israel, would not disappear,
   except to give place to the eternal temple. M. Volkmar, M. Hitzig
   observe, it is true, that in the Fourth Book of Esdras, in Judith, and
   in much of the apocryphal book, the destruction of the temple by
   Nabuchodnosor is identified with the destruction of the temple by
   Titus, and that the reflections which are placed in the mouth of the
   fictitious prophet are those which happen after the year 70.

   But this opinion, besides being of such secondary application, is not
   here admissible. Evidently the verse 5 xiv. refers to the second
   temple. The remark that the new temple was very different from the
   first--for it was anything but majestic--is an allusion to Esd. iii.
   12, told in the style of Josephus, Ant. xi. iv. 2. Still more this
   important passage would lead one to think that at the time when the
   Book of Tobit was written, Herod had not as yet put forth his hand on
   the second temple in order that he might rebuild it, an event which
   took place the 19th year before J.C.

   The critics whom I now am fighting apply here the system, getting
   greatly into fashion, which seeks to base upon a passage of the pseudo
   Epistle of Barnabas, and according to whom there had been under the
   reign of Hadrian, a commencement of the rebuilding of the temple
   undertaken by consent with the Jews. It is to this reconstruction that
   may apply the passage of Tobit xiv. 5. But I have shown elsewhere that
   the interpretation of the false passage of Barnabas is wrong.

   Were it true, it would be singular that an abortive attempt, which
   would not be without interruption, should become thus the base of the
   whole apocalyptic system.

   Secondly, the verse xiv. 10 furnishes another proof of the composition,
   relatively old, of the Book of Tobit. "My Son, see what Aman did to
   Ahkiakar, who had nourished him, how he cast him from the light into
   darkness, and how he repaid him; but Ahkiakar was saved and Aman
   received the chastisement that he deserved; Manasse likewise gave him
   alms, and was saved from the deadly snare which Aman had spread for
   him; Aman fell into the snare and perished." This Ahkiakar was a nephew
   of Tobit's father, who figures in the book as the steward and maitre
   d'hotel of Esarhaddow. The part he plays is incidental and peculiar.

   The fashion in which he is spoken of, seems to show that he was known
   by some other means.

   The verse we are quoting does not explain this, unless one admits,
   parallelly to the Book of Tobit, another book where an infidel, called
   Aman, who had for foster-father a good Jew named Ahkiakar, that he
   repaid him with ingratitude and thrust him into prison, but Ahkiakar
   was saved and Aman was punished.

   This Aman was evidently, in the Jewish romances, the man who played the
   part of offering to others snares into which he himself fell, seeing
   that in the tales to which Tobit made allusion, the same Aman suffered
   the fate which he intended a certain Manasses to undergo. Impossible,
   in my opinion, not to see here a parallel of the Haman of the Book of
   Esther hung from the gallows where he hoped to hang Mordecai,
   foster-father of Esther.

   In a book composed in the year 100 or 135 of our time, all this is
   inconceivable. One must refer it to a time and to a Jewish society
   where the Book of Esther would exist under an entirely different form
   than that of our Bibles, and where the part of Mordecai was played by a
   certain Ahkiakar, also a servant of the king.

   Now the Book of Esther certainly existed, just as we have it, in the
   first century of our era, since Josephus knows of its being
   interpolated.

   Thirdly, an objection none the less grave against the method of M.
   Grætz is that, if the Book of Tobit was posterior to the defeat of
   Bar-Coziba, the Christians would not have adopted it. In the interval
   between Titus and Hadrian, the religious brotherhood of the Jews and
   the Christians is sufficient to account for the fact that books newly
   brought to light in the Jewish community, such as that of Judith, the
   apocalypse of Esdras, and that of Baruch, would pass without difficulty
   from the synagogue to the Church. After the intestine broils which
   accompanied the war of Bar-Coziba, there would be no room for this. The
   Jewish and Christian faiths are henceforth two enemies; nothing passed
   from one side to the other of the gulf which divide them. Besides, the
   synagogue really no longer created such books, calm, idyllic, without
   bigotry, without hate.

   After 135, Judaism produces the Talmud, a piece of dry and violent
   casuistry. The religious views are all profane, and of Persian origin,
   as that of the healing of demoniacs and of the blind by the viscera of
   fishes. This moderation of the marvellous, in consequence of which the
   two are cured, without miracle, by the prescriptions whereof those
   privileged of God have the secret, all this does not belong to the
   second century after J. C.

   The condition of the people at the time when our author wrote, was
   comparatively happy and tranquil, at least in the country where he
   composed it. The Jews appeared wealthy, they were in domestic service
   under the nobles, acting as go-betweens in all purchases, and occupying
   places of confidence, being employed as stewards, major-domos, butlers,
   as we see in the Books of Esther and of Nehemiah. In place of being
   troubled by the rain, dreams, and passions which engrossed every Jew at
   the end of the first century of our era, the conscience of the author
   is serene in a high degree. He is not exactly a Messianist. He believes
   in a wonderful future for Jerusalem, but without any miracle from
   heaven, or Messiah as king. The book then is, in our opinion, anterior
   to the second century of our era. By the pious sentiment which there
   reigns, it is far behind the Book of Esther, a book from which all
   religion sentiment is totally absent. It might be imagined that Egypt
   was the spot where such a romance could possibly have been composed, if
   the certainty that the original text was written in Hebrew had not
   created a difficulty. The Jews of Egypt did not write in that language.
   I do not think, however, that the book was composed at Jerusalem or in
   Judea. What the author intends is to cheer up the provincial Jew, who
   has a horror of schism, and abides in communion with Jerusalem.

   The Persian ideas which fill the book, the intimate acquaintance which
   the author possesses of the great cities of the East, although he makes
   strange mistakes as to the distances, bring one to imagine that he is
   in Mesopotamia, particularly at Adiabene, where the Jews were in a very
   flourishing condition in the middle of the fast century of our era.

   In supposing that the book was thus composed about the year 50 in Upper
   Syria, one can, it seems to me, satisfy the exigencies of the problem.
   The state of the usages and of the ideas of the Jews; above all, that
   which concerns the bread of the Gentiles, recalls the time which
   preceded the revolt under Nero. The description of the eternal
   Jerusalem seems based upon the Apocalypse (ch. xxi.), not that one of
   the authors had copied from the other, but that they drew from a source
   of mutual imaginations. The demonology, especially the circumstance of
   the devil bound in the deserts of Upper Egypt, recall the Evangelist
   Mark. Lastly, The form of the personal memoirs, which the Greek text
   presents, at least in the opening pages, makes one think of the Book of
   Nehemiah: that form was no longer in use in the apocryphas posterior to
   the year 70. The inductions which lead one to assign the date of the
   composition to an anterior date, inductions which we have not
   dissembled, are demolished by the considerations which prevent us, on
   the other side, attributing to the book a great antiquity. One
   important fact, indeed, is that one does not find, neither amongst the
   Jews nor the Christians, any mention of the Book of Tobit before the
   end of the second century. Now it is necessary to confess that if the
   Christians of the first and second century possessed the book, they
   would have found it in perfect harmony with their sentiments. Let it be
   Clement Romain, for example; certainly if he had had such a writing at
   hand, he would have quoted it, just as he quotes the Book of Judith. If
   the book had been anterior to Jesus Christ, one cannot comprehend that
   it would have remained in such obscurity.

   On the contrary, if one admits that it was composed in Oschoene in
   Adialene a few years before the grand catastrophes of Judea, one may
   suppose that the Jews engaged in the struggle would have had knowledge
   of it. The book was not yet translated into Greek: the greater part of
   the Christians could not read it. Lymmachus or Theodosius would have
   been found in possession of the original, and they would have
   translated it. In that case, the fortunes of the book amongst the
   Christians would be commenced.

   One leading element of the question, which has not been used here by
   the interpreters, are the analogies which a sagacious criticism has
   discovered between the Jewish narrative and that collection of tales
   which have gone round the world, without distinction of language or
   race. Studied from this point of view, the Book of Tobit seems to us
   like the Hebrew and godly version of a tale which is related in
   Armenia, in Russia, amongst the Tartars, and the Higanes, and which is
   probably of Babylonian origin. A traveller finds in the roadway the
   corpse of a man which had been refused sepulture because he had not
   paid his debts. He stopped to bury him. Soon afterwards, a companion,
   clothed in white, offers to journey with him. This companion gets the
   traveller out of a bad scrape, procures riches for him, and a charming
   wife, who wrests him away from the evil spirits. At the moment of
   parting, the traveller offers him the half of all that which he had
   gained, thanks to him, save and except his wife, and naturally so. The
   companion demands his half share of the woman: great perplexity arises!
   At the moment when he is about to proceed to make that strange
   division, the companion reveals himself--he is the ghost of the dead
   man whom the traveller had buried.

   No doubt that the Book of Tobit is an adaptation according to Jewish
   ideas of that old narrative, popular throughout the whole of the East.
   It is this that explains the fantastical importance assigned to the
   burial of the dead, which constitutes a remarkable feature of our book.
   Nowhere else in the Jewish literature is the burial of the dead placed
   on the same footing as that of the observance of the Law. The
   resemblance to the tales of the East confirms thus our hypothesis
   concerning the Mesopotamian origin of the book. The Jews of Palestine
   did not listen to these pagan tales. Those of Oschoene would be more
   open to the talk of those outside them. We most add that the Book of
   Esther could not have existed in that country in the form which it was
   known in Judea: this will explain the strange passage concerning Aman
   and Ahkiahkar.

   Our hypothesis then is that Book of Tobit was composed in Hebrew in the
   north of Syria, towards the year 40 or 50 after J.C.; that it was at
   first little known by the Jews in Palestine; that it was translated
   into Greek towards the year 160 by the Judeo-Christian translators, and
   that it was immediately adapted by the Christians.

    THE END
     __________________________________________________________________

   London: Printed by the Temple Publishing Company.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Leviticus

   [1]18:5

   Numbers

   [2]24:17

   Judges

   [3]13

   Psalms

   [4]96:10

   Isaiah

   [5]7:14

   Jeremiah

   [6]31:1-40

   Ezekiel

   [7]5:24

   Daniel

   [8]14

   Joel

   [9]1:1-20

   Habakkuk

   [10]2:1-20

   Zechariah

   [11]8:14   [12]14:1

   John

   [13]1:1-14

   1 Timothy

   [14]2:9-15   [15]4:8   [16]5:1

   2 Timothy

   [17]4:2

   Titus

   [18]3:10

   2 Peter

   [19]3:1

   Revelation

   [20]21:1-27

   Tobit

   [21]13:9   [22]14:4   [23]14:4   [24]14:5   [25]14:5   [26]14:5
   [27]14:10
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * GLUKON: [28]1
     * IESOUS ChRISTOS ThEOU UIO OGER STAUDOS: [29]1
     * IChThUE: [30]1
     * IONOPOLEITON: [31]1
     * Methorion pneuma: [32]1
     * Peri tes meta ton Christon hustates Ioudaion poliorchias: [33]1
     * bdelugma: [34]1
     * neanis: [35]1
     * pansperma: [36]1
     * parthenos: [37]1
     * poliorchia: [38]1
     * poliorchiai: [39]1
     * Archaios aner: [40]1
     * He kata Andrianon hustate Ioudaion poliorchias: [41]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

     * ysr'l lchrvt: [42]1
     * lchrvt yrvslm: [43]1
     * smvn: [44]1
     * smnv: [45]1
     * smts: [46]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Animula, vagula, blandula: [47]1
     * Corpus juris: [48]1
     * Græculus: [49]1
     * Hic cestus artemque repono.: [50]1
     * Judicare seculum per ignem: [51]1
     * Periodi: [52]1 [53]2 [54]3 [55]4
     * Philosophus: [56]1
     * Pius: [57]1
     * Quod semper quod ubique.: [58]1
     * Si vos liberique vestri valetis, bene est; ego quidem et exereitus
       valemus.: [59]1
     * ad nauseam: [60]1
     * animalculæ: [61]1
     * canopus: [62]1
     * confector: [63]1
     * coenaculum: [64]1
     * coetus illiciti: [65]1
     * ecclesia: [66]1 [67]2 [68]3
     * elysium: [69]1
     * episcopi: [70]1 [71]2
     * fiscus judaicus: [72]1
     * illicita collegia: [73]1
     * interregnum: [74]1
     * iterum crucifigi: [75]1
     * memoriæ: [76]1
     * minutiæ: [77]1
     * misericordiæ: [78]1
     * modus vivendi: [79]1
     * non ad narrandum, sed ad probandum: [80]1
     * pallium: [81]1
     * pari passu: [82]1
     * patera: [83]1
     * presbyteri: [84]1 [85]2 [86]3
     * prophetia post eventum: [87]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * Historie Ecclesiastique: [88]1
     * Priéres: [89]1
     * Reconnaissances: [90]1
     * chapelle ardent: [91]1
     * clientèle: [92]1
     * comtes: [93]1
     * curé: [94]1
     * enfant terrible: [95]1
     * esprit de famille: [96]1
     * fiancés: [97]1
     * fêtes: [98]1 [99]2
     * maitre d'hotel: [100]1
     * merveilles: [101]1
     * mise en scene: [102]1 [103]2
     * naïveté: [104]1
     * personnel: [105]1
     * point d'appui: [106]1
     * protégé: [107]1
     * régime: [108]1
     * résumé: [109]1 [110]2
     * éclat: [111]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [112]i  [113]ii  [114]iii  [115]iv  [116]v  [117]vi  [118]vii
   [119]viii  [120]1  [121]2  [122]3  [123]4  [124]5  [125]6  [126]7
   [127]8  [128]9  [129]10  [130]11  [131]12  [132]13  [133]14  [134]15
   [135]16  [136]17  [137]18  [138]19  [139]20  [140]21  [141]22  [142]23
   [143]24  [144]25  [145]26  [146]27  [147]28  [148]29  [149]30  [150]31
   [151]32  [152]33  [153]34  [154]35  [155]36  [156]37  [157]38  [158]39
   [159]40  [160]41  [161]42  [162]43  [163]44  [164]45  [165]46  [166]47
   [167]48  [168]49  [169]50  [170]51  [171]52  [172]53  [173]54  [174]55
   [175]56  [176]57  [177]58  [178]59  [179]60  [180]61  [181]62  [182]63
   [183]64  [184]65  [185]66  [186]67  [187]68  [188]69  [189]70  [190]71
   [191]72  [192]73  [193]74  [194]75  [195]76  [196]77  [197]78  [198]79
   [199]80  [200]81  [201]82  [202]83  [203]84  [204]85  [205]86  [206]87
   [207]88  [208]89  [209]90  [210]91  [211]92  [212]93  [213]94  [214]95
   [215]96  [216]97  [217]98  [218]99  [219]100  [220]101  [221]102
   [222]103  [223]104  [224]105  [225]106  [226]107  [227]108  [228]109
   [229]110  [230]111  [231]112  [232]113  [233]114  [234]115  [235]116
   [236]117  [237]118  [238]119  [239]120  [240]121  [241]122  [242]123
   [243]124  [244]125  [245]126  [246]127  [247]128  [248]129  [249]130
   [250]131  [251]132  [252]133  [253]134  [254]135  [255]136  [256]137
   [257]138  [258]139  [259]140  [260]141  [261]142  [262]143  [263]144
   [264]145  [265]146  [266]147  [267]148  [268]149  [269]150  [270]151
   [271]152  [272]153  [273]154  [274]155  [275]156  [276]157  [277]158
   [278]159  [279]160  [280]161  [281]162  [282]163  [283]164  [284]165
   [285]166  [286]167  [287]168  [288]169  [289]170  [290]171  [291]172
   [292]173  [293]174  [294]175  [295]176  [296]177  [297]178  [298]179
   [299]180  [300]181  [301]182  [302]183  [303]184  [304]185  [305]186
   [306]187  [307]188  [308]189  [309]190  [310]191  [311]192  [312]193
   [313]194  [314]195  [315]196  [316]197  [317]198  [318]199  [319]200
   [320]201  [321]202  [322]203  [323]204  [324]205  [325]206  [326]207
   [327]208  [328]209  [329]210  [330]211  [331]212  [332]213  [333]214
   [334]215  [335]216  [336]217  [337]218  [338]219  [339]220  [340]221
   [341]222  [342]223  [343]224  [344]225  [345]226  [346]227  [347]228
   [348]229  [349]230  [350]231  [351]232  [352]233  [353]234  [354]235
   [355]236  [356]237  [357]238  [358]239  [359]240  [360]241  [361]242
   [362]243  [363]244  [364]245  [365]246  [366]247  [367]248  [368]249
   [369]250  [370]251  [371]252  [372]253  [373]254  [374]255  [375]256
   [376]257  [377]258  [378]259  [379]260  [380]261  [381]262  [382]263
   [383]264  [384]265  [385]266  [386]268  [387]269  [388]270  [389]271
   [390]272  [391]273  [392]274  [393]275  [394]276  [395]277  [396]278
   [397]279  [398]280  [399]281  [400]282  [401]283  [402]284  [403]285
   [404]286  [405]287  [406]288  [407]289  [408]290  [409]291  [410]292
   [411]293  [412]294  [413]295  [414]296  [415]297  [416]298  [417]299
   [418]300
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=18&scrV=5#xiv-p2.1
   2. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=24&scrV=17#xiii-p13.1
   3. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=13&scrV=0#xxx-p12.12
   4. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=10#xvi-p4.1
   5. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#ix-p12.1
   6. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=1#xxx-p12.8
   7. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=5&scrV=24#xxx-p12.9
   8. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=14&scrV=0#xxx-p12.5
   9. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxx-p12.6
  10. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxx-p12.7
  11. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=8&scrV=14#xxx-p12.10
  12. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=1#xxx-p12.2
  13. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p21.1
  14. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=9#viii-p15.1
  15. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#viii-p18.2
  16. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=1#viii-p12.1
  17. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=2#viii-p17.1
  18. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=10#viii-p17.2
  19. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=1#ix-p4.1
  20. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=1#xxxi-p18.1
  21. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=13&scrV=9#xxxi-p3.1
  22. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=14&scrV=4#xxxi-p3.2
  23. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=14&scrV=4#xxxi-p3.4
  24. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=14&scrV=5#xxxi-p3.5
  25. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=14&scrV=5#xxxi-p5.1
  26. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=14&scrV=5#xxxi-p6.1
  27. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=14&scrV=10#xxxi-p8.1
  28. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-p1.2
  29. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-p13.1
  30. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-p13.2
  31. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-p1.3
  32. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-p1.3
  33. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p11.3
  34. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p12.14
  35. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ix-p12.3
  36. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-p1.2
  37. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ix-p12.2
  38. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p11.4
  39. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p15.1
  40. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-p14.2
  41. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p11.2
  42. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p22.4
  43. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p22.5
  44. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p19.1
  45. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p19.2
  46. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p19.3
  47. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-p6.1
  48. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-p4.1
  49. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-p1.2
  50. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ii-p5.1
  51. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-p14.1
  52. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-p10.1
  53. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-p10.2
  54. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-p11.1
  55. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-p18.1
  56. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-p5.2
  57. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-p5.1
  58. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-p14.1
  59. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-p23.1
  60. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-p18.1
  61. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxii-p9.1
  62. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-p3.2
  63. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-p21.2
  64. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-p11.2
  65. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-p11.1
  66. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-p2.1
  67. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-p2.2
  68. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-p3.1
  69. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-p3.1
  70. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-p4.1
  71. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-p4.2
  72. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-p1.2
  73. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-p11.2
  74. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iv-p4.1
  75. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-p23.1
  76. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-p20.1
  77. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-p3.1
  78. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-p4.3
  79. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-p1.2
  80. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p8.1
  81. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-p10.1
  82. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-p27.1
  83. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-p2.2
  84. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-p20.1
  85. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-p2.1
  86. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-p6.1
  87. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxxi-p3.3
  88. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-p11.1
  89. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-p9.1
  90. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-p1.2
  91. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-p21.1
  92. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-p5.1
  93. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-p3.1
  94. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-p22.1
  95. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-p14.2
  96. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-p4.2
  97. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-p4.1
  98. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-p11.1
  99. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-p14.1
 100. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxxi-p8.2
 101. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-p14.1
 102. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-p11.1
 103. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-p9.1
 104. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-p12.1
 105. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-p16.1
 106. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-p24.1
 107. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ii-p4.1
 108. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xx-p8.1
 109. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-p7.1
 110. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-p1.2
 111. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvii-p8.1
 112. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#i-Page_i
 113. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#i-Page_ii
 114. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#i-Page_iii
 115. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ii-Page_iv
 116. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ii-Page_v
 117. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ii-Page_vi
 118. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ii-Page_vii
 119. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ii-Page_viii
 120. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ii-Page_1
 121. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_2
 122. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_3
 123. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_4
 124. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_5
 125. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_6
 126. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_7
 127. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_8
 128. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_9
 129. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_10
 130. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_11
 131. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iii-Page_12
 132. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iv-Page_13
 133. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iv-Page_14
 134. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iv-Page_15
 135. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iv-Page_16
 136. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#iv-Page_17
 137. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#v-Page_18
 138. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#v-Page_19
 139. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#v-Page_20
 140. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#v-Page_21
 141. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#v-Page_22
 142. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#v-Page_23
 143. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#v-Page_24
 144. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vi-Page_25
 145. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vi-Page_26
 146. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vi-Page_27
 147. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vi-Page_28
 148. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vi-Page_29
 149. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vi-Page_30
 150. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vi-Page_31
 151. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vi-Page_32
 152. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vi-Page_33
 153. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_34
 154. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_35
 155. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_36
 156. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_37
 157. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_38
 158. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_39
 159. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_40
 160. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_41
 161. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_42
 162. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_43
 163. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_44
 164. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#vii-Page_45
 165. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_46
 166. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_47
 167. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_48
 168. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_49
 169. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_50
 170. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_51
 171. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_52
 172. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_53
 173. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_54
 174. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_55
 175. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_56
 176. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_57
 177. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#viii-Page_58
 178. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ix-Page_59
 179. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ix-Page_60
 180. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ix-Page_61
 181. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ix-Page_62
 182. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ix-Page_63
 183. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ix-Page_64
 184. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#ix-Page_65
 185. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_66
 186. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_67
 187. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_68
 188. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_69
 189. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_70
 190. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_71
 191. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_72
 192. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_73
 193. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_74
 194. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#x-Page_75
 195. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_76
 196. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_77
 197. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_78
 198. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_79
 199. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_80
 200. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_81
 201. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_82
 202. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_83
 203. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_84
 204. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xi-Page_85
 205. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_86
 206. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_87
 207. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_88
 208. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_89
 209. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_90
 210. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_91
 211. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_92
 212. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_93
 213. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_94
 214. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_95
 215. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_96
 216. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_97
 217. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_98
 218. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_99
 219. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_100
 220. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xii-Page_101
 221. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_102
 222. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_103
 223. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_104
 224. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_105
 225. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_106
 226. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_107
 227. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_108
 228. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_109
 229. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_110
 230. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_111
 231. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_112
 232. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_113
 233. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_114
 234. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiii-Page_115
 235. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_116
 236. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_117
 237. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_118
 238. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_119
 239. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_120
 240. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_121
 241. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_122
 242. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_123
 243. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_124
 244. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_125
 245. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_126
 246. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xiv-Page_127
 247. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_128
 248. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_129
 249. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_130
 250. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_131
 251. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_132
 252. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_133
 253. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_134
 254. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_135
 255. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_136
 256. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_137
 257. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_138
 258. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xv-Page_139
 259. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_140
 260. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_141
 261. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_142
 262. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_143
 263. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_144
 264. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_145
 265. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_146
 266. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_147
 267. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_148
 268. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_149
 269. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_150
 270. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_151
 271. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_152
 272. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_153
 273. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_154
 274. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_155
 275. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvi-Page_156
 276. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-Page_157
 277. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-Page_158
 278. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-Page_159
 279. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-Page_160
 280. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-Page_161
 281. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-Page_162
 282. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-Page_163
 283. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xvii-Page_164
 284. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xviii-Page_165
 285. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xviii-Page_166
 286. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xviii-Page_167
 287. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xviii-Page_168
 288. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xviii-Page_169
 289. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xviii-Page_170
 290. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xviii-Page_171
 291. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xviii-Page_172
 292. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_173
 293. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_174
 294. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_175
 295. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_176
 296. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_177
 297. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_178
 298. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_179
 299. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_180
 300. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_181
 301. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_182
 302. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_183
 303. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_184
 304. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_185
 305. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_186
 306. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_187
 307. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_188
 308. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xix-Page_189
 309. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xx-Page_190
 310. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xx-Page_191
 311. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xx-Page_192
 312. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xx-Page_193
 313. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xx-Page_194
 314. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xx-Page_195
 315. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xx-Page_196
 316. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_197
 317. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_198
 318. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_199
 319. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_200
 320. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_201
 321. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_202
 322. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_203
 323. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_204
 324. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_205
 325. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_206
 326. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_207
 327. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_208
 328. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_209
 329. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxi-Page_210
 330. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxii-Page_211
 331. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxii-Page_212
 332. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxii-Page_213
 333. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxii-Page_214
 334. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxii-Page_215
 335. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxii-Page_216
 336. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_217
 337. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_218
 338. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_219
 339. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_220
 340. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_221
 341. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_222
 342. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_223
 343. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_224
 344. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_225
 345. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_226
 346. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_227
 347. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiii-Page_228
 348. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_229
 349. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_230
 350. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_231
 351. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_232
 352. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_233
 353. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_234
 354. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_235
 355. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_236
 356. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_237
 357. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_238
 358. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_239
 359. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_240
 360. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_241
 361. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxiv-Page_242
 362. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-Page_243
 363. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-Page_244
 364. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-Page_245
 365. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-Page_246
 366. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-Page_247
 367. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-Page_248
 368. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-Page_249
 369. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-Page_250
 370. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxv-Page_251
 371. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvi-Page_252
 372. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvi-Page_253
 373. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvi-Page_254
 374. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvi-Page_255
 375. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvi-Page_256
 376. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvi-Page_257
 377. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvi-Page_258
 378. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvii-Page_259
 379. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvii-Page_260
 380. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvii-Page_261
 381. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvii-Page_262
 382. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvii-Page_263
 383. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvii-Page_264
 384. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvii-Page_265
 385. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxvii-Page_266
 386. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_268
 387. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_269
 388. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_270
 389. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_271
 390. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_272
 391. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_273
 392. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_274
 393. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_275
 394. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_276
 395. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_277
 396. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_278
 397. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_279
 398. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxviii-Page_280
 399. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_281
 400. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_282
 401. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_283
 402. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_284
 403. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_285
 404. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_286
 405. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_287
 406. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_288
 407. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_289
 408. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_290
 409. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxix-Page_291
 410. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-Page_292
 411. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-Page_293
 412. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-Page_294
 413. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-Page_295
 414. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-Page_296
 415. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxx-Page_297
 416. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxxi-Page_298
 417. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxxi-Page_299
 418. file:///ccel/r/renan/hadrian_pius/cache/hadrian_pius.html3#xxxi-Page_300
