     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: A History of the Methodist Episcopal Church. Volume II.
      Creator(s): Bangs, Nathan, D.D.
     Print Basis: T. Mason and G. Lane, 1839
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; History
      LC Call no: BX8235.B35 1838 V.2
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Protestantism

                  Post-Reformation

                  Other Protestant denominations

                  Methodism
     __________________________________________________________________

   A History Of The

   Methodist Episcopal Church

By Nathan Bangs, D.D.

   VOLUME II

   (Third Revised Edition, Published in 1853)

   FROM THE YEAR 1792 TO THE YEAR 1812.

   THIRD EDITION, REVISED AND CORRECTED.

   "How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob; and thy tabernacles, O Israel,"
   Numbers xxiv, 5.

   "Behold, I send an Angel before thee -- beware of him, and obey his
   voice; provoke him not. -- If thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do
   all that I speak, then I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and an
   adversary to thine adversaries,"
   Exod. xxiii, 20-22.

   NEW-YORK:

   PUBLISHED BY T. MASON AND G. LANE,

   FOR THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH,

   AT THE CONFERENCE OFFICE, 200 MULBERRY-STREET.

   J. Collord, Printer.

   1839.

   Entered according to act of Congress, in the year 1838, by T. Mason

   & G. Lane, in the clerk's office of the Southern District of New York
     __________________________________________________________________

Volume II
     __________________________________________________________________

CONTENTS

BOOK IV

  From 1792 to 1812

  CHAPTER 1

   Methodism won its way; satisfaction in the doings of the conference of
   1792; conferences and circuits; efforts to establish district schools;
   labors of Bishop Asbury; Methodism in New England; preachers withdrawn,
   dead, and located, numbers, conferences, and circuits; Methodism in the
   west; affliction and labors of Bishop Asbury; others labor and suffer
   with him; Methodism in Vermont and Maine; in New Hampshire; days of
   fasting and thanksgiving; locations and deaths of preachers; number of
   members and conferences; poisonous effects of infidelity; a fast
   proclaimed; thanksgiving; numbers; conferences attended by Bishop
   Asbury; his labor and sufferings; meets the classes in New York;
   Benjamin Abbott; his labors and their effects; his last public service;
   his death; his character; death of other preachers; of Judge White;
   numbers

  CHAPTER 2

   Second General Conference; locations deprecated; chartered fund; church
   property; manner in, and purposes for which it is held; local
   preachers, rules for the government of rule respecting the use of
   ardent spirits; Dr. Coke offers his services to the conference, which
   were accepted; he returns to Europe; an incident of the voyage;
   conference adjourns.

  CHAPTER 3

   Conferences and circuits; illness of Bishop Asbury; his labors and
   sufferings; further sufferings at Tuckehoe, N.Y.; not able to attend
   conferences, but appoints Jesse Lee in his place; death of preachers,
   and number in the church; people of color special object of attention;
   rebuilding of the Light street church; extension of the work in Western
   New York; numbers; death and character of John Dickins; deaths and
   locations; revival in Upper Canada; Calvin Wooster; good results of;
   his labors; others enter into the work; opposition to it; Methodism in
   Ohio; in Georgia and Mississippi; locations and deaths -- death and
   character of H. C. Wooster; numbers.

  CHAPTER 4

   Third General Conference. The oldest journal commences here; debility
   of Bishop Asbury; conference requests a continuance of his services; to
   which he consents; the case of Dr. Coke considered; conference consents
   to his temporary residence in Europe; letter of Bishop Asbury to the
   British Conference; Dr. Coke returns; address of the American to the
   British Conference; election of Richard Whatcoat to the episcopal
   office; his labors and character; allowance of preachers; provision for
   married preachers; boundaries of conferences; the bishops authorized to
   ordain colored preachers adjournment.

  CHAPTER 5

   Great revivals; in Baltimore, Duck Creek, Eastern Shore of Maryland,
   Philadelphia, Connecticut, Vermont, New Hampshire; Commencement of camp
   meetings in the west; their good effects great meeting on Desha's
   Creek; conversion of individuals; opposition to these meetings -- how
   silenced; number of attendants increase; different denominations unite
   in them; powerful effects; labors of William McKendree; camp meetings
   spread other preachers enter into the work; providentially introduced;
   defence of these meetings; death of preachers, and numbers; labors of
   Bp. Asbury and Whatcoat; Methodism in N. hampshire and Vermont; in U.
   Canada; in Charleston, S.C.; deaths of preachers, and numbers; death
   and character of Mr. Jarratt; conferences; work of God prospers in the
   west; also in New Jersey; in the District of Columbia and in Vermont;
   Methodism in Montreal, L. C. and in Upper Canada; labors of the
   bishops; Baltimore conference; death and character of Bishop Asbury's
   mother; Methodism in Philadelphia; numbers; conference in Boston;
   progress of the work by means of camp-meetings in Virginia, Maryland,
   North and South Carolina, and Georgia; extends to Western New York and
   Lower Canada; deaths of preacher; comparative view of number in
   different sections of the country; influence of Methodism on the
   general state of society.

  CHAPTER 6

   Fourth General Conference; number and names of those Composing it;
   rules of proceeding and powers of the bishops; trial of a bishop,
   amendment of one article of faith, and sundry other alterations;
   addresses of the American to the British conference; boundaries of
   conferences; adjournment of the General Conference; effects of
   camp-meetings; influence declines in Kentucky; Springfield presbytery;
   wild excesses; Methodist adhere to their standards; Cumberland
   Presbytery; camp-meetings in Ohio; Methodism in Marietta; in the older
   states; in Illinois and upper Canada; state of things in Detroit;
   locations, deaths, and numbers, and conferences; general state of the
   work; death and character of Tobias Gibson; of Nicholas Watters and
   Wilson Lee; of others; numbers and conference; proposition of Bishop
   Asbury for a delegated General Conference; rejected by Virginia
   conferences; Dr. Cooks marriage and proposition to reside in America;
   Methodism in Louisiana; in Mississippi; in lower Canada, particularly
   Quebec; French mission; in Massachusetts, and Eastern Shore, Md; Bishop
   Asbury in the west; in Charleston, S. C.; death and character of Bishop
   Whatcoat; withdrawings, locations, and expulsions, numbers and
   conferences; Bishop Asbury's travels and prayers; Methodism in
   Missouri; in Savannah, Ga; deaths and numbers.

  CHAPTER 7

   General Conference of 1808 -- number of members; the case of Dr. Coke
   -- his letter to the General Conference; conference dissatisfied with
   him; his letter to Bishop White; the bishop's answer; remarks on this
   correspondence; Dr. Coke's explanatory letter; letter to Dr. Coke;
   resolutions in reference to Dr. Coke; address of the British to the
   American conference; of the American to the British conference; defence
   of those measures; measures for a delegated General Conference;
   Memorial of the New York conference; concurred in by other conferences;
   referred to a committee; report, and its rejection; a source of grief;
   second report accepted; well received; election of William McKendree to
   the episcopal office; sketch of his character and labors; E. Cooper
   resigns his station as book steward, and J. Wilson and D. Hitt
   appointed; local deacons, raising supplies, settling disputes, and
   adjournment of conference; minute respecting Dr. Coke.

  CHAPTER 8

   Extent of the annual conferences; general satisfaction in what had been
   done; Bishop Asbury relieved in his labors by his new colleague; Bishop
   McKendree enters upon his work; their manner of traveling; privations
   and enjoyments; extension of the work in Ohio; singular conversion;
   progress of the work in New England; revival in the city of New York;
   locations and deaths of preachers; account of Captain Webb; numbers;
   Methodism in the west; in Boston; origin of camp meetings; manner in
   which they are held; Account of one held on Long Island, N.Y.; another
   in the west; numbers; Genesee conference; Methodism in Cincinnati; in
   Indiana; revival in New york; locations and deaths of preachers;
   character of Joseph Everett; of John Wilson; numbers; rumors of war;
   earthquakes; want of houses of worship; of parsonages; Bishop Asbury in
   Upper Canada; in the western states; Methodism in Pittsburg; locations
   and death of preachers; numbers.

BOOK V

  CHAPTER 1

   First delegated General Conference; names of its members; rules;
   address from Bishop McKendree; referred to committees; Bishop Asbury's
   desire to visit his native land; Genesee and other conferences;
   ordination of local deacons; rule for settling disputes; how state of
   itinerant in the M.E.C.; sad effects of this state of things; Lee's
   History and efforts to obtain a better; church property; provision for
   worn out preachers, widows, and orphans and for missionary purposes;
   address of G. C to the members of the church; presiding elder question;
   history of; arguments for and against the measure; end of the
   controversy; stationing power; its use.

  CHAPTER 2

   War declared; consequences of this; growing importance of the West;
   commission from the A. B. C. F. M. sent there; report; Bishop Asbury
   declines in health; remarks on the war and effects of intoxicating
   liquors; state of the work; numbers; a distressing times on the
   fronters; secession of Pliny Brett; general state of things; labors of
   Bishop Asbury; makes his will; mutual affection and influence of the
   bishops; numbers; cause of the increase; the war rages; its effects on
   religion; dangerous illness, and recovery of Bishop Asbury; resumes his
   travels; his debilitated appearance; death and character of Mr.
   Otterbein, and others connected with him; death of Dr. Coke; locations;
   deaths and numbers; Bishop McKendree; conversation of Bishop Asbury
   with him; the war draws near its termination; locations, deaths and
   numbers; peace and its consequences; Bishops Asbury and McKendree;
   locations -- death of Learner Blackman; of Richman Nolley; of other
   preachers; decline of Bishop Asbury; last entry in his journals, and
   his last sermon; his death and burial; inscription on his tombstone;
   his life never written; his character; concluding remarks; Note A.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    BOOK IV

    From 1792 to the First Delegated General Conference in 1812
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 1

    From the close of the General Conference of 1792 to the close of the Annual
    Conferences of 1796

   We have hitherto traced the progress of Methodism in this country, from
   its small beginning in 1766 to the close of the first General
   Conference in 1792. Though it had difficulties, both internal and
   external, to contend with, it won its way through every opposition,
   maintaining the purity of its character, and exerting its hallowing
   influence on society, in the meantime molding itself into a more
   compact form and firmer consistency, until, we have seen, it was
   organized in One Supreme judicatory to which its destinies, under God,
   were committed. I shall now proceed to narrate, as accurately as
   possible, its subsequent progress, both in its general councils and in
   its various ramifications over this extended continent.

  1793

   Though the labors of the conference, detailed in the former chapter,
   were great, and the subjects of deliberation elicited very considerable
   controversy, yet the preachers generally departed to their respective
   spheres of labor with promptness and cheerfulness; and the people, with
   the exception of those who were poisoned with the O'Kelleyan schism,
   manifested great satisfaction at what had been done. It was, indeed,
   manifest to all impartial men that the members of this conference
   "sought not their own" glory, temporal aggrandizement, ease, or
   pleasure, but the glory of God and the good of mankind.

   This year there were no less than nineteen conferences held in
   different parts of the country, for the convenience of the preachers
   and people, and it was upward of eleven months from the time of the
   first to the last, -- the times and places of which, not affording much
   matter of general interest, I think not necessary now or hereafter to
   specify. In these several conferences the following twelve circuits
   were added: -- Swanino, in Virginia; Haw River, in North Carolina;
   Hinkstone, in the West; Washington, Maryland; Freehold, New Jersey;
   Herkimer and Seneca Lake, New York; Tolland and New London,
   Connecticut; Province of Maine, Maine; Prince George, in Maryland;
   Savannah, in Georgia.

   An effort was made this year for the erection of district schools, in
   imitation of the Kingswood School, established by Mr. Wesley, in
   England; and an address was drawn up by Bishop Asbury to the members of
   the Church, with a view to call their attention to the importance of
   this subject. Several such were accordingly commenced soon after; but
   whether for want of skill in their management, or patronage from the
   people, or more probably from both of these causes, they lingered for a
   short time, and then ceased to exist. These failures in an attempt to
   impart the benefits of a Christian education made an impression upon
   the mind of the good bishop and others that the Methodists were not
   called to attend to these things and hence for several years they were
   suffered to sleep. This subject has, however, more latterly awakened a
   very general interest in the Church, and the cause of education has
   been prosecuted with vigor and success, as will be noticed in the
   proper place.

   After the adjournment of the conference, Bishop Asbury commenced his
   tour of the continent by traveling through the southern states, and
   thence west over the Allegheny Mountains into Tennessee and Kentucky,
   contending with almost all sorts of difficulties, and yet everywhere
   scattering the seeds of eternal life. From the west he returned and
   visited the northern and eastern states, and on arriving at the city of
   New York, he says, after mentioning that be had been much afflicted in
   body, particularly with an inflammatory rheumatism in his feet, --

   "I have found, by secret search, that I have not preached
   sanctification as I should have done. If I am restored, this shall be
   my theme more pointedly than ever, God being my helper. I have been
   sick upward of four months, during which time I have attended to my
   business, and rode, I suppose, not less than three thousand miles."

   In this journey he had the satisfaction to behold, in many places, a
   revival of the work of God, which, amid the gloom occasioned by his
   debility, the roughness of the roads, and the coarseness of his fare,
   particularly in the new countries, made him "rejoice in hope of the
   glory of God." While a foundation was laying for an extensive work of
   God in the western states, New England began more fully to "stretch out
   her hands to God." This year there were two districts in New England,
   one of which was under the charge of the Rev. Ezekiel Cooper, and the
   other the Rev. George Roberts, both of whom were able ministers of the
   New Testament; and the Rev. Jesse Lee, who had opened a way for the
   spread of Methodism in this country, was stationed in the province of
   Maine, and Lynn. Through their labors, and those preachers who were
   associated together under their direction, several new circuits were
   formed in Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island, and many
   societies were established.

   But this work did not go on without opposition. Though the civil
   regulations of the country did not allow the standing order to
   interpose their authority to prevent the Methodists from preaching, yet
   they were not allowed the full exercise of their ministry, particularly
   as respects uniting people in matrimony. Hence Mr. Roberts was
   prosecuted and fined for performing the marriage ceremony. As, however,
   this sort of persecution was becoming unpopular among the people, the
   more they were oppressed in this way, "the more they prospered," until
   finally all those legal barriers were removed out of the way, and the
   Methodists, as well as others, are protected in all their rights and
   privileges.

   Though it will be anticipating the chronological order of the history a
   little, yet I think it will give the reader a more intelligible idea of
   the progress of the work in this country, to connect a few particulars
   in this place. This year the New London circuit was formed. Though as
   early as 1789 preaching commenced in this city, yet no regular class
   was formed until the year 1793 and that consisted of fifty members. And
   it was not until 1798 that they succeeded in building a house of
   worship in New London, which was dedicated to God on the 22d of July of
   that year.

   Warren circuit, in Rhode Island, which included Warren, Newport,
   Providence, Cranston, and several places in Massachusetts, appears on
   the minutes of this year; and the first Methodist church which was
   built in Rhode Island was in the town of Warren; and the first sermon
   was preached in it Sept. 24, 1794.

   As perfect religious freedom was secured to the people by the original
   charter granted to the state of Rhode Island, and of course no form of
   Christianity was established by law, the Methodists met with less
   opposition there than they did in some other portions of New England.

   In Provincetown, on Cape Cod, which was first included in the minutes
   of 1795, there were some incidents attending the introduction of
   Methodism which, as they show the fruits of the carnal mind on the one
   hand, and the good providence of God on the other, may be worthy of
   record. It seems that a few in this place were brought under serious
   impressions, and began to hold meetings among themselves before they
   were visited by any preacher, and they had therefore no one competent
   to instruct and guide them. In this way they endeavored to strengthen
   each other's hands for some time, being much despised and persecuted by
   those who "knew not what spirit they were of;" until one of our
   preachers, who was on his passage from New York to St. John's, in New
   Brunswick, meeting with contrary winds, the vessel in which he sailed
   was compelled to anchor in the harbor of Provincetown. On going ashore,
   the preacher soon found these young converts, and at their invitation
   gave them a sermon. After staying with them a few days, and preaching
   several times, he left them with directions where they might apply for
   Methodist preachers. They accordingly sent to Boston for help, and were
   soon supplied.

   In consequence of these movements, when the Methodist preachers first
   visited the place, they were cordially received, treated with great
   kindness, and many attended their meetings. A society was soon formed,
   and several sinners awakened and converted to God, and added to the
   society. Their number daily increasing, they commenced building a house
   of worship. This provoked opposition, and the "sons of Belial"
   assembled in the night, took the greater part of the timber, which had
   been brought from a distance, at a considerable expense, threw it from
   the brow of a hill into the valley, cut it to pieces and built a pen
   with it, -- then taking a sailor's old hat, coat, and trousers, stuffed
   them so as to make them resemble a man, fastened the image on the top
   of the pen, and tarred and feathered it. This shameful conduct, so far
   from intimidating the brethren, or discouraging them in their efforts
   to erect a house for the worship of God, only served to stimulate them
   to renewed diligence; and by the month of January they had their house
   ready for use, and accordingly took possession of it in the name of the
   Lord.

   James O'Kelley, Rice Haggard, John Robertson, and John Allen, were
   returned in the minutes this year as withdrawn. Eighteen were located,
   and one, James Bell, was expelled. Benjamin Carter and John Sproul had
   died, both in peace.

   In making the above record, we cannot but notice the number of
   locations which took place in those early days of the Church, and
   which, indeed, continued to be numerous for many years thereafter. That
   this practice has had an unfavorable effect upon the interests of the
   Church, by depriving it of some of its tried and experienced ministers,
   must be evident to all; for though many of those who located retained
   their piety, and also their usefulness to some extent, yet it is
   manifest that their ministerial labors were very much contracted, and
   their usefulness proportionally circumscribed. These locations,
   however, were owing, in some measure at least, to the scanty support
   which was made for men of families, and the great difficulty of
   contending, under those circumstances, with the hardships of an
   itinerant life, particularly in the new countries. Hence the
   temptations which were held out to locate that they might provide a
   livelihood for their growing families. If the Methodist Episcopal
   Church has erred in any one thing more than another, it has been in
   neglecting to make that provision for its ministers which they needed,
   and which the gospel authorizes them to receive. A remedy for this evil
   is to be found in that spirit of liberality which Christianity
   inculcates, and which is essential to the existence and usefulness of a
   gospel ministry.

   The effect of the labors of this year may be seen in the following
   statement: --

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 51,416; Last Year: 52,109;
   Decrease: 693 -- Colored This Year: 16,227; Last Year: 13,871;
   Increase: 2,356 -- Total This Year: 67,643; Last Year: 65,980 --
   Increase: 1,663 -- Preachers This Year: 269; Last Year: 266; Increase:
   3.

   The reader will perceive that though there was an increase of 1,663 in
   the total number, there was a decrease of 693 among the white members.
   The effects of the O'Kelleyan secession began to be felt, particularly
   in Virginia, and some parts of North Carolina.

  1794

   The number of annual conferences was reduced this year to fourteen, as
   some of the preachers had complained of there being so many at such
   short distances, among other reasons, because it prevented the minutes
   from being printed until near the end of the year. This inconvenience,
   however, should have been submitted to rather than to have made it
   necessary for the preachers to assemble from such a vast distance, at
   the expense of so much time and money, as many of them did when,
   afterward, the number of conferences was reduced to seven. At these
   conferences the following new circuits were returned in the minutes: --
   Federal, in Maryland; Carlisle, in Pennsylvania; Leesburgh and
   Pendleton, in Virginia; Black Swamp, in South Carolina; New Hampshire,
   in New Hampshire; Marblehead, Orange, and Fitchburg, in Mass.; and
   Vermont, in Vermont; Oswegochee, in Upper Canada, was divided into two.

   In some of the southern states, Methodism was doomed to much suffering,
   arising out of the disputes and divisions occasioned by the O'Kelleyan
   secession, which has been already detailed. But while these things were
   transacting in those parts, to the grief of many pious hearts, the
   cause of Christ, through the labors of his faithful servants, was
   extending in more favored portions of our country We have before seen,
   that as early as 1786, the Methodist preachers had penetrated the
   Western wilderness beyond the Allegheny mountains, and that they had
   gradually extended their labors from year to year, being led on and
   encouraged in their work both by the example and precept of Bishop
   Asbury, who was generally in the foremost ranks when danger and
   hardship were to be encountered and endured. This year a conference was
   appointed to be held in Kentucky, on the 15th of April, and the bishop
   set off to meet his brethren at that place. On the 20th of January he
   reached the city of Charleston, S. C., where he found himself so
   unwell, that he was obliged to relinquish his intended journey to the
   west; and that the reader may see for himself the manner in which this
   apostolic man employed his time, the extent of his labors in the cause
   of God, and the privations to which he was often subjected, we will
   endeavor to follow him in some of his journeyings this year. After
   mentioning the kindness and hospitality with which he had been treated
   in his affliction, while at Charleston, he says, --

   "I have written largely to the west, and declined visiting those parts
   this year. The American Alps, the deep snows, the great rains, swimming
   the creeks and rivers, riding in the night, sleeping on the earthen
   floors, more or less of which I must experience, if I go to the western
   country, might, at this time, cost me my life. I have only been able to
   preach four times in three weeks. I have had sweet peace at times since
   I have been here; the love of meetings, especially those for prayer,
   the increase of hearers, the attention of the people, my own better
   feelings, and the increasing hope of good that prevails among the
   preachers, lead me to think that the needy shall not always be
   forgotten, nor the expectation of the poor perish."

   He remained in Charleston, employing his time in the best manner he
   could, while endeavoring to recruit his exhausted strength, until
   February 28th, when he set off on a tour through different parts of the
   southern country, visiting the churches, and setting things in order.
   On the 20th of March, he says, --

   "I directed my course, in company with my faithful fellow-laborer,
   Tobias Gibson, up the Catawba, settled mostly by the Dutch. A barren
   spot for religion. Having rode in pain twenty-four miles, we came,
   weary and hungry, to O_____'s tavern, and were glad to take what came
   to hand. Four miles forward we came to Homes' Ford, upon Catawba river,
   where we could neither get a canoe nor guide. We entered the water in
   an improper place, and were soon among the rocks and in the whirlpools.
   My head swam, and my horse was affrighted. The water was to my knees,
   and it was with difficulty we retreated to the same shore. We then
   called to a man on the other side, who came and piloted us across, for
   which I paid him well. My horse being afraid to take the water a second
   time, brother Gibson crossed and sent me his, and our guide took mine
   across. We went on, but our troubles were not at an end; night came on
   and it was very dark. It rained heavily, with powerful lightning and
   thunder. We could not find the path that turned out to Connell's.' In
   this situation we continued until midnight or past. At last we found a
   path which we followed until we came to dear old father Harper's
   plantation; we made for the house, and called; he answered, but
   wondered who it could be; he inquired whence we came; I told him we
   would tell him when we came in; for it was raining so powerfully that
   we had not much time to talk. When I came dripping into the house, he
   cried, God bless your soul, is it brother Asbury? Wife, get up.'"

   After such a salutation they felt themselves at home, though much
   fatigued from their exposure and long ride.

   After some farther remarks expressive of his thankfulness to God for
   the sweet peace of mind he enjoyed amid his physical sufferings and
   toilsome labors, he says, "This campaign has made me groan, being
   burdened." -- "I have provided brothers G. And L. for the westward. I
   wrote a plan for stationing, and desired the preachers to be, as I am,
   in the work. I have no interest, no passions, in their appointments; my
   only aim is to care and provide for the flock of Christ." -- "I feel
   that my sufferings have been good preaching to me -- especially in
   crossing the waters. I am solemnly moved in not visiting my Holstein
   and Kentucky brethren. It may be their interest to desire the
   preservation of my life. While living I may supply them with preachers,
   and with men and money. I feel resolved to be wholly the Lord's. Weak
   as I am, I have done nothing, I am nothing, only for Christ."

   From this part of the country he came north, though Virginia, and on to
   Baltimore, where he took sweet counsel in the midst of his old friends.
   Thence he passed on though Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York,
   visiting all the principal cities and towns on his way, attending
   conferences and preaching to the people, and passed into the New
   England states. The following are some of his pointed remarks upon the
   state of things in this country: --

   "Ah! here are walls of prejudice, but God can break them down. Out of
   fifteen United States, thirteen are free; but two are fettered with
   ecclesiastical chains -- taxed to support ministers, who are chosen by
   a small committee, and settled for life. [1] My simple prophecy is,
   that this must come to an end with the present century. [2] The Rhode
   Islanders began in time and are free. Hail, sons of liberty! Who first
   began the war?" (of the Revolution, doubtless is meant.) "Were it not
   Connecticut and Massachusetts? And priests are now saddled upon them. O
   what a happy people would these be, if they were not thus
   priest-ridden. [3] It is well for me that I am not stretching along,
   while my body is so weak, and the heat so intense." "I heard -- read a
   most severe letter from a citizen of Vermont to the clergy and
   Christians of Connecticut, striking at the foundation and principle of
   the hierarchy and the policy of Yale College, and the independent
   order. It was expressive of the determination of the Vermonters to
   continue free from ecclesiastical fetters, to follow the Bible, equal
   liberty to all denominations of Christians. If so, why may not the
   Methodists, who have been repeatedly solicited; visit these people
   also?"

   These extracts show, in a striking manner, the immense labors performed
   by this primitive bishop, in the name of Jesus Christ. Nor was he alone
   in these labors. His example provoked others to follow in the
   footsteps, who, though they were not called to travel so extensively,
   were equally assiduous, and alike successful in their endeavors to
   plant the standard of Jesus Christ in various parts of this continent.
   Among others we may mention a William Watters, the first Methodist
   preacher raised up in America, who traversed the western wilds, and
   labored in the woods of Kentucky; a Garrettson, who opened the way into
   the interior of New York state, and penetrated even to Vermont; a Lee,
   who led the way into New England, and laid the foundation for that work
   of God there which has since reared itself in beauty and glory, amid
   "fightings without and fears within;" a Roberts and a Cooper, who
   followed in the track marked out for them by Lee, and nobly stood their
   ground amid storms of reproach, and labors more abundant." These
   leaders of "God's sacramental host" being aided by their associates,
   all zealous for God and for the salvation of souls, were scattering the
   "good seed of the kingdom" in every direction, and we who have followed
   them have had the happiness of seeing it" take root and bear fruit," in
   some places thirty, in others sixty, and in some a hundred fold.

   In the preceding extract from Bishop Asbury's Journal, we have seen
   that he alludes to Vermont, to which they had been solicited to send
   preachers. It is well known that in this state there were no legal
   barriers in the way of any denomination of Christians, but that all
   were permitted the free and unrestrained exercise of their
   peculiarities. Although as early as 1788 Mr. Garrettson had visited the
   southern borders of the state, and preached in a few places, it was not
   until this year that any of our preachers obtained a permanent foothold
   here; but this year, Joshua Hull was sent to Vermont, and his labors
   were made a blessing to many. Since that time the cause of Methodism
   has advanced rapidly among the people in almost every part of the
   state, to the reformation and salvation of thousands of souls.

   This year also Methodism was introduced into the province of Maine, by
   the indefatigable labors of Jesse Lee. In Portland he preached in the
   Congregational church, and then passed on though Freeport and Bath,
   crossed the Kennebeck river, and went as far as the town of Penobscot.
   In most of the places he was cordially received, and succeeded in
   forming a regular circuit, and this laid a foundation for the permanent
   establishment of Methodism in Maine. He gives the following account of
   his first visit to Portsmouth: --

   "Sunday the 8th of September, I went to hear Mr. Watters in the
   forenoon and in the afternoon. After he was done, I went with some
   friends to the court-house, but the great men would not let us go into
   the house to preach, so I got on the step of the door of the
   court-house and began. When I commenced I had about a dozen people, but
   they soon began to flock together, and I had some hundreds of them to
   hear me before I had done. They stood in different parts of the
   streets. I found much freedom in speaking, and the word reached many of
   the hearts of the hearers, who were as solemn and attentive as though
   they had been in a meeting house."

   It may be remarked that the settlements along the Penobscot river at
   that time had been newly formed, and were destitute of settled pastors;
   hence the people were much gratified with the visit of Mr. Lee, and
   those who succeeded him; and though he had to contend with many
   difficulties, as a stranger bearing a message differing in so many
   particulars from what they had been accustomed to hear, yet God gave
   him favor in the eyes of the people, and strength to persevere in his
   good work, until he had opened a way for the establishment of regular
   preaching in that destitute part of the country.

   New Hampshire was also visited about this time. John Hill was the first
   Methodist preacher sent into that state but with what success I cannot
   tell, as we do not find any members returned on the minutes in that
   state for this year. At the several annual conferences for this year,
   the following resolutions were passed: --

   "It is most earnestly recommended by the conferences, that the last
   Friday in February, 1795, be set part throughout the United States, by
   the members of the Methodist Episcopal Church, as a day of solemn
   fasting and prayer, and that all worldly concerns be laid aside.

   "It is also recommended by said conferences, that the last Thursday in
   October be set apart as a day of solemn and general thanksgiving, and
   that alL servile labor be laid aside, and those days be observed with
   all the solemnity of a Sabbath."

   They furthermore said, "The bishops and conferences desire that the
   preachers generally change every six months, by the order of the
   presiding elder, whenever it can be made convenient."

   No less than twenty-eight preachers took a location this year, either
   in consequence of "weakness of body or family concerns." Two, Jeremiah
   Cosdon and Jethro Johnson, withdrew from the connection; and four were
   "dismissed for improper conduct." Four had died, namely, Philip Cox,
   Henry Birchett, James Wilson, and John Wayne.

   Of Philip Cox, who was an Englishman by birth, it is stated that he had
   been sixteen years in the ministry, during which time he had traveled
   extensively in several of the states, and preached the gospel with
   considerable success. He was a man of sound judgment, of quick
   apprehension, and a great lover of union, and often prayed and preached
   to the admiration of his hearers. He was among the pioneers of the
   western wilds, where he labored assiduously and strove to do good by
   the circulation of religious books. On his return from the west he was
   seized with a complaint which soon put a period to his existence.
   Though in his last moments, through the violence of his disease, he
   was, for the most part of the time, delirious, yet he gave evidence to
   his friends that he died in peace.

   Henry Birchett fell a martyr to his work, after having been in the
   traveling ministry only between five and six years. He was a native of
   Brunswick county, Virginia. He volunteered his services for four years
   in the dangerous stations of Kentucky and Cumberland, and wore himself
   out in preaching the gospel in these new countries. His name,
   therefore, stands enrolled among those worthy and self-denying men who
   hazarded their all for the sake of carrying the glad tidings of the
   gospel to the poor and the destitute, exposed in hunger, cold, and
   nakedness, and to the degradations of savages: for such was the state
   of things in Kentucky and other places where he traveled, that often
   even the necessaries of life could not be had, nor the wildernesses
   traversed without the danger of being intercepted by savage foes. But
   the meekness, love, prayers, sermons, and sufferings in the cause of
   Christ of Henry Birchett, will not be forgotten by the sons and
   daughters of Kentucky, who have reaped spiritual benefit from the work
   which was commenced by his labors and sacrifices, and has been since
   carried forward by his successors in the ministry.

   Of James Wilson and John Wayne, it is said that, after the former had
   labored in the ministry about six, and the latter about four years,
   with general acceptance, they both died in peace.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 52,794; Last Year: 51,416;
   Increase: 1,378 -- Colored This Year: 13,814; Last Year: 16,227;
   Decrease: 2,413 -- Total This Year: 66,608; Last Year: 67,643 --
   Decrease: 1,035 -- Preachers This Year: 301; Last Year: 269; Increase:
   32.

  1795

   The number of annual conferences was reduced this year to seven,
   greatly to the inconvenience of the preachers, and it is believed to
   the detriment of the work of God. This diminution in the number of the
   conferences was made in consequence of the general opposition of the
   preachers to having so many, by which they thought the powers of the
   conferences were abridged, and those of the bishop proportionally
   augmented; and hence, to take away all such ground of fear, the bishops
   yielded to the wishes of their brethren, notwithstanding they were
   satisfied that, otherwise, it was not for the best.

   Some idea may be formed of the extent of the annual conferences at this
   time, when it is considered that the New York conference comprehended
   within its bounds most of the state of New York, the whole of New
   England, and the province of Upper Canada; out of which have been since
   formed, the New England, Maine, New Hampshire, Troy, Oneida, Black
   River, and part of Genesee and the Canada conferences; and the other
   conferences were proportionally great in extent. Some of the circuits
   at that time included a larger extent of territory than districts do
   now, -- a four weeks' circuit often being not less than four hundred
   miles in circumference, and including from twenty to forty appointments
   in thirty days. Such were the labors of the Methodist ministry in those
   days.

   In consequence of reducing the number of annual conferences to seven,
   some of the preachers, who labored in the frontier circuits, had to
   come from two to four hundred miles to attend the conferences, which
   obliged them to leave their regular work from three to six weeks,
   during which time the people were unsupplied with the word and
   ordinances of the gospel. This, in addition to the expense of time and
   money consumed in traveling such a distance, was an evil of no small
   magnitude, and against which, a remedy has been since wisely provided
   in an increase of the number of the annual conferences.

   But the reduction in the number of conferences diminished naught from
   the labors of the superintendent, nor of those preachers who were
   fighting the battle, of the Lord in different parts of the great field
   in which they were employed. The former made his usual tour of the
   continent, extending his labors this year into the state of Vermont,
   where he preached in the woods in the town of Bennington, to a
   congregation made up, he says, of Deists, Universalists, and other
   sinners, some of whom seemed to be melted to tenderness under the word.

   About this time the minds of many people were corrupted by the
   deistical writings of Thomas Paine, whose effusions against the Bible
   were received with greater avidity by Americans on account of the
   eminent services he had rendered to his country during the war of the
   Revolution. But Thomas Paine as a politician and Thomas Paine as a
   theologian were very different men. His book, however, against the
   Bible, was published by the booksellers; which, together with others of
   a kindred character, were widely circulated, and they were exerting a
   most deleterious influence upon the minds of many of our citizens, and
   threatened to poison the fountains of knowledge with their pestiferous
   contents. It could hardly be otherwise, under these circumstances, than
   that immorality should abound, and the "love of many wax cold." And the
   unrestrained freedom of the press, together with the laxity with which
   the laws against vice were administered, threatened to deluge the
   country with ungodliness. To impress upon all, and more especially upon
   the members and friends of the Methodist Episcopal Church, the
   necessity of a more thorough and extensive reformation among all orders
   of people, a "GENERAL FAST" was recommended by the several annual
   conferences, in the following address to the people of their charge: --

   "It is recommended by the general traveling ministry of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church, that the first Friday in March, 1796, should be held
   as a most solemn day of fasting, humiliation, prayer, and supplication.
   It is desired that it should be attended to in all our societies and
   congregations, with Sabbatical strictness -- that we should bewail our
   manifold sins and iniquities -- our growing idolatry, which is
   covetousness and the prevailing love of the world -- our shameful
   breach of promises, and irreligious habits of making contracts, even
   without the intention of honest heathens to fulfill them -- our
   superstition, the trusting in ceremonial and legal righteousness; and
   substituting means and opinions for religion -- the profanation of the
   name of the Lord -- the contempt of the Sabbath, even by those who
   acknowledge the obligation we are under to keep it holy, for many make
   no distinction between this and a common day, and others make a very
   bad distinction, by sleeping, walking, visiting, talking about the
   world, and taking their pleasure; too many also, in many parts of the
   country, profane the sacred day, by running their land and water
   stages, wagons, &c., -- disobedience to parents, various debaucheries,
   drunkenness, and such like -- to lament the deep-rooted vassalage that
   still reigneth in many parts of these free, independent United States
   -- to call upon the Lord to direct our rulers and teach our senators
   wisdom -- that tho lord would teach our people a just and lawful
   submission to their rulers -- that America may not commit abominations
   with other corrupt nations of the earth, and partake of their sins and
   their plagues -- that the gospel may be preached with more purity, and
   be heard with more affection -- that He would stop the growing
   infidelity of this age, by calling out men who shall preach and live
   the gospel -- that the professors may believe the truths, feel the
   power, partake of the blessings, breathe the spirit, and obey the
   precepts of this glorious gospel dispensation -- that Africans and
   Indians may help to fill the pure church of God."

   At the same time, with a view to manifest their gratitude for what God
   had done, and for the many temporal and spiritual mercies vouchsafed
   unto the people, a day of "GENERAL THANKSGIVING," was also recommended
   in the words following:--

   "It is recommended, by the general ministry, to all our dearly beloved
   brethren and sisters that compose our societies and sacred assemblies,
   to observe the last Thursday in October, 1796, as a day of holy
   gratitude and thanksgiving -- to lay aside the cares of the world, and
   to spend the day in acts of devotional gratitude -- as a society, to
   give glory to God for his late goodness to the ancient parent society
   from whom we are derived: that they have been honored with the
   conversion of hundreds and thousands within these two years last past
   -- for such a signal display of his power in the Methodist society,
   within the space of twenty-six years, through the continent of America,
   as may be seen in the volume of our annual minutes, published in 1795
   -- for the late glorious and powerful work we have had in Virginia and
   Maryland, and which still continues in an eminent and special manner,
   in some parts of our American connection -- for the many faithful
   public witnesses which have been raised up, and that so few,
   (comparatively speaking,) have dishonored their holy calling -- that we
   have had so many drawn from the depths of sin and misery, to the
   heights of love and holiness among the subjects of grace; numbers of
   whom are now living, and others have died in the full and glorious
   triumph of faith -- to take into remembrance the goodness and wisdom of
   God displayed toward America, by making it an asylum for those who are
   distressed in Europe with war and want, and oppressed with ecclesiastic
   and civil tyranny; the merciful termination of our various wars; the
   pacifications of the savage tribes; and the rapid settlement and
   wonderful population of the continent; that we have been able to feed
   so many thousands, at home and abroad; that we have had such faithful,
   wise, and skillful rulers; that we have such good constitutions formed
   for the respective states -- for the general union and government, that
   this may be kept pure and permanent -- for the admirable Revolution
   obtained and established at so small a price of blood and treasure --
   that religious establishments by law are condemned and exploded in
   almost every spot of this extensive empire. And for African liberty; we
   feel gratitude that many thousands of these poor people are free and
   pious."

   The work of God spread this year in several parts of New England, more
   particularly in the province of Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont, and
   also in the northern and western parts of the state of New York. But
   nothing occurred in this department worthy of special notice.

   No less than thirty-two preachers located this year, three withdrew
   from the church, and five had died.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 48,121; Last Year: 52,794;
   Decrease: 4,673 -- Colored This Year: 12,170; Last Year: 13,814;
   Decrease: 1,644 -- Total This Year: 60,291; Last Year: 66,608 --
   Decrease: 6,317 -- Preachers This Year: 313; Last Year: 301; Increase:
   12.

   This great decrease was owing, in a great measure, to the O'Kelleyan
   division, which was now at its height, and was spreading desolation in
   many of the societies in Virginia, and also in some parts of North
   Carolina.

  1796

   There were seven annual conferences held this year: and the following
   new circuits were added: Shelby and Logan; in the Western Conference;
   Bath and Kennebec, in the province of Maine; Cape May, in New Jersey;
   Chesterfield, in New Hampshire and Vershire, in Vermont.

   This year a conference was held at Green Briar, in the upper part of
   Virginia, which Bishop Asbury attended; after which be set off on
   another tour over the mountains and through the valleys.

   "Frequently," he says, "we were in danger of being plucked from our
   horses by the boughs of the trees under which we rode. About seven
   o'clock, after crossing six mountains and many rocky creeks and fords
   of Elk and Monongahela rivers, we made the Valley of Distress, called
   by the natives of Tyger's Valley. We had a comfortable lodging at Mr.
   White's. And here I must acknowledge the kindness and decency of the
   family, and their readiness to duty, sacred and civil. Thence we
   hastened on at the rate of forty-two miles a day." -- "After
   encountering many difficulties, known only to God and ourselves, we
   came to Morgantown. I doubt whether I shall ever request any person to
   come and meet me at the levels of Green Briar, or to accompany me
   across the mountains again, as brother D. Hitt has done. O! how
   checkered is life! How thankful ought I to be that I am here safe, with
   life and limbs, in peace and plenty, at kind brother S_____'s."

   After performing this fatiguing journey, visiting various places and
   preaching to the people, he once more found himself in more comfortable
   quarters in the older states, where he persevered with his wonted
   designs in the grand work to which he had been called, and in which his
   soul delighted. After arriving at Baltimore, he takes a "review of his
   journey for some months past," which, as it will give the reader some
   idea of the manner in which the bishop employed his time, we will
   present in his own words.

   "From the best judgment I can form, the distance" (I have traveled) "is
   as follows: -- from Baltimore to Charleston, S. C., one thousand miles;
   thence up the state of South Carolina two hundred miles; from the
   center to the west of Georgia two hundred miles; through North Carolina
   one hundred miles; through the state of Tennessee one hundred miles;
   through the west of Virginia three hundred miles; through Pennsylvania
   and the west of Maryland, and down to Baltimore, four hundred miles."
   And the reader will recollect that these journeys were performed
   generally on horseback, sometimes through creeks, morasses, and over
   high mountains, often lodging in log cabins, or on the ground, with
   coarse fare, and in the meantime preaching usually every day. It is
   true that in the older settlements he was not only cordially received
   and treated with great hospitality, but was blessed with an abundance
   of temporal comforts. And the above is but a fair specimen of the mode
   of life pursued by most of the Methodist preachers of that day, with
   this exception only, that they did not travel so extensively as Bishop
   Asbury did.

   The work of God spread this year in some parts of New England,
   particularly in the province of Maine, and in the states of New
   Hampshire and Vermont. Alluding to these things, while on his visit to
   that part of the country, Bishop Asbury remarks: --

   "This day I was led out greatly for New England. I believe God will
   work among this people. Perhaps they have not had such a time here for
   many years. The power of God was present, and some felt as at heaven's
   gate. Two or three women spoke as on the borders of eternity, and
   within sight of glory."

   It may be proper to remark here, that Bishop Asbury, wherever he was,
   did not content himself simply with preaching to the people, but if
   time permitted, met the classes, explained to them the discipline, and
   attended to all the duties of a pastor. Thus, speaking of being in the
   city of New York, he says that he "preached morning, afternoon, and
   evening, alternately in each of the three churches then in the city,
   besides meeting six classes in the course of the day."

   In meeting the society, I observed to them, that they knew but little
   of my life and labors, unless in the pulpit, family, or class meeting,"
   -- intimating that it was impossible for them to have any adequate idea
   of his general labors and sufferings through the country.

   This year that eminent servant of God, Benjamin Abbott, took his
   departure to another world. And as his life and labors made a powerful
   impression upon the community, and tended greatly to enlarge the work
   of God wherever he traveled, it seems suitable that a more particular
   account should be given of him than of some others.

   He was born in the state of Pennsylvania, in the year 1732, and, grew
   to manhood "without hope and without God in the world," and so
   continued until the fortieth year of his age, when it pleased God to
   bring him to a knowledge of the truth by the instrumentality of
   Methodist preaching. Soon after his conversion he gave evidence of his
   call to the gospel ministry, and he entered upon this work with an
   ardor of mind which plainly evinced that he was moving in the order of
   God, and it may be truly said that "signs and wonders were wrought" by
   his instrumentality. For several years he labored merely as a local
   preacher, supporting himself and family by the labor of his hands. He
   continued in this way greatly pleased in his efforts to bring sinners
   to the knowledge of Christ, until April, 1789, when he joined the
   traveling ministry, and was stationed in Duchess circuit, in the state
   of New York. From this time till disabled by infirmities, he continued
   traveling and preaching though various parts of New York, New Jersey,
   Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Delaware states, edifying the church by his
   example and labors, and he was an instrument in the hand of God of the
   awakening and conversion of thousands of souls. As some portions of his
   life were attended with remarkable interpositions of divine Providence
   and peculiar manifestations of the grace of God, I think it will be
   both pleasing and profitable to the reader to present a few of the
   instances in this place. While laboring in the state of Delaware, he
   gives the following account:

   "Next day I set out for my appointment, but being a stranger, I stopped
   at a house to inquire the way, and the man told me he was just going to
   that place, for there was to be a Methodist preacher there that day;
   and our preacher, said he, is to be there to trap him in his discourse,
   and if you will wait a few minutes until a neighbor of mine comes, I
   will go with you. In a few minutes the man came, who, it seems, was a
   constable. So we set off; and they soon fell into conversation about
   the preacher, having no idea of my being the man, as I never wore
   black, or any kind of garb that indicated my being a preacher, and so I
   rode unsuspected. The constable being a very profane man, he swore by
   all the gods he had, good and bad, that he would lose his right arm
   from his body if the Methodist preacher did not go to jail that day.
   This was the theme of their discourse. My mind was greatly exercised on
   the occasion, and what added, as it were, double weight, I was a
   stranger in a strange place, where I knew no one. When we arrived at
   the place appointed, I saw about two hundred horses hitched. I also
   hitched mine, and retired into the woods, where I prayed and covenanted
   with God on my knees, that if he stood by me in this emergency, I would
   be more for him, though grace, than ever I had been. I then arose and
   went to my horse, with a perfect resignation to the will of God,
   whether to death or to jail. I took my saddlebags and went to the
   house; the man took me into a private room, and desired I would preach
   in favor of the war, as I was in a Presbyterian settlement. I replied,
   I should preach as God should direct me. He appeared very uneasy and
   left me, and just before preaching, he came in again and renewed his
   request that I would preach up for war; I replied as before, and then
   followed him out among the people, where he made proclamation as
   follows: -- Gentlemen, this house is my own, and no gentleman shall be
   interrupted in my house in time of his discourse, but after he has done
   you may do as you please. Thank God, said I softly, that I have liberty
   once more to warn sinners before I die. I then took my stand, and the
   house was so crowded that no one could sit down. Some hundreds were
   round about the door. I stood about two or three feet from the
   constable who had sworn so bitterly. When he saw that I was the man he
   had so abused on the way, with so many threats and oaths, his
   countenance fell and he turned pale. I gave out a hymn, but no one
   offered to sing; I sung four lines, and kneeled down and prayed. When I
   arose, I preached with great liberty. I felt such power from God rest
   upon me, that I was above the fear of either men or devils, not
   regarding whether death or a jail should be my lot. Looking forward I
   saw a decent looking man trembling, and tears flowed in abundance,
   which I soon discovered was the case with many others. After preaching,
   I told them I expected they wanted to know by what authority I had come
   into that country to preach. I then told them my conviction and
   conversion, the place of my nativity and place of residence; also, my
   call to the ministry, and that seven years I had labored in God's
   vineyard; that I spent my own money and found and wore my own clothes,
   and that it was the love that I had for their precious souls, for whom
   Christ died, that had induced me to come among them at the risk of my
   life; and then exhorted them to fly to Jesus, the ark of safety -- that
   all things were ready -- to seek, and they should find, to knock, and
   it should be opened unto them. By this time the people were generally
   melted into tears. I then concluded, and told them on that day two
   weeks they might expect preaching again. I mounted my horse and set out
   with a friendly Quaker for a pilot. We had not rode above fifty yards,
   when I heard one hallooing after us. I looked back, and saw about fifty
   running after us. I then concluded that to jail I must go. We stopped,
   and when they came up, I crave your name, said one, -- I told him, and
   so we parted. He was a justice of the peace, and was the person I had
   taken notice of in time of preaching, and observed him to be in great
   anxiety of mind. No one offered me any violence; but they committed the
   next preacher, on that day two weeks, to the common jail. I went home
   with the kind Quaker, where I tarried all night. I found that himself
   and wife were under serious impressions, and had had Methodist
   preaching at their house."

   Though Mr. Wesley gives several accounts in his Journals of some
   persons being so affected under his preaching as to fall helpless to
   the floor or on the ground, yet such things had not been common in this
   country. It is true that in the great revival which took place in
   Virginia in the early days of Methodism, several such instances are
   recorded. But under the powerful preaching of Mr. Abbott many examples
   of a partial suspension of the animal functions occurred, as the
   following extract will show: --

   "Next day I went on to my appointment, where we had a large
   congregation: I preached with life and power, and God attended the word
   with the energy of his Spirit. A Quaker girl was powerfully wrought
   upon, so that every joint in her shook, and she would have fallen to
   the floor, but four or five took and carried her out of the door; when
   she had recovered a little she went to a neighbor's house and told him
   that she had seen the dreadfulest old man the she ever saw in all her
   life, and that he almost scared her to death, for his eyes looked like
   two balls of fire, and that she expected every minute he would jump at
   her. But, said the neighbor, I know the old man, and he would not hurt
   nor touch you. I went on, and the power of the Lord continued among us
   in such a manner that many fell to the floor, and others cried aloud
   for mercy. One young woman to exhort the people; I stopped preaching,
   which I always judged was best, in similar instances, and let God send
   by whom he will send: she went on for some time with great life and
   power, and then cried out, Let us pray; we all kneeled down, and she
   prayed with life and liberty, until she was spent and so forbore. A
   preacher being present, I called on him, and he went to prayer, and
   while he was praying three were set at liberty; and, after him, myself
   and others prayed and several received justifying faith. The shout
   continued for the space of three or four hours. After meeting broke up,
   I thought it was not necessary to meet the class, as we had such a
   powerful time, and it had lasted so long already. The young woman who
   had given the exhortation and prayed, took five others with her, and
   retired to the barn to pray for the mourners, who went with them, where
   they continued until late in the evening, and three souls were set at
   liberty; another, as she was returning home, in sore distress fell on
   her face in the woods, where she continued in prayer until God set her
   soul at liberty to rejoice in his love. An old Presbyterian woman
   requested me to call at her house on the ensuing day, as she wanted to
   discourse with me on religion; I did call, and she received me very
   kindly, and then related her conviction and conversion, and added, that
   some years after, God had sealed her his to the day of eternity; and,
   said she, neither our preachers or people will believe me, when I tell
   them how happy I am. I then endeavored to explain to her the nature of
   sanctification, and what it was, and asked her if we should pray
   together; she replied, With all my heart. After prayer I departed in
   peace, having no doubt but what God had sanctified her soul and body.
   She was the first Presbyterian that I ever had met with, that would
   acknowledge sanctification in its proper sense.

   "I went to my next appointment, where I had put brother G. D., who
   professed sanctification, class leader, and the Lord attended his words
   with power. This had brought the man of the house where the class met
   into doubts, whether the work was of God or the devil; for the people
   had frequently fallen, both under his prayer and exhortation. Soon as I
   came to the house he related how great his exercises had been
   respecting the work. One day, said he, I thought I would go down to my
   stack yard, which stood some distance from the house, and there pray to
   God to discover the reality of it to me; and on my way thither, as I
   sat on a fence, I thought I saw a man sitting on the next pannel [sic];
   I got off and went down to the stacks, and the man went with me, side
   by side, and when I kneeled down to pray, the man stood right before
   me. I prayed until my shirt was wet on my back, entreating God that he
   would give me some token, whereby I might know whether the work was of
   him or not. The man who stood before me said, Blessed are those that
   are pure in heart. I then arose to see whether he was a man or not, and
   went to put my hand upon him, and he said, Touch me not! I then turned
   myself round another way, and he stood right before me again, and said
   several other words which I do not relate, and then vanished, or
   ascended, as in a flame of fire. Now, said I, do you doubt about the
   matter, whether the work is of God or not? No, said he, I have no
   doubts about it, for God has sent his angel to confirm me. I then went
   and preached, -- the Lord was present. We had a glorious time, and
   several fell to the floor; we had a precious time also in class, and
   two joined Society.

   "Next day I went to my appointment, and found a large congregation. I
   preached, and the power of the Lord attended the word. One young man
   sprang from the bench and called aloud for mercy, then fell on his
   knees and prayed fervently. I stopped preaching, and when he was done,
   I went to prayer with him, and after me several others; many wept, some
   cried aloud for mercy, and others fell to the floor. When I dismissed
   the people to meet class, I invited the young man in. Here we had a
   precious season among the dear people of God, and some mourners were
   set at liberty." * * * * * *

   "I went home with brother M., and next day preached in a crowded house,
   with liberty: the power of the Lord arrested a young Quaker, and he
   fell to the floor as if he had been shot: his mother being present,
   cried out, My son is dead! My son is dead! I replied, Mammy, your son
   is not dead; look to yourself, mammy, your son is not dead; and in a
   few minutes we had a number slain before the Lord. An old Quaker man
   stood with tears in his eyes; I said to him, Daddy, look to yourself;
   this was the way with you, when you had the life and power of God among
   you. Read Sewel's history of the people called Quakers, and you will
   find there that John Audland, a young man, was preaching in a field
   near Bristol, and the people fell to the ground before him, and cried
   out under the mighty power of God. The man of the house brought the
   book, and read the passage before the congregation, and he then
   acknowledged it to be the work of the Lord. I attempted to meet the
   class, but did not speak to above two or three, when the people fell
   before the Lord, as men slain in battle, and we had the shout of a king
   in the camp of Jesus: two or three professed that God had sanctified
   their souls. The young Quaker and several others professed that God had
   set their souls at liberty; several joined society, and we had a
   precious time. When I went on that circuit, there were about six or
   seven in society at that place, and when I left it there were about
   thirty-six, six or seven of whom had been Quakers. At this place, our
   meetings were generally so powerful that I never regularly met the
   class during the time I was on the circuit for we always had the shout
   of a king in the camp of Jesus -- glory to God!"

   These instances serve to show the power and authority by which Benjamin
   Abbott spoke in the name of the Lord; and though there might have been
   some human weakness mingling with these signal displays of the power of
   God, yet it is manifest that in most cases the work was genuine, as
   appeared by its fruits; for "by their fruits ye shall know them."

   The writer of his life gives the following very affecting account of an
   incident which strikingly exemplifies the tenderness of his conscience
   and the humility of his mind: --

   On his way to a quarterly meeting, about the first of February, 1795,
   the presiding elder mentioned to him, that the people there thought he
   had power by faith to open or shut the gates of heaven. Mr. Abbott said
   to me, when conversing on this subject, 'It went though my soul like a
   dagger: I was grieved, for I saw that the idea led to idolatry, in
   ascribing to a poor mortal the power which is due to God only. I felt
   as if my usefulness were at an end; although I did not discover to
   brother W_____, the presiding elder, how exceedingly I was hurt, nor
   was he, I believe, sensible of it.' They attended the quarterly meeting
   in great harmony, and the Master of assemblies was present to the joy
   and consolation of many. At night Mr. Abbott was taken very ill, and
   never was able to attend a circuit as a traveling preacher, or scarcely
   ever to preach afterward; so that his usefulness, indeed, was, in one
   sense, at an end."

   The labors of Mr. Abbott were unremitting and most arduous, so that it
   may be said be literally wore himself out in the service of his divine
   Master. The last public service he performed was at the funeral of Mrs.
   Paul, in the town of Salem, N. J., in the month of April, 1796, and as
   it was attended with a remarkable incident, evincing the blessed
   results of ministerial faithfulness, I will give it in the words of the
   biographer. It is as follows: --

   "A the funeral sermon was preached by Mr. Morford, he arose and gave an
   exhortation, and particularly addressed himself to Mr. W., a man whom
   he had loved as himself, and who had, through the subtlety of Satan,
   departed from better knowledge. In his exhortation he called to mind
   the happy hours he had spent under his roof; how much he (Mr. W.) had
   done for the cause of God; and how often they had rejoiced together as
   fellow-laborers in Christ Jesus; and then warned him in the most solemn
   manner of his impending danger, in the love and fear of God, until
   tears flowed, his strength failed, and he was unable to speak any
   longer.

   "While the interment of the corpse took place, Mr. Abbott retired to a
   friend's house, unable to attend it. After the interment, Mr. W.
   addressed the audience on the occasion, and appeared angry,
   apprehending that he had been ill used. I spoke to him on the occasion,
   and endeavored to reason the case with him; but to very little purpose,
   for he apprehended that I had been the instigator of the supposed
   affront, and appeared as much offended with me as with Mr. Abbott.
   After my return from the interment, I went and informed Mr. Abbott of
   the matter: Why,' said he, if I were able to take my horse and go and
   see him, I should not have made use of that opportunity; but as I am
   not able to go and see him, I was convinced that if I let that
   opportunity pass, I should never have another; and I thought it my duty
   to speak as I did: therefore I leave the event to God. I am sure that
   it cannot hurt him, or do him any injury; for a man that is posting in
   the broad way to damnation, cannot be easily worsted. O!' said he, I
   have seen the time that we have rejoiced together as fellow-laborers in
   Christ, and it grieves my soul to see that the devil has got the
   advantage of him!' On Mr. W.'s return home, he wrote a letter to Mr.
   Abbott on the occasion, justifying himself and his conduct. However,
   the Spirit of God fastened it on him, as a nail in a sure place; for at
   our first quarterly meeting held at Salem, after Mr. Abbott's death, in
   the love feast, Mr. W. arose and openly declared that God had healed
   all his backslidings, and that he had made his servant, Father Abbott,
   an instrument in his divine hand to bring about his restoration."

   After lingering along the shores of time for several months, he finally
   closed his life in triumph on the 34th day of August, 1796, aged about
   sixty-four years. The following is an account of the closing scene of
   his life: --

   "My brother went to see him, and found him very poorly, to whom he
   said, Brother Ffirth [sic], I am going to die, and tomorrow you must go
   to Philadelphia, for brother McClaskey to come and preach my funeral
   sermon:' to which my brother replied, Father Abbott, you may continue
   for some time yet, as the time of your death is uncertain.' No,' said
   he, I shall die before you would get back from Philadelphia, unless you
   should travel in the night.' My brother replied, It will not answer to
   go before your decease.' Why,' said he, I shall die, and I do not wish
   my body to be kept until it is offensive: you know the weather is warm
   and the distance is considerable.' "That is true,' replied my brother,
   but if I were to go to Philadelphia for brother McClaskey, to preach
   your funeral sermon, and you were not dead, the friends would laugh at
   me, and he would not not come.' Ah!' said he, it may be so; I never
   thought or that; perhaps it will be best to stay until I am dead.'

   "Next day, observing a visible alteration in him, my brother concluded
   to tarry with him until his exit: during the day he continued in a rack
   of excruciating pain, which he bore with Christian patience and
   resignation. He was happy in God, and rejoiced at his approaching
   dissolution; and seemed much engaged in his soul with God. He appeared
   to possess his rational faculties to his last moments; and for some
   time previous thereunto he was delivered from that excruciating pain,
   to the joy of his friends; his countenance continued joyful, heavenly,
   and serene. His last sentence, that was intelligibly articulated, was,
   Glory to God! I see heaven sweetly opened before me!'

   "After this, his speech so much failed that he could not be distinctly
   understood, only now and then a word, as, See! -- see! -- glory! --
   glory!' &c."

   Mr. Abbott was, in many respects, a remarkable man; not, indeed, on
   account of his intellectual or literary attainments, for he was
   extremely illiterate, and of very limited information. Were we,
   therefore, to measure his standard of excellence as a preacher by the
   usual rules by which it is determined, he would sink perhaps below
   mediocrity; for such was his deficiency in respect to his knowledge
   even of his vernacular tongue that he could scarcely express himself
   grammatically on any subject; yet with all these defects, he had drunk
   so deeply at the fountain of spiritual life, had made himself so
   thoroughly acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, and had such an
   accurate knowledge of the human heart, and was, moreover, so deeply
   impressed by the Holy Spirit that it was his duty to call sinners to
   repentance, that whenever he spoke in the name of the Lord there was an
   "unction from the Holy One" attending his word, which made it manifest
   to all that he was sent from heaven to beseech mankind to be reconciled
   to God.

   Though a Boanerges or son of thunder in the pulpit, especially in his
   appeals to the impenitent, yet in private circles, in conversation with
   his friends, and in his addresses to mourning penitents, he was all
   love and meekness, manifesting the simplicity and docility of a child.
   But that which distinguished him most eminently among his fellows was
   the power which he seemed to have with God in prayer. Perhaps he seldom
   entered the pulpit, or appeared before a congregation as God's
   messenger, without previously "wrestling in the strength of mighty
   prayer," and God did indeed "reward him openly." Many were the
   instances in which his heavenly Father answered his "strong cries and
   tears," while pouring out the desire of his heart before him in prayer.
   And let it be recollected that such prayer, which takes hold on God,
   always supposes the exercise of strong faith in Jesus Christ, that
   faith which says, "I will not let three go unless thou bless me."

   Such was Benjamin Abbott. And though we cannot enroll him among those
   who have distinguished themselves by scientific research, or deep
   theological knowledge, yet we may inscribe upon his tombstone, "Here
   lies a man whom God delighted to honor as the instrument of saving many
   sinners from the error of their ways." Through his energetic labors an
   impulse was given to the work of God in this country which has been
   felt through all our borders from that day to this; and hence his name
   may be fitly associated with those who were honored of God in building
   up our Zion as on a hill, from which light has been reflected on
   thousands who have been brought under its holy and happy influence.

   Another distinguished, though humble and unpretending servant of God
   was taken this year from the militant to the church triumphant. Francis
   Acuff, born in Virginia, and brought up in Tennessee, has left a name
   in the west which will be remembered with grateful recollections while
   Methodism shall continue to live and flourish in that country. He
   resided in Holstein, Tennessee; and though only three years in the
   traveling ministry, yet such were his talents and indefatigable labors
   in the work, that he won the confidence and affection of the people for
   whose salvation he devoted his strength; they lamented over his
   untimely grave as over the remains of a departed friend. He had only
   attained to the twenty-fifth year of his age when he was cut down as a
   flower, in the morning, and taken to ripen in the paradise of God.

   As an instance of the strong attachment which was felt by those who
   were best acquainted with this man of God, I will give the following
   anecdote on the authority of the author of "Short Sketches of Revivals
   of Religion in the Western Country." An Englishman by the name of
   William Jones, on his arrival in Virginia, was sold for his passage. He
   served his time, four years, with fidelity, conducted himself with
   propriety, and was finally brought to the knowledge of the truth by
   means of Methodist preaching. As he had been greatly blessed under the
   preaching of Mr. Acuff, when he heard of his death, Billy, as he was
   called, determined to visit his grave. Though he had to travel a long
   distance though the wilderness, in which he had heard that the Indians
   often killed people by the way, yet his great desire to visit the grave
   of his friend and pastor impelled him forward, believing that the Lord
   in whom he trusted was able to protect him from savage cruelty, and
   provide for his wants. "When I came to the rivers," said he, "I would
   wade them, or if there were ferries they would take me over, and when I
   was hungry the travelers would give me a morsel of bread. When I came
   to Mr. Greene's, in Madison county, I inquired for our dear brother
   Acuff's grave. The people looked astonished, but directed me to it. I
   went to it, felt my soul happy, kneeled own, shouted over it, and
   praised the Lord!" Such a mark of strong affection in a simple follower
   of Jesus Christ speaks volumes in favor of the man over whose grave
   those grateful recollections were so piously indulged.

   Another of the veterans who fell in the field this year deserves a
   passing notice. Reuben Ellis had traveled extensively, and preached
   with great acceptance for about twenty years. He is said to have been a
   man of rather a slow apprehension, but of a sound understanding,
   possessed of godly simplicity and sincerity, and that his preaching was
   weighty and powerful. In his life he manifested great deadness to this
   world, living as in the immediate view of eternity. He was a native of
   North Carolina, and in the notice of his death it is stated that the
   people of the south "well knew his excellent worth, as a Christian and
   a minister of Christ."

   After laboring in various parts of the country, leaving behind him
   evidences of his fidelity and deep devotion to the cause of God, he
   closed his useful labors in the city of Baltimore, in the month of
   February. 1796, in the full hope of everlasting life. Some estimate may
   be formed of the high character he sustained by the fact, that the
   record of his death says, "It is a doubt whether there be one left in
   all the connection higher, if equal, in standing, piety, or
   usefulness."

   Jacob Bush, Stephen Davis, William Jessup, Richard Ivy, John Jarrell,
   and Zadoc Priest, of whom honorable mention is made, all died this year
   in the full hope of immortality and eternal life.

   In the early part of our history we have seen the kindness manifested
   to Mr. Asbury by Judge White of Kent county, Delaware, state, during
   his seclusion from the fury of his persecutors. It is pleasant to
   reflect on the latter end of such men, and to see how the Lord rewarded
   them for their attentions to his servants. Last year Judge White died
   "in the Lord," and though he was not a preacher, the death of such a
   man is deserving a place in this record of the Lord's dealings with his
   church. The following is Bishop Asbury's account of the character and
   death of this good man: --

   "This day," May 21, 1795, "I heard of the death of one among my best
   friends in America, Judge White, of Kent county, Delaware. This news
   was attended with an awful shock to me. I have met with nothing like it
   in the death of any friend on the continent. Lord help us to live our
   short day to thy glory! I have lived days, weeks, and months, in his
   house. O that his removal may be sanctified to my good, and the good of
   the family! He was about sixty-five years of age. He was a friend to
   the poor and oppressed. He had been a professed Churchman, and was
   united to the Methodist connection about seventeen or eighteen years.
   His house and heart were always open; and he was a faithful friend to
   liberty in spirit and in practice; he was a most indulgent husband, a
   tender father, and an affectionate friend. He professed perfect love
   and great peace, living and dying."

   Such a testimony is alike honorable to him who made it, and to him in
   whose favor it was recorded, showing the gratitude and affectionate
   remembrance of the one, and the disinterested friendship and fidelity
   of the other.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 45,384; Last Year: 48,121;
   Decrease: 2,737 -- Colored This Year: 11,280; Last Year: 12,170;
   Decrease: 890 -- Total This Year: 56,664; Last Year: 60,291 --
   Decrease: 3,627 -- Preachers This Year: 293; Last Year: 313; Decrease:
   20.

   The reader will perceive that there had been a diminution of numbers
   now for three years past. This is said to have been owing chiefly to
   the spirit of dissatisfaction which had been spread abroad by the
   controversy of O'Kelley and his party. Such are the pernicious effects
   of divisions of this character upon the interests of true religion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] It is not, I believe, generally the case, that a minister is
   settled for life.

   [2] It has come to an end, though not quite so soon as there predicted.

   [3] The bishop undoubtedly alludes to their being supported by law --
   by a legal taxation, which he considered contrary to the gospel ...
   [some words at the end of this footnote were missing from our printed
   copy. -- DVM]
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 2

    An Account of the General Conference of 1796

   The conference assembled in the city of Baltimore, October 20th, 1796,
   and was composed of one hundred and twenty members. As there were no
   restrictions upon the powers of the conference at that time, they felt
   themselves at liberty to review our entire economy, and to make such
   alterations and additions to the Discipline as they might consider
   would best promote the interests of the Church. Up to this time the
   bishops had a discretionary power to appoint as many annual conferences
   as they might judge would be most for the convenience of the preachers
   and people; but this conference fixed their bounds, and determined that
   their number should be but six, with a proviso that, if the bishop saw
   proper, they might form an additional one in the province of Maine.

   We have already seen that the strength of the itinerating ministry was
   very much weakened, from year to year, by reason of the numerous
   locations which took place at the several annual conferences. This
   originated, in part at least, from the inadequate support which was
   provided for the preachers and their families, especially in the new
   settlements. The hardships to which they were exposed in traversing the
   wilderness, their scanty fare, and the excessive labors they were
   obliged to perform, brought on many of them premature old age, and in
   many instances they contracted those diseases which terminated in
   death. By these means, while some were doomed to linger on in
   feebleness and poverty, others were called to leave their widows and
   orphan children, to suffer from the privations brought upon them by the
   sacrifices of their devoted husbands and parents. With such prospects
   before them, many, as before stated, were induced to forsake the
   itinerant field, in the hope of providing more adequately for
   themselves and families, while it may be presumed that some were
   actuated more from mercenary motives than merely from a fear of
   temporal want.

   To remedy an evil of such magnitude, and take away, as far as possible,
   all temptations to forsake the work of spreading the gospel by an
   itinerant ministry, many of the most devoted friends of the cause had
   looked with anxious hearts for some suitable means. The subject came up
   for consideration before this General Conference, and they finally
   resolved to create a fund for the relief of necessitous preachers,
   their wives, widows, and orphans. This was soon after incorporated by
   the legislature of Pennsylvania, under the following

  "ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION

   Of the Trustees of the Fund for the Relief and Support of the
   itinerant, superannuated, and worn-out Ministers and Preachers of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church in the United States of America their Wives
   and Children, Widows and Orphans.

   ARTICLE 1. -- It is provided and declared, that the name, style, and
   title of this corporation shall be, The Trustees of the Fund for the
   Relief and Support of the itinerant superannuated, and worn-out
   Ministers and Preachers of the Episcopal Church, (in the United States
   of America,) their Wives and Children, Widows and Orphans;' and that
   the said trustees shall consist of John Dickins, Thomas Haskins; Jacob
   Baker, Henry Manly, Burton Wallace, Josiah Lusby, Hugh Smith, Caleb
   North, and Cornelius Comegys, and their successors, qualified and
   appointed as is hereinafter mentioned. And they are hereby vested with
   full powers for carrying into effect the benevolent and charitable
   purposes in this instrument mentioned and declared.

   ARTICLE 2. -- It is provided and declared, that the said trustees, and
   their successors, by the name, style, and title aforesaid, shall be
   able and capable in law to make, receive, have, hold, possess, and
   enjoy, all, and all manner of lands, tenements, rents, annuities,
   franchises, and hereditaments, and any sum or sums of money, and any
   manner and portion of goods and chattels, given, granted, or devised
   unto them or their successors, by any person or persons, bodies politic
   or corporate, agreeable to the intention of the donors respectively,
   and according to the objects, articles, and conditions, in this
   instrument mentioned and declared; and by the name, style, and title
   aforesaid, shall be able and capable in law, to sue and be sued, plead
   and be impleaded, in any court or courts, before any judge or judges,
   justice or justices, in all manner of suits, complaints, pleas, causes,
   matters, and demands whatsoever, and all and every matter therein to
   do, in as full and effectual a manner as any other person or persons,
   bodies politic and corporate, within this commonwealth may or can do.

   ARTICLE 3. -- It is provided and declared, that in case of the death,
   resignation, or expulsion from membership (according to the rules and
   discipline from time to time adopted by the itinerant ministers and
   preachers of the said Church, in their General Conference assembled) of
   any one or more of the members of the said corporation, or their
   successors, then, and in such case, it shall be the duty of the
   remaining trustees to nominate double the number of those whose seats
   may have been vacated as aforesaid, and to make a representation
   thereof, in writing, to the itinerant ministers and preachers of the
   said Church in their next General Conference assembled; whose duty it
   shall be then and there to proceed to choose, and, by a majority of
   votes, appoint one or more persons (as the case may be) out of the
   whole number of those nominated by the trustees, as aforesaid, to fill
   such vacancy or vacancies, in order to keep up the number of nine
   trustees for ever: and upon such choice and appointment a certificate
   shall issue from the said General Conference signed by their president
   and countersigned by their secretary, and directed to the trustees of
   the said corporation, containing the name or names of the person or
   persons so chosen and appointed, which said certificate shall be
   registered in the books of the said corporation; and the person or
   persons thus chosen and appointed shall be vested with all the powers
   and immunities of a member of the said corporation -- provided,
   nevertheless, that no person or persons shall be eligible as a trustee
   or trustees of the said corporation who has not been a member of the
   said Church (according to the rules and discipline thereof, as
   aforesaid) at least five years next preceding his or their election and
   appointment as aforesaid, and who shall not be at least twenty-five
   years of age.

   ARTICLE 4. -- It is provided and declared, that the said corporation
   shall meet at least once in every year (for the dispatch of their
   necessary business) at such time and place as a majority of them may
   judge most convenient and proper: and when so met they shall have power
   to make such by-laws, rules, and regulations for their government, in
   the management of their affairs, as a majority of them may judge
   necessary; and also at every such annual meeting they shall proceed to
   choose, and by a majority of votes appoint two of their own number to
   act, the one as president, and the other as secretary, to the said
   corporation, who may continue them in office from year to year, as a
   majority of the said corporation may think proper.

   ARTICLE 5. -- It is provided and declared, that if, at any time
   hereafter, a majority of the trustees should deem it expedient, by deed
   or otherwise, to grant, bargain, sell, convey, or otherwise dispose of
   any part or parcel of the estate, real or personal, of, and belonging
   to, the said corporation, or charge or incumber the same, then, and in
   such case, it shall be their duty to make a representation thereof in
   writing to the itinerant ministers and preachers of the said Church, in
   their next General Conference assembled, who shall then and there judge
   of the necessity or expediency of such proposed sale; and if two-thirds
   of the ministers and preachers, assembled as aforesaid, shall consent
   and agree thereto, a certificate shall issue from the said General
   Conference, signed by their president and countersigned by their
   secretary, declaring such approbation and consent, and specifying the
   kind and amount of the property to be sold or otherwise disposed of;
   which certificate shall be transmitted to the said trustees, who shall
   cause the same to be recorded in the books of the said corporation --
   provided, always, that the moneys arising from such licensed sale shall
   be vested by the said trustees (as soon as conveniently may be) in such
   other securities and property as, in the judgment of a majority of
   them, will be most productive and safe; and provided farther, that the
   annual interest and income, arising from the money so vested, shall be
   exclusively applied in the manner and for the uses and purposes in this
   instrument mentioned and declared.

   ARTICLE 6. -- It is provided and declared, that the annual rents,
   interest, and income of the estate, real and personal, which now does,
   or at any time hereafter may belong to the said corporation and their
   successors, shall by them be held subject to the exclusive order and
   control of the itinerant ministers and preachers of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church in the United States of America, in their General
   Conference (from time to time) assembled: and the said ministers and
   preachers, thus assembled, are hereby vested with full powers to
   appropriate and point out the mode of applying the same to the objects,
   under the limitations, and for the uses and purposes herein mentioned
   and expressly declared.

   ARTICLE 7. -- It is provided and declared, that the object and design
   of the fund hereby intended to be established is expressly for the
   purposes of relieving the distresses, and supplying the deficiencies of
   the itinerant and superannuated or worn-out ministers and preachers of
   the Methodist Episcopal Church in the United States of America who
   remain in connection with, and continue subject to, the order and
   control of, the General Conference; as also for the relief of the wives
   and children, widows and orphans, of such ministers and preachers, and
   for no other use, intent, or purpose whatever.

   ARTICLE 8. -- It is provided and declared, that no sum exceeding
   sixty-four dollars shall in any one year be appropriated and applied to
   the use of an itinerant, superannuated, or worn-out single minister or
   preacher; also that no sum exceeding one hundred and twenty-eight
   dollars, in any one year, shall be applied to the use of an itinerant,
   superannuated, or worn-out married minister or preacher and that no sum
   exceeding sixty-four dollars, in any one year, shall be applied to the
   use of each widow of such ministers and preachers as are herein before
   mentioned and described and also that no sum exceeding sixteen dollars
   shall be applied, in any one year, to the use of each child or orphan,
   of such ministers and preachers as are herein before particularly
   mentioned and described.

   ARTICLE 9. -- It is provided and declared, that no sum or sums of
   money, and or any pretense whatever, shall be drawn from the fund
   hereby intended to be established, other than for the uses and
   purposes, and under the limitations and restrictions, herein before
   expressly mentioned and declared -- provided, nevertheless, that the
   trustees of the said corporation and their successors shall have power
   to draw and apply, from time to time, so much money belonging to the
   said fund as in the judgment of a majority of them may be wanting to
   defray all the necessary expense of conducting the business of the said
   corporation.

   ARTICLE 10. -- It is provided and declared, that it shall be the duty
   of the trustees to cause regular and fair accounts to be kept (in books
   to be provided for that purpose) of the funds of the said corporation,
   as well as it respects the kind and amount of the capital stock, and of
   the annual interest and income thereof, as of all and every sum or sums
   of money which shall from time to time be drawn therefrom, for the
   objects, under the limitations, and for the uses and purposes herein
   before particularly mentioned and declared. And farther, it shall be
   the duty of the said trustees and their successors, at every General
   Conference of the preachers as aforesaid, to prepare and lay before
   them a statement of the affairs of the said fund, for their inspection
   and examination; which said statement shall be signed by the president
   and countersigned by the secretary of the said corporation, certifying
   that the same is fair and correct."

   It was provided, by a resolution of the General Conference, that the
   objects of this fund should be presented in an address to our brethren
   and friends, and that they should be invited to fill it up by voluntary
   contributions, donations, and bequests. This was accordingly done, and
   some subscribed liberally, while others stood aloof from it, thinking
   it most advisable to let the funds remain in the hands of the people,
   to be drawn out as they might be needed. Though the creation of the
   chartered fund originated from the purest motives, and has been kept up
   and superintended by some of the most benevolent spirits in the Church,
   yet it has never been able to pay more than from ninety to one hundred
   dollars a year to each annual conference; and as this small amount
   would not, when divided among the several claimants, give to each but
   about two dollars a year, it may be questioned whether, by inducing a
   false dependence in the public mind, this fund has not defeated the
   objects of its institution, and disappointed the expectations of its
   benevolent founders and patrons. It has continued, however, in
   existence, has gradually increased in its resources, and its avails are
   scrupulously applied according to the provisions of its charter; and
   hence for the good it has done we have reason to be thankful, and
   especially to those generous men who have, from time to time,
   gratuitously superintended its affairs, and impartially distributed its
   avails.

   At this conference, with a view to secure church property permanently
   to the use of the Methodist Episcopal Church, according to the true
   intent and meaning of the donors and contributors, with as little
   expense as possible, the form of a deed of settlement was drawn up and
   inserted in the Discipline. The provisions of the Discipline, however,
   in respect to this deed, have been modified from time to time, so as to
   conform to the usages of law in the several states and territories,
   merely requiring deeds of trust to be so drawn as to "secure the
   premises firmly and permanently to the Methodist Episcopal Church," to
   be held in trust by a board of trustees -- elected by the people where
   the laws of the states respectively so require, or where no such laws
   exist, they are to be appointed by the preacher in charge, or by the
   presiding elder of the district -- for the use of the members of said
   church in the place where the property is located. See Dis., part ii,
   sec. 2.

   As many have affirmed that all church property is owned by the annual
   conferences, it may be proper to remark, that they have no legal claim
   to the property, nor have they sought, nor do they seek, any other
   control over it than to be permitted "to preach and expound God's word"
   in the churches, and to administer the discipline and ordinances of the
   gospel of Jesus Christ. As to the property itself, it is vested in a
   board of trustees, elected according to the provisions of law, where
   such law exists, who are held responsible as Methodists to the
   quarterly meeting conference of their circuit for the manner in which
   they discharge their trusts; while the conferences claim the right of
   using the houses of worship, in conformity to the object for which they
   were erected, for religious and spiritual purposes only, according to
   the requisitions of the doctrines and Discipline of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church. It is true, the trustees are not permitted to
   alienate the property for other purposes than those for which it was
   procured, nor are they permitted to exclude from the pulpits those
   ministers who are regularly sent to them according to the regulations
   of the Church to which they belong. And is not this as it should be?
   Should not church property be held sacredly for the sole purposes to
   which it has been devoted, and which were specified in the deed of
   settlement when it was enfeoffed to the church? ["enfeoffed to the
   church:" made a holding of, placed under the control of, the church--
   DVM]

   These remarks have been called for by the oft-repeated and oft-refuted
   slander, that the Methodist bishops and conferences are the legal
   owners of the houses of worship which are occupied within our bounds.
   The property belongs to the members of the church worshipping in that
   place, and they have committed it to trustees, generally of their own
   choosing, for safe keeping, that it may be used for the exclusive
   purpose for which it was procured, namely, to be devoted in perpetuity
   to the interests of true religion, as now taught, explained, and
   enforced by the Methodist Episcopal Church.

   We have already seen that our economy recognizes a class of laborers
   denominated local preachers, who attend to secular concerns for a
   livelihood, and preach occasionally without fee or reward, as their
   dispositions and circumstances will allow. The number of these had
   become considerably increased in consequence of the numerous locations
   before noticed, as well by licensing those who were thought to possess
   gifts and grace for usefulness in the Church. This useful class of men
   were often called upon to assist the traveling preachers in their work,
   to fill vacancies occasioned by sickness or death, in addition to their
   regular appointments on the Sabbath. In consequence of these things,
   the present General Conference made the following provisions respecting
   a local preacher: --
    1. He must receive a license, after being examined and approved, from
       the quarterly meeting conference, provided he be recommended by the
       class to which he belongs.
    2. After improving his gifts acceptably for four years, by being
       suitably recommended to an annual conference, he was to be eligible
       to the office of a deacon.
    3. Whenever a local preacher filled the place of a traveling preacher,
       if the latter were unable from sickness or other unavoidable means
       to fill his own appointments, he was to be allowed a sum in
       proportion to the allowance of the traveling preacher, to be raised
       by the circuit; or if the traveling preacher were absent from other
       causes, his substitute was to be paid out of his allowance.
    4. But if the local preacher were distressed in his circumstances, in
       consequence of his services in the Church, by applying to the
       quarterly conference, he might receive such relief as they might
       see proper to afford him, after the allowance of the traveling
       preachers and their families were paid.
    5. A rule was made for the trial of a local preacher before his peers,
       differing but little from the one now in existence, which, as the
       regulations respecting them have been modified from time to time, I
       shall notice more particularly in another place. Before this rule
       was passed, local preachers had been tried before the society to
       which they belonged, the same as if they were but private members.
       Since this period, however, they have been amenable either to those
       of their own grade in the ministry or to the quarterly meeting
       conference.

   The following rule respecting the use and sale of spirituous liquors
   was made, and still continues, unhappily, [Bangs apparently thought
   that the regulation was faulty, in that it seemed to give tacit
   legitimacy to some use of spirituous liquors. -- DVM] the standing
   regulation on this subject: --

   "If any member of our society retail or give spirituous liquors, and
   any thing disorderly be transacted under his roof on this account, the
   preacher who has the oversight of the circuit shall proceed against him
   as in the case of other immoralities; and the person accused shall be
   cleared, suspended; or excluded, according to his conduct, as on other
   charges of immorality."

   By turning to the form of Discipline published in 1789, which is said
   to be fifth edition, we find the following item in the General Rules:
   --

   "Drunkenness, buying or selling spirituous liquors, or drinking them."

   This was an alteration from the rule of Mr. Wesley, as that allowed the
   use of them in cases of "extreme necessity," -- whereas this prohibits
   all use of them, as a drink, and even forbids the "buying or selling"
   them under any circumstances. At what time or by whose influence the
   rule was so altered as to read as it now stands in the Discipline, I
   have not been able to ascertain, but presume it must have been some
   time prior to the year 1796, as it seems the pernicious custom of
   retailing them had become so offensive at this time as to require a
   special enactment of the General Conference to check the unhallowed
   practice; for when people begin to make laws with a view to regulate
   any particular practice, it is an evidence that the practice itself is,
   in some sense, sanctioned. It is to be hoped that the time is not far
   distant when the entire use of spirituous liquors shall be banished
   from the world, but more especially from the church of God: and that to
   traffic in them, by either manufacturing, buying or selling them, shall
   be considered as dishonorable, as it is now to become inebriated by
   their excessive use.

   In consequence of the extension of the work, the frequent interruptions
   in the health of Bishop Asbury, and the long absence of Dr. Coke from
   the continent every year, it was considered expedient by many members
   to elect and consecrate some person as an assistant bishop. After
   consulting each other in reference to the manner in which the person
   should be elected, Dr. Coke put an end to the discussion by offering
   himself unreservedly to the American Methodists. This offer was
   accepted by the conference, and Dr. Coke gave them the following
   certificate in writing: --

   "I offer myself to my American brethren entirely to their service, all
   I am and have, with my talents and labors in every respect, without any
   mental reservation whatever, to labor among them and to assist Bishop
   Asbury; not to station the preachers at any time when he is present;
   but to exercise all the episcopal duties, when I hold a conference in
   his absence, and by his consent, and to visit the West Indies and
   France, when there is an opening and I can be spared.

   Signed, Thomas Coke." Conference Room, Baltimore, Oct. 27, 1796."

   This instrument was given and accepted in good faith, and the
   obligation was sacredly fulfilled on the part of Dr. Coke, until he was
   honorably released from it by his American brethren. In pursuance of
   this engagement, Dr. Coke continued on the American continent as the
   "friend and colleague" of Bishop Asbury, laboring with great acceptance
   and usefulness among the people in different parts of the country,
   until the 6th of February, when he took his departure from Charleston,
   South Carolina, for Europe. Having a very tempestuous passage, the ship
   suffered severely, an though they arrived in the Irish channel in
   twenty-five days, they were there becalmed nearly sixteen days, during
   which time the following curious incident occurred, which shows the
   superstition to which seamen, otherwise intelligent, are often
   subjected.

   During the calm Dr. Coke used his time in reading a large folio volume.
   "At length," says his biographer, "being impelled more violently by a
   tide of superstition, than his vessel was by natural breezes, the
   captain exclaimed in unequivocal terms, We shall never have a wind
   until that book is finished.' Sir, I will put it aside,' replied Dr.
   Coke. No,' rejoined the captain, that will not do; it must be finished,
   or we shall have no wind.' Dr. Coke continued reading, and I doubt
   not,' he observes, that the captain was somewhat confirmed in his
   opinion; for just as I had finished the book, the wind sprung up, and
   in six and thirty hours brought us into the harbor.'"

   Having finished the labors of this conference, Bishop Asbury expressing
   his gladness that the session was over, went to his accustomed work,
   and the preachers to their respective fields of labor, being
   "determined to know nothing save Jesus Christ and him crucified."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 3

    From the close of the General Conference in 1796, to the commencement of the
    General Conference in 1800

  1797

   There were six annual conferences held this year, one of which was in
   Wilbraham, Massachusetts, the seventh that was held in New England.
   Three new circuits were returned on the minutes, namely, Pleasant
   River, in Maine; Sandwich, and Martha's Vineyard, in Massachusetts.
   This latter circuit included the island by that name belonging to the
   state of Massachusetts, about twenty-one miles in length, and was once
   the scene of missionary labors by some of our Puritan ancestors, who
   devoted themselves to the conversion of the aborigines of the country.
   But the fruit of these labors, though they abounded for a season, had
   long since disappeared; and among the white inhabitants who had taken
   their place, a few only welcomed the coming of a Methodist preacher;
   for we find that in 1798 no more than thirteen members of the Church
   are credited to Martha's Vineyard.

   Though Bishop Asbury began the year with his wonted diligence, and set
   off upon his annual tour of the continent, yet his physical strength
   was not equal to the task, and he was compelled to yield, though with
   great reluctance, to the necessity of employing a substitute to preside
   in the conferences. He, however, in company with Dr. Coke, rode through
   several of the southern states until the doctor left the continent for
   Ireland.

   The following remark shows the intimate and endeared friendship which
   subsisted between these two servants of God. Speaking of the doctor's
   departure, he says, "Strangers to the delicacies of Christian
   friendship know little or nothing of the pain of parting." After
   spending some time in Charleston, in consequence of his great debility,
   during which, however, he was busy in setting things in order,
   preaching when able, and assisting them in building another house of
   worship, he set off on his western tour. "On my way," he says, "I felt
   as if I was out of prison. Hail ye solitary pines! the jessamine, the
   red-bud, and the dog-wood! How charming in full bloom! the former a
   most fragrant smell." He succeeded in crossing the Cumberland Mountains
   in the state of Tennessee, but such were his bodily afflictions, that,
   through the advice and persuasions of his friends, he relinquished his
   intention of visiting the Kentucky conference, and made his way back as
   he was able to endure the fatigue of traveling, to the city of
   Baltimore. While in the state of Virginia, he made the following
   reflections: --

   "My fever left me, as I thought, from Monday until Friday night. I am
   kept cheerful, but very weak. My diet is chiefly tea, potatoes, Indian
   meal gruel, and chicken broth. My reading is only the Bible. I cannot
   think much, and write only a few letters. I think of my charge, of the
   conferences, and the Church, and of my dear parents, who will probably
   outlive me. [4] I must he made perfect through sufferings. I rest in
   rainy weather, and have to ride from eighty to one hundred miles in a
   week. The way we now go we have sometimes to ride thirty miles to get
   to a house." -- "I have traveled about six hundred miles with an
   inflammatory fever, and a fixed pain in my breast."

   In this state of pain and weakness did this holy man of God pursue his
   work, through the various sections of our country, for the sole purpose
   of building up the Redeemer's kingdom. On the tenth of June he arrived
   in Baltimore, where he had every attention paid to him which Christian
   love and esteem could devise; and notwithstanding his physical
   sufferings, he employed his time, so far as his feeble health would
   allow, in preaching occasionally to the people, visiting the classes,
   and in organizing an African Church. By a suitable attention to medical
   advice, and the nursing care of his affectionate friends, he soon so
   far recruited as to be able to resume his itinerant labors. Accordingly
   we find him on his Northern course passing though Pennsylvania and New
   Jersey, (stopping long enough in the most important places to preach
   and meet the classes,) to New York, and thence he went on his way with
   an intention to meet the conference at Wilbraham in Massachusetts; but
   his fever increasing, he was obliged to stop at Tuckehoe, at the house
   of Bishop Sherwood where he was treated with great kindness. While here
   he makes the following reflections, which show the feelings of a
   sensitive heart, struggling under the burdensome cares of a
   superintendent of the Church, of an obedient and affectionate son,
   still panting for an enlarged sphere of usefulness in the world: --

   "The kindness of this Sherwood family is great; my dear mamma, and
   Betsy Sherwood, and Jonathan and Bishop also: if I had not been at home
   here, what additional distress of mind would have attended me! my
   friends also were welcome to come and see me. Sabbath day, at the widow
   Sherwood's, I had the pleasure of hearing our brother Matthias make a
   pointed, profitable, and powerful discourse. It is now eight weeks
   since I have preached -- awfully dumb Sabbaths! I have been most
   severely tried from various quarters; my fevers, my feet, and Satan,
   would set in with my gloomy and nervous affections. Sometimes subject
   to the greatest effeminacy; to distress at the thought of a useless,
   idle life: but what brought the heavy pang into my heart, and the big
   tear to roll, that never rises without a cause, was the thought of
   leaving the connection without some proper men of their own election,
   to go in and out before them in my place, and to keep that order which
   I have been seeking these many years to establish. My aged parents were
   dear to me in their advanced age and dependent state: like myself, they
   have spent what they had to spare for many years, nearly forty, in
   keeping open doors for the gospel and people of God: this burden hath
   been laid upon them. I am happy that I can now ride a little every
   clear day for my better health, and can eat and sleep better. I am left
   too much alone: I cannot sit in my room all day making gloomy
   reflections on the past, present, and future life. Lord help me! for I
   am poor and needy; the hand of God hath touched me, and I think Satan
   forts himself in my melancholy, unemployed, unsocial, and inactive
   hours."

   While the bishop was thus hindered from attending the conference in
   Wilbraham, it was some consolation to him to know that there were those
   in the Church who could supply his place, without material detriment to
   the cause. He Accordingly wrote to Jesse Lee, requesting him to attend
   the Conference in Wilbraham, which he did, and the conference made
   choice of him to preside over their deliberations. This duty he
   discharged to their entire satisfaction, doing all the business of an
   annual conference except the ordinations. Afterward, at the request of
   the bishop, and on the recommendation of that conference, Mr. Lee left
   New England and accompanied Bishop Asbury, with a view to aid him in
   his peculiar work, to some of the more southern conferences. After
   attending the Virginia conference together, the bishop, at the request
   of the conference, stopped to recruit his strength, now much wasted by
   sickness and fatigue, and Mr. Lee went on to attend the more southern
   conferences.

   This year the city of Philadelphia was severely visited by an
   epidemical disease which hurried into eternity thousands of its
   citizens, and induced thousands of others to flee for safety into the
   country. On this account the conference which was to have set in that
   city was removed to Duck Creek, in the state of Delaware.

   The number of locations still continued to embarrass the itinerancy, as
   not less than forty-three were returned this year "under a location
   through weakness of body and family concerns." How much more mighty in
   strength and comely in beauty would have been the Methodist Episcopal
   Church had she used the proper means to retain in her itinerant service
   all those men of God! Youth and inexperience were often called in to
   supply the lack of service occasioned by these premature departures
   from the regular work.

   While the increase, though comparatively small among the members, shows
   the good effects resulting from a united effort to spread the knowledge
   of God our Saviour, the decrease in the number of preachers, as will be
   seen below, evinces a lamentable defect in securing the continued
   labors of all those who had entered the itinerating ranks.

   Two preachers, namely, John Ragan and Albert Van Nostrand, closed their
   labors and life this year in peace, and went to their reward in glory.

   Numbers in the Church

   Last year and this, in the recapitulation of the numbers, I find them
   taken by states; and that the reader may see the relative strength of
   Methodism in the several states of the Union, I give them as they stand
   In the minutes for 1797.

   Province of Maine -- Whites: 616; Colored:

   New Hampshire -- Whites: 92; Colored:

   Massachusetts -- Whites: 905; Colored: 8

   Rhode Island -- Whites: 175; Colored: 2

   Connecticut -- Whites: 1,186; Colored: 15

   New York -- Whites: 4,612; Colored: 238

   New Jersey -- Whites: 2,438; Colored: 127

   Pennsylvania -- Whites: 2,900; Colored: 198

   Delaware -- Whites: 1,461; Colored: 823

   Maryland -- Whites: 6,982; Colored: 5,106

   Virginia -- Whites: 11,046; Colored: 2,490

   North Carolina -- Whites: 7,251; Colored: 2,071

   South Carolina -- Whites: 2,693; Colored: 890

   Georgia -- Whites: 1,022; Colored: 148

   Tennessee -- Whites: 534; Colored: 42

   Kentucky -- Whites: 1,740; Colored: 57

   Canada -- Whites: 792; Colored: 3

   Total This Year -- Whites: 46,445; Colored: 12,218

   Grand Total This Year: 58,663

   Grand Total Last Year: 56,664

   Increase: 1,999

   Preachers This Year: 262

   Preachers Last Year: 293

   Decrease: 31

   It will be seen by the above enumeration, that there were upward of
   twelve thousand people of color attached to the Methodist Episcopal
   Church. These were chiefly in the southern states, and had been
   gathered principally from the slave population.

   At an early period of the Methodist ministry in this country, it had
   turned its attention and directed its efforts toward these people, with
   a view to bring them to the enjoyment of gospel blessings. The
   preachers deplored, with the deepest sympathy, their unhappy condition,
   especially their enslavement to sin and Satan; and while they labored
   unsuccessfully by all prudent means to effect their disenthrallment
   from their civil bondage, they were amply rewarded for their
   evangelical efforts to raise them from their moral degradation, by
   seeing thousands of them happily converted to God. These efforts added
   much to the labor of the preachers, for such was the condition of the
   slaves that they were not permitted, on working days, to attend the
   public administration of the word in company with their masters; and
   hence the preachers devoted the evenings to their instruction, after
   the customary labors of the day were closed. And although at first
   there was much aversion manifested by the masters toward these
   benevolent efforts to elevate the condition of their slaves, yet
   witnessing the beneficial effects of the gospel upon their hearts and
   lives, they gradually yielded their prejudices, and encouraged the
   preachers in their labors, assisted in providing houses to accommodate
   them in their worship, and otherwise protected them in their religious
   privileges. While, therefore, the voice of the preachers was not heard
   in favor of emancipation from their civil bondage, nor their
   remonstrances against the evils of slavery heeded, the voice of truth
   addressed to the understandings and consciences of the slaves
   themselves, was often heard with believing and obedient hearts, and
   made instrumental in their deliverance from the shackles of sin and the
   bondage of Satan. Those who were thus redeemed were enrolled among the
   people of God, and were consequently entitled to the privileges of the
   Church of Christ. In some of the northern cities, houses of worship
   were erected for their special and separate accommodation, and they
   were put under the pastoral charge of a white preacher, who was
   generally assisted by such colored local preachers as may have been
   raised up among themselves; for many such, from time to time,
   possessing gifts for edification, were licensed to preach the gospel to
   their colored brethren, and some of these have been eminently useful.
   In the more southern states, where the municipal regulations in respect
   to the slaves are more severe, some portion of the churches where the
   white population assemble is usually set apart for the blacks. Their
   behavior has generally been such as to insure the confidence of their
   masters and the protection of their civil rulers, though they labored
   under the disabilities incident to a state of servitude.

   This year, ten months from the time the former house was consumed by
   fire, on the 19th of October, the new church in Light Street, in the
   city of Baltimore, was consecrated to the service of almighty God.

  1798

   There were seven conferences this year, so arranged that the bishops
   might begin their labors in the southern states in the winter season,
   and travel on north in the spring and summer months. One of these
   conferences was held in Readfield, in the province of Maine, for the
   accommodation of that part of the work.

   Chenango, in the western part of New York, Vergennes, in Vermont, and
   Providence, in Rhode Island, were added to the list of circuits. The
   western section of the state of New York was, at this time, a new
   country, just filling up with inhabitants, and was generally destitute
   of the word and ordinances of Christianity. To supply them with these
   several young men full of zeal for the cause of God, were sent into
   this newly settled country, under the care of the Rev. F. Garrettson,
   to whom the charge of the Albany district was confided. As early as
   1792, Mr. Garrettson had traveled though various parts of this new
   country, preaching to the people in their log houses, in barns, and
   often holding his quarterly meetings under the foliage of the trees.
   Aided as he was by those zealous and indefatigable young preachers who
   entered this field of labor, he was instrumental in extending the
   gospel and its attendant blessings into these destitute places; by
   these means those societies were established, which have continued to
   nourish and increase to the present time. Along the Mohawk river, as
   far as Utica, as well as the Chenango and Susquehanna rivers, those
   pioneers of Methodism penetrated, and laid the foundation for those
   extensive revivals of religion which have blessed that region of
   country. We may form some judgment of the good effects of these labors
   and sacrifices from the fact that there were returned in the minutes
   for this year, including the Tioga, Wyoming, Saratoga and Seneca
   circuits, 892 members of the Church. Had equal zeal been manifested at
   this early period in building suitable houses of worship, as the work
   enlarged with the progress of the settlements, Methodism would have
   taken a stand here more firmly, and have exerted a much more hallowed
   and extensive influence over the population. As it was, however, the
   permanency of the work has been manifested by its steady growth and
   leavening effects on that flourishing part of the country; and more
   latterly the defect alluded to has been in a great measure remedied by
   the zeal and industry of those enlightened men to whom the oversight of
   the work has been committed.

   A gradual extension of the cause was witnessed generally throughout our
   bounds, and much harmony and peace prevailed among preachers and
   people.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 47,867; Last Year: 46,445;
   Increase: 1,422 -- Colored This Year: 12,302; Last Year: 12,218;
   Increase: 84 -- Total This Year: 60,169; Last Year: 58,663 -- Increase:
   1,506 -- Preachers This Year: 267; Last Year: 262; Increase: 5.

   During the prevalence of the yellow fever in the city of Philadelphia
   this year, many estimable citizens were swept from time to eternity,
   and among others that eminent preacher of the gospel, John Dickins,
   whose useful services in the Church entitle him to a more special and
   lengthened notice than what has been given to some others.

   He was a native of Great Britain, born and educated in the city of
   London. At what time he emigrated to this country is not stated; but it
   appears that in 1774 he was made a partaker of divine grace, and united
   himself to the Methodist society in Virginia. In 1777 he was admitted
   into the traveling ministry, and itinerated extensively though Virginia
   and North Carolina in the time of the Revolutionary war. For some cause
   he located in 1781, but two years after was readmitted into the
   conference, and was stationed in the city of New York, where he labored
   for several years acceptably and usefully. When the Book Room was
   established in the city of Philadelphia in 1789, he was appointed to
   its superintendence, and he managed its concerns with great skill and
   fidelity until his demise. For this station he was eminently qualified,
   not only on account of his strict fidelity, his theological
   attainments, and thorough acquaintance with the economy of Methodism,
   but also from his literary acquirements. His knowledge of the sciences
   was considerable, and besides his own language, he was familiar with
   the Latin and Greek. And, though not brilliant in his conceptions nor
   splendid as a preacher, he was of sound judgment, a close and
   conclusive reasoner, a plain, pointed, and successful preacher, always
   adapting, as nearly as might be, his discourses to the condition and
   circumstances of his hearers. As an evidence of the soundness of his
   views as a divine, may be mentioned the fact that the "Short Scriptural
   Catechism," which has been published for many years at our Book Room,
   was the production of his pen. And whatever may be said in behalf of
   others which have been since issued from the press, this is among the
   most excellent of them all, and should never be superseded by those of
   less intrinsic merit. It contains in fact a body of divinity in a few
   words, selected from the Holy Scriptures, arranged in due order, in the
   very phraseology in "which the Holy Ghost teacheth."

   The accuracy and fidelity with which he discharged his duties as an
   editor, and also as a financier and bookkeeper -- for in each of these
   capacities did he serve while superintending the Book Concern in
   Philadelphia -- may be seen and appreciated by an inspection of the
   books of the establishment, by a recurrence to the manner in which it
   prospered in his hands, and the typographical correctness with which
   the books were executed.

   In the relations of husband and parent he sustained the purity and
   dignity of his station, mixing in all his deportment the tenderness of
   the warmest affection with the attributes essential to maintain his
   authority as the head of a family. In the relation of a father ever
   attentive to the best interests of his children, he devoted himself to
   their education, to training their minds to moral and religious duties,
   and to restraining them from those vices which corrupt the mind, and
   lay the foundation for present and future misery.

   The state of his mind may be seen by the following extract of a letter
   which he wrote to Bishop Asbury a short time before his death. The
   reader will recollect that the yellow fever was then raging in
   Philadelphia with awful and destructive violence, sweeping into
   eternity thousands of his fellow-beings, while others, to escape from
   this devouring plague, were flying into various parts of the country.
   Notwithstanding these alarming aspects in the heavens and the earth
   around him, John Dickins remained, as a faithful sentinel, at his post,
   giving warning to the impenitent, and counsel and consolation to the
   trembling and dying believer. In the midst of these things, he says to
   Bishop Asbury: --

   "My much-esteemed Friend and Brother -- I sit down to write as in the
   jaws of death. Whether Providence may permit me to see your face again
   in the flesh I know not; but if not, I hope, though abundant mercy, we
   shall meet in the presence of God. I am fully conscious that I am an
   unprofitable, a very unprofitable servant; but I think my heart
   condemns me not, and therefore I have confidence in God. Perhaps I
   might have left the city, as most of my friends and brethren have done;
   but when I thought of such a thing, my mind recurred to that Providence
   which has done so much for me, a poor worm, that I was afraid of
   indulging any distrust. So I commit myself and family into the hands of
   God, for life or death."

   Soon after writing the above, he was seized with the raging epidemic,
   and on the 27th of September, 1795, he took his departure to a better
   world, in the fifty-second year of his age. During his sickness, which
   he contracted while visiting the abodes of wretchedness and
   administering the consolations of the gospel to the dying, he was saved
   from those awful agitations of body and mind which are usually the
   accompaniments of this fatal disease, and with great tranquillity of
   mind he entered into his Master's joy. From the testimony of his
   bereaved widow it appears that he said to her, on the first day of his
   illness, --

   "I am very ill; but I entreat you in the most earnest manner, not to be
   the least discomposed or uneasy. Tell the children, I beg them not to
   be uneasy, for divine wisdom cannot err. Glory be to God! I can rejoice
   in his will, whether for life or death. I know all is well! Glory be to
   Jesus! I hang upon three. Glory be to thee, O, my God I have made it my
   constant business, in my feeble manner, to please thee -- and now, O
   God, thou dost comfort me."

   In this happy frame of mind did he meet the last enemy on his first
   approaches. Then clasping his hands together, he joyfully exclaimed,
   "Glory be to God! Glory! Glory be to God! My soul now enjoys such sweet
   communion with him, that I would not give it for all the world. Glory
   be to Jesus! O, glory be to God! I have not felt so much for seven
   years. Love him! Trust him! Praise him!"

   Bishop Asbury bears the following testimony to the character of Mr.
   Dickins: -- "For piety, probity, profitable preaching, holy living,
   Christian education of his children, secret closet prayer, I doubt
   whether his superior is to be found either in Europe or America."

   James King, and Michael H. R. Wilson, also finished their course and
   entered into their Master's joy.

   Twelve were located; and for the first time, four were returned as
   supernumerary preachers this year. These were, John Smith, Thomas
   Morrell, Enoch Mudge, and Henry Willis.

  1799

   This year there were only six conferences, the first of which was in
   Charleston, S. C., January 1, and the last in the city of New York,
   June 19, 1799.

   As John Dickins, the book steward, had gone to his reward, by the
   recommendation of the Philadelphia Conference, Bishop Asbury appointed
   Ezekiel Cooper, to superintend the Book Concern, which was still
   carried on in the city of Philadelphia.

   This year was distinguished by several revivals of religion. In Upper
   Canada a gracious revival had commenced in 1797, chiefly through the
   instrumentality of Calvin Wooster, whose fervency of spirit led him
   forth in the work of reformation in a most remarkable manner, and with
   singular success. In company with Samuel Coate, he volunteered his
   services as a missionary to this distant field of labor, and after
   enduring almost incredible hardships on their way, for they lodged no
   less than twenty-one nights in the wilderness, they arrived in safety
   just in time to attend a quarterly meeting on the Bay of Quinte
   circuit. After the preaching on Saturday, while the presiding elder,
   Darius Dunham, retired with the official brethren to hold the quarterly
   meeting conference, brother Wooster remained in the meeting to pray
   with some who were under awakenings, and others who were groaning for
   full redemption in the blood of Christ. While uniting with his brethren
   in this exercise, the power of the Most high seemed to overshadow the
   congregation, and many were filled with joy unspeakable, and were
   praising the Lord aloud for what he had done for their souls, while
   others "with speechless awe, and silent love," were prostrate on the
   floor. When the presiding elder came into the house, he beheld these
   things with a mixture of wonder and indignation, believing that
   "wild-fire" was burning among the people. After gazing for a while with
   silent astonishment, he kneeled down and began to pray to God to stop
   the "raging of the wild-fire," as he called it. In the meantime, Calvin
   Wooster, whose soul was burning with the "fire of the holy Spirit,"
   kneeled by the side of brother Dunham, and while the latter was
   earnestly engaged in prayer for God to put out the wild-fire, Wooster
   softly whispered out a prayer in the following words, "Lord, bless
   brother Dunham! Lord, bless brother Dunham!" Thus they continued for
   some minutes -- when, at length, the prayer of brother Wooster
   prevailed, and Dunham fell prostrate on the floor -- and ere he arose
   received a baptism of that very fire which he had so feelingly
   deprecated as the effect of a wild imagination. There was now harmony
   in their prayers, feelings, and views; and this was the commencement of
   a revival of religion which soon spread though the entire province for
   as brother Dunham was the presiding elder, he was instrumental in
   spreading the sacred flame throughout the district, to the joy and
   salvation of hundreds of immortal souls.

   Calvin Wooster was a man of mighty prayer and faith. Frequently was his
   voice heard, by the families where he lodged, in the night season, when
   rising from his bed while others slept, he would pour out the desire of
   his soul to God, in earnest prayer for the salvation of souls. Such,
   indeed, was the strength of his faith in God, and the fervency of his
   spirit, as well as the bold and pointed manner of his appeals to the
   consciences of his hearers, and particularly to the wicked, that few of
   these could stand before him -- they would either flee from the house,
   or, smitten with conviction, fall down and cry aloud for mercy while,
   in the midst of these exercises, the saints of God were shouting forth
   his praises.

   Nor was he alone in this work. The other preachers caught the flame of
   divine love, and were came forward under its sacred impulses in their
   Master's work. Many instances of the manifestations of divine power and
   grace might be narrated, which go to illustrate the authority by which
   these men of God spoke in his name; one of which I will relate.

   At a quarterly meeting in the Bay of Quinte district, as the preacher
   commenced his sermon, a thoughtless man in the front gallery,
   commenced, in a playful mood, to swear profanely, and otherwise to
   disturb the congregation. The preacher paid no attention to him until
   he was in the midst of his sermon, when, feeling strong in faith and
   the power of His might, suddenly stopping, he fixed his piercing eye
   upon the profane man, then stamping with his foot, and pointing his
   finger at him with great energy, he cried out, "My God! smite him!" He
   instantly fell, as if shot though the heart with a bullet. At this
   moment such a divine afflatus came down upon the congregation, that
   sinners were crying to God for mercy in every direction, while the
   saints of God burst forth in loud praises to his name. Similar
   instances of God's gracious presence were not uncommon in those days in
   that country, as they have been related to the writer on the most
   unquestionable authority. Indeed, this great work may be said to have
   been, in some sense, the beginning of that great revival of religion
   which soon after spread through various parts of the United States.

   The doctrine more especially urged upon believers was that of
   sanctification, or holiness of heart and life, -- a complete surrender
   of the soul and body, all their powers and affections, to the service
   of God -- and this was pressed upon them as their present privilege;
   depending for its accomplishment now on the faithfulness of God, who
   had promised to do it. When this baptism of the Holy Ghost which fired
   and filled the hearts of God's ministers at that time, and which
   enabled them so to speak that the people felt that their words were
   with "demonstration and power," and they could not well resist the
   influence of those "thoughts which breathed," and those "words which
   burned."

   Nor were they less assiduous to press upon the unconverted the
   necessity of immediate and instantaneous conversion, or a present
   justification by faith in Jesus Christ -- warning them in the most
   faithful and affectionate manner of the imminent danger of delaying one
   moment to repent of their sins, and surrender their hearts to God. O
   what awful sensations ran though the assemblies while Calvin Wooster,
   and others of a like spirit, were denouncing the just judgments of God
   against impenitent sinners, in such pointed language as made the "ear
   to tingle," and the heart to palpitate! Nor were they less affected
   while these men of God portrayed in such lively colors the beauty and
   amiableness of religion, the ability and willingness of the Lord Jesus
   Christ to save them, and concluded by urging them, in the most earnest
   manner, and with the most affectionate and pathetic strain of
   eloquence, to accept of pardon and invitation without a moment's delay.

   "We are not to suppose that this work went on without opposition. In
   that country there was a marked line of distinction "between the
   righteous and the wicked," there being but few formal professors of
   religion to interpose between the two classes. And such was the general
   state of society, that those who did not embrace religion felt
   themselves at liberty to manifest their hatred to its doctrines by open
   acts of hostility, by scurrilous speeches, and in some instances by
   personal violence. But in the midst of the obloquy and reproach heaped
   upon the servants of God, they held on their way, boldly proclaiming
   the sacred truths of the gospel; and, not infrequently, some of the
   boldest opposers of the truth no sooner came within its hearing, than
   they were forced to yield to its authority, when they willingly bowed
   their necks to the yoke of Jesus Christ. One instance among many others
   I will relate. A stout opposer of the Methodists, hearing that his wife
   was in a prayer-meeting, rushed violently into the room, seized the
   wife, and dragged her to the door, when, attempting to open it, he was
   himself seized with trembling, his knees failed him, and he fell
   helpless upon the floor, and was fain to beg an interest in the prayer
   of those very people whom he had so much despised and persecuted. He
   rose not until the Lord released him from his sins and made him a
   partaker of his pardoning mercy. This very man afterward became an
   itinerant minister, with whom I was personally acquainted, and had the
   relation of these facts from his own lips.

   All, however, were not so fortunate. The Rev. James Coleman, calling to
   visit a woman under conviction for sin, while talking with her, was
   assailed by her husband, who struck him on the forehead so violently,
   that he carried the mark for a considerable time; and then, to add to
   the enormity of the offense, raised the scandalous report that Mr.
   Coleman was holding improper discourse with his wife, which, indeed,
   was believed by many, until the real cause was revealed, namely, the
   man's hatred to true religion.

   This seems a suitable place to notice the introduction of Methodism
   into the state of Ohio, which was received into the Union in 1802. It
   is said that the first settlement in Ohio was commenced in the town of
   Marietta in 1788, by emigrants from Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and
   Connecticut. What is called the "Western Reserve," was chiefly settled
   by persons from Connecticut, who purchased the lands of that state
   about eight years after the first settlement was made. Like all the
   other new territories in our western wilderness, the settlers were at
   first destitute of the ordinances of religion, though many of those who
   removed to Ohio carried their Bibles with them, and retained the
   religions impressions which they had received at home.

   It seems that about the year 1796, Francis McCormick, a local preacher,
   emigrated from Virginia, first to Kentucky, but not liking his
   situation, removed to what was then called the Northwestern Territory,
   now Ohio, and settled on the Little Miami, near where the town of
   Milford now stands. Having no associates like-minded with himself, he
   went to work in the name of the Lord, and was instrumental in forming a
   class of ten members, including himself and the members of his family.
   Being encouraged by this success, he began holding meetings wherever he
   could gain access to the people, and soon succeeded in forming two more
   classes, one at brother Ramsey's, on the Obannon's Creek, and another
   at brother Nutt's near Columbia, each consisting of about ten members.
   In these labors, though much opposed by the thoughtless and some
   bigoted professors of religion, he enjoyed much of the presence of the
   Lord, and often rejoiced over returning prodigals to their Father's
   house.

   Being attached to the itinerant plan of preaching the gospel, Mr.
   McCormick made several attempts to procure a regular preacher, but
   could not succeed, because there were not preachers enough to supply
   the circuits already formed and forming in Kentucky and Tennessee, and
   at the same time to answer his call. At length he was joined in his
   labors by Philip Gatch, who was among the first Methodist preachers
   raised up in America, for his name appears in the minutes as an
   assistant in 1774, and was stationed at that time on Frederick circuit
   in Maryland, his native state. He was now a local preacher, having
   desisted from traveling in 1778 -- and moving into this new country,
   became an efficient agent in building up the cause of God. They were
   soon after joined by some other pious families from various parts of
   the older states; and in 1799 they were visited by the Rev. John
   Kobler, from the Hinkstone circuit, in Kentucky. In company with
   brother McCormick, he traveled up the Little Miami to the Mad river, as
   far as there were any settlements, and then down the Great Miami river.
   They met with some opposition from a few bigoted professors of
   religion, with whom they disagreed on some doctrinal points, but in
   general the people appeared ripe for the gospel; and thus these visits
   laid the foundation for that flourishing state of Methodism which has
   been witnessed in this thriving part of our country. They were soon
   after regularly supplied with preaching, and though the inhabitants,
   from their ignorance of the real character and motives of the preachers
   who came among them, seemed at first afraid to receive them into their
   houses or to hear them preach, yet they gradually succeeded in gaining
   their attention and confidence, and in bringing many of them from
   "darkness into the marvelous light of gospel."

   In 1803, John Collins, a local preacher from New Jersey, settled on the
   east fork of the Little Miami: his labors were greatly blessed among
   the people, and through his instrumentality several young preachers
   were raised up for the itinerancy, who became eminently useful. In 1807
   brother Collins joined the traveling ministry, and has continued his
   useful labors to the present time. Through his and the labors of others
   who united with him in this work, circuits were formed, and societies
   established in that part of Ohio along the banks of the Great and
   Little Miami rivers, Mad River, Cesar's Creek, in Urbana and Xenia,
   Derby and Paint Creeks, so that in 1807 an annual conference was held
   in Chillicothie, at which time there were in the Ohio district 3683
   members, and 17 preachers.

   In the Western Reserve, Methodism is about co-eval [contemporary] with
   the earliest settlement of the country. The first society was formed in
   Deerfield, in 1801, by a few persons who had emigrated from
   Massachusetts, namely, Lewis Day, Lewis Ely, their families, and a few
   others. The next year a society was formed, in the town of Hubbard, at
   George Frazier's, an emigrant from the Eastern Shore of Maryland. In
   the same year, Henry Shaul, an exhorter, and afterward a local
   preacher, moved from Georgetown, Pa., having previously traveled nearly
   forty miles though the woods to visit the brethren in that place, and
   settled in the town of Deerfield. About the same time William Veach and
   Amos Smith, local preachers, settled in Hubbard, and helped to build up
   the society; and Obed Crosby, a local preacher, established himself in
   the town of Vernon. These opened the way for the introduction of
   Methodism in the Western Reserve.

   In 1803, Shadrach Bostwick, who had been a traveling preacher for
   several years in the eastern conferences, was stationed as a missionary
   at Deerfield, which was at that time connected with the Baltimore
   conference. He was the first regular preacher sent to the Western
   Reserve, and he succeeded in forming a small circuit among the new
   settlements, which he traveled by following Indian trails and marked
   trees, from one little settlement to another, and at the next
   conference he returned sixteen Church members. For want of roads and
   bridge, he was compelled to desist from traveling in the winter months.
   He continued his labors until 1805, when he located, and the few
   appointments he had secured were connected with the Erie circuit, then
   under the charge of David Best and Joseph A. Shackleford. In this way
   the work commenced in this section of the state of Ohio, and it has
   continued from that day to this gradually and sometimes powerfully to
   advance, keeping an even pace with the progress of the settlements and
   the improvements of society.

   In many other parts of the country the work of God greatly prospered.
   The delightful harmony which prevailed among preachers and people, and
   the efforts which were made to extend the blessings of the gospel into
   the new settlements, east, west, north, and south, gave a vigorous
   impulse to the general cause, and became a means of bringing hundreds
   into the fold of Christ.

   In the month of January of this year, George Clark was sent to St.
   Mary's, in the state of Georgia. He found the people in general quite
   destitute of the gospel, and consequently ignorant of its requisitions,
   some having arrived to maturity without the privilege of ever hearing a
   sermon or even a prayer. He bestowed his labors chiefly on the people
   in Glenn and Camden counties, and so unacquainted were they with Divine
   worship that he found it needful to teach them the very first elements
   of Christianity, even when they should kneel, and when sit, in time of
   public worship. His labors, however, were so sanctioned of God; that
   before the year closed, many of the people became constant hearers of
   the word, while a number of others were truly converted to God and
   thoroughly reformed in their lives. The first Methodist society in the
   town of Augusta, Ga., was formed in the month of December of this year
   under the labors of Stith Mead. Some time after this they succeeded in
   building a commodious house of worship, and the society has gradually
   enlarged its borders from that day to this.

   This year, Tobias Gibson volunteered his services as a missionary to
   Natchez, in the Mississippi Territory. Though this territory was not
   received into the confederacy as an independent state, until the year
   1817, yet the people from several of the older states had emigrated
   into its bounds, and were forming settlement in various places along
   the banks of the Mississippi River, the chief of which, at that time,
   was the town of Natchez. Like other new settlements, they were
   generally destitute of religious privileges, and in danger of being
   carried away in the stream of moral pollution. Tobias Gibson, being
   released from his regular work, in consequence of ill health, feeling
   his mind drawn toward the people in that western country, set off to
   pay them a visit. Though he found them under the influence of different
   religious creeds, so far as any religious influence was felt, they
   received him as a messenger of God, and his labors were blessed to the
   awakening and conversion of souls. The report of his labors and success
   at the next conference was highly satisfactory, and accordingly, in
   1800, his name appears on the minutes for Natchez, with eighty members
   in the church. He continued in this country until his death in 1804.

   Some idea may be formed of the difficulties he had to encounter and the
   privations he endured, from the fact, that after traveling six hundred
   miles, much of the way though the wilderness, to Cumberland River,
   taking his saddle and traveling equipage into a canoe, he paddled
   himself down the Cumberland into the Ohio River, and thence into the
   Mississippi, a distance of upward of seven hundred miles more, to the
   town of Natchez. Four times he traversed the wilderness, a distance of
   six hundred miles, being conducted by some friendly Indians on his
   devious way. The burning love of God which impelled him on in this
   work, filled his mouth with persuasive arguments in behalf of the
   gospel, and made him instrumental in leading many a wanderer back to
   his Father's house. When so worn down by his excessive labors and
   exposure, as to be unable to pursue his work with the wonted vigor, he
   came to the conference, and so earnestly plead the cause in behalf of
   those people, that in 1803 another, Moses Floyd, was sent to his help,
   and by their patient and indefatigable labors in this newly settled
   country, they laid a foundation for the erection of that superstructure
   of Methodism which has since reared itself in those western wilds.

   No less than twenty-nine preachers located this year, and ten were
   returned supernumerary. The following had died: --

   John N. Jones and William Wilkerson, both of whom were natives of
   Virginia, the former having traveled eight, and the latter five years.
   They had been zealous and faithful, and died in the Lord.

   Hezekiah Calvin Wooster also took his departure to another world this
   year. We have already seen something of his character in the notice we
   have taken of the work of God in Upper Canada. His name is "like
   ointment poured forth," to many in that country, and he used to be
   spoken of as an extraordinary messenger of God, sent to declare his
   counsels unto a fallen and rebellious world. After exerting all his
   powers of body and mind in beseeching sinners to be reconciled to God,
   he returned home with the fatal consumption fastened upon his lungs.
   But even while in this feeble state, so reduced as not to be able to
   speak above a whisper, this whisper, being announced to the
   congregation by another, was frequently attended by such a divine
   energy and unction, that sinners would tremble and fall under the
   announcement, while the people of God felt the holy anointing running
   though their souls. It is said, indeed, that his very countenance
   exhibited such marks of the Divine glory that it struck conviction into
   the hearts of many who beheld it.

   "Behold how great a matter a little fire kindleth." Though Hezekiah
   Calvin Wooster could not be regarded as a man of more than ordinary
   talents as a preacher, yet, such was the holy fervor of his soul, his
   deep devotion to God, his burning love for the souls of his fellow-men,
   that he was the happy instrument of kindling up such a fire in the
   hearts of the people, wherever he went, particularly in Upper Canada,
   that all the waters of strife and opposition have not been able to
   quench it. This testimony I consider due to such departed worth. The
   grace of God wrought mightily in him, and great was his glorying in the
   cross of Christ -- nor did he glory in aught else -- for he was as much
   distinguished for his humility, his deadness to self, and to
   self-applause, as he was for the fervor of his spirit, the strength of
   his faith, and the boldness and pointedness of his appeals to the
   consciences of the people.

   That he enjoyed "perfect love," was demonstrated, not only from the
   fact of his having recorded the time when he received this great
   blessing, [5] but also and more especially from the whole tenor of his
   life, his constant self-denial, his watchings and fastings, and from
   the "fruit of the Spirit, love, faith, meekness, patience, gentleness,
   long-suffering, and charity," which shone out conspicuously in all his
   deportment, in the temper of his mind, and the words of his lips.

   It could not be expected otherwise than that such a man should be
   prepared to meet his "last enemy" with firmness, and to "rejoice in
   hope of the glory of God," when drawing near to the termination of his
   earthly career. Accordingly, when so exhausted as to be scarcely able
   to speak, on being asked by his father if his confidence was still
   strong in the Lord, he answered with holy triumph, "Yes, strong!
   strong!" And a short time before his eyes were closed in death, he
   said, "The nearer I draw to eternity, the brighter heaven shines upon
   me." He thus "fell asleep in Jesus" on the 6th of November, 1798, in
   the 28th year of his age and the fifth year of his ministry. Though his
   race was short, it was brilliant -- its brilliancy arising not so much
   from the splendor of his talents as from the purity of his motives, the
   fidelity of his private and public life, and the holy and burning zeal
   with which he pursued his vocation until sickness and death put a stop
   to his activity. And when he sunk under the cloud of death, he left
   such a trail of light behind him, as shall, it is humbly hoped, never
   be extinguished. Such honor God puts upon those who honor him.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 49115; Last Year: 47,867;
   Increase: 1,248 -- Colored This Year: 12,236; Last Year: 12,302;
   Decrease: 66 -- Total This Year: 61,351; Last Year: 60,169 -- Increase:
   1,182 -- Preachers This Year: 272; Last Year: 267; Increase: 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4] In this he was under a mistake, as he lived to pay a merited token
   of respect to both his parents on occasion of their death.

   [5] The following was found among his papers after his death: --
   "Hezekiah Calvin Wooster was born May 20, 1771. Convicted of sin
   October 9, 1791. Born again December 1, 1791. Sanctified February 6,
   1792."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 4

    An Account of the General Conference of 1800

  1800

   As the oldest manuscript journal of a General Conference I have been
   able to find is the one for this year, I have been guided thus far from
   printed documents only, and from such facts as I have been able to
   collect from living witnesses. Hereafter recourse will be also had to
   the records of the General Conference for such information as relates
   to the general affairs of the Church, and to the alterations or
   additions which may have been made from time to time in the rules and
   regulations of the Discipline.

   There were eight annual conferences held this year, the first beginning
   in Charleston, S. C., January 1, and the last in Lynn, Mass., on the
   18th of July. But before we notice the extension of the work in the
   bounds of the several conferences, and in the new settlements of the
   western country, we will detail the doings of the General Conference,
   which was held from the 6th to the 20th day of May, in the city of
   Baltimore.

   By a reference to the journal of Bishop Asbury for the year 1799, it
   will be perceived that such was his physical debility, originating from
   excessive labors, the multiplicity of his cares, and his exposures to
   all sorts of weather, that, though he continued his annual tour of the
   continent, he was able to preach but seldom, and that it was with much
   difficulty he discharged his official duties at several annual
   conferences. In consequence of this general debility he entertained
   serious thoughts of resigning the superintendency at the ensuing
   General Conference, and accordingly wrote to several of his most
   judicious friends in reference to it, giving them information of his
   intention. So confirmed was he in the intention of resigning his
   office, and of taking a seat on a level with his brethren in the
   conference, that he had prepared a letter to that effect, with a design
   to present it to the conference, fully believing that his bodily health
   was not adequate to the discharge of the multitudinous and important
   duties of a superintendent. When the conference convened, and the
   subject of the bishop's resignation was introduced, he informed them
   that in consequence of bodily infirmities, he had not been able to
   travel, as heretofore, on horseback, nor to preach as often as usual,
   and therefore had been obliged to take with him a traveling companion,
   that the appointments might be regularly filled -- and moreover that
   his labors were frequently interrupted for want of strength to perform
   them regularly; on which account he did not know that the conference
   were fully satisfied with the manner in which he had discharged his
   official trust. After some conversation on these topics, the following
   questions and answering were unanimously agreed to: --

   "Question. Whereas, Mr. Asbury has signified his intention of resigning
   his official station in our Church on account of his weakness of body,
   what is the sense of the conference on this occasion?

   "Answer 1. The General' Conference consider themselves under many and
   great obligations to Mr. Asbury for the many and great services which
   he has rendered to this connection.

   "2. This conference do earnestly entreat Mr. Asbury for a continuation
   of his services as one of the general superintendents of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church as far as his strength will permit."

   This unequivocal expression of confidence and affection so satisfied
   the bishop of their unabated attachment to him, and of their
   approbation of his conduct, that he told them in answer,
   notwithstanding his feelings led him still to decline the arduous
   duties of his office, yet, as his general health was better than it had
   been, he was willing to continue his services in any way the conference
   might think best. This matter being set at rest,

   The next question which arose was, whether Dr. Coke, who was present as
   one of the presidents of the conference, might have liberty to return
   to Europe in conformity to an earnest request of the British Conference
   to that effect. This request was founded on the acknowledged right
   which the American Conference had to the exclusive services of Dr.
   Coke, in consequence of the solemn pledge he had given them in the year
   1796, *[See Book IV., Chap. 3] and which had been gratefully accepted
   by the American Conference. And so sacred was this obligation
   considered by Dr. Coke, and recognized by the British Conference, that
   he would not consent to a withdrawal of his services from his American
   brethren without their approbation and consent. When, however, his
   engagement was first made known to the brethren in Great Britain, they
   expressed their deep regrets that the doctor had thus deprived them of
   his valuable services, particularly in the missionary department of
   their work. Accordingly, when he visited the continent in 1797, he
   brought with him an earnest and affectionate address from the British
   Conference to their American brethren, in which they urged the doctor's
   return to Europe with all practicable speed, as his presence and
   influence among them seemed necessary to secure their peace and
   harmony, and more especially for the efficient prosecution of their
   missionary enterprise, which was then in its infancy. But as the
   engagement of Dr. Coke was made with the General Conference, which
   would not again assemble until 1800, no official action could be had in
   reference to this subject at that time. The address, however, was
   submitted to the Virginia conference, at which Dr. Coke was present,
   and the following letter from Bishop Asbury will show the light in
   which the matter was viewed by them, as well as the high estimation in
   which Dr. Coke was held by his brethren on both sides of the Atlantic

   Respected Fathers and Brethren: -- You, in your brotherly kindness,
   were pleased to address a letter to us, your brethren and friends in
   America, expressing your difficulties and desires concerning our
   beloved brother Dr. Coke, that he might return to Europe to heal the
   broach which designing men have been making among you, or prevent its
   threatened overflow. We have but one grand responsive body, which is
   our General Conference, and it was in and to this body the doctor
   entered his obligations to serve his brethren in America. No yearly
   conference, no official character dare assume to answer for that grand
   federal body.

   By the advice of the yearly conference now sitting in Virginia, and the
   respect I bear to you, I write to inform you that in our own persons
   and order we consent to his return, and partial continuance with you,
   and earnestly pray that you may have much peace, union, and happiness
   together. May you find that your divisions end in a greater union,
   order, and harmony of the body, so that the threatened cloud may blow
   over, and your divisive party may be of as little consequence to you,
   as ours is to us.

   With respect to the doctor's returning to us, I leave your enlarged
   understandings and good sense to judge. You will see the number of
   souls upon our annual minutes, and as men of reading, you may judge
   over what a vast continent these societies are scattered. I refer you
   to a large letter I wrote our beloved brother Bradburn on the subject.

   By a probable guess, we have, perhaps, from 1,000 to 1,200 traveling
   and local preachers. local preachers are daily rising up and coming
   forward with proper recommendations from their respective societies, to
   receive ordination, besides the regulation and ordinations of the
   yearly conferences. From Charleston, South Carolina, where the
   conference was held, to the province of Maine, where another conference
   is to be held, there is a space of about 1,300 miles; and we have only
   one worn-out superintendent, who was this day advised by the yearly
   conference to desist from preaching till next spring, on account of his
   debilitated state of body. But the situation of our affairs requires
   that he should travel about five thousand miles a year, through many
   parts unsettled, and other thinly peopled countries. I have now with me
   an assistant who does every thing for me he constitutionally can: but
   the ordaining and stationing the preachers can only be performed by
   myself in the doctor's absence.

   We have to lament that our superintendency is so weak, and that it
   cannot constitutionally be strengthened till the ensuing General
   Conference. How I have felt and must feel, under such critical and
   important circumstances, I leave you to judge.

   "To write much on the subject would be imposing on my own weakness and
   your good understanding. I speak as unto wise men; judge what I say.

   "Wishing you great peace and spiritual prosperity, I remain your
   brother, your friend, your servant for Christ's sake,

   Francis Asbury"

   In conformity with the permission given in this letter for his absence
   from America for a short season only, after remaining for a while and
   assisting Bishop Asbury, Dr. Coke returned to Europe, and was usefully
   employed in visiting the societies in various parts of the United
   Kingdom, particularly in Ireland during a rebellion which broke out in
   1798, in which he was successful in his attempts to shield the
   Methodist preachers from all blame, -- until the session of this
   General Conference, when he appeared to fulfill his engagements with
   his American brethren, or be honorably released. After deliberating for
   some time upon the request of the British Conference for Dr. Coke's
   return, the following resolution was concurred in: --

   "That in compliance with the address of the British Conference, to let
   Dr. Coke return to Europe, this General Conference consent to his
   return, upon condition that he come back to America as soon as his
   business will allow, but certainly by the next General Conference."

   In accordance with the spirit of this resolution, the conference
   addressed their British brethren in the words following: --

   "We have considered, with the greatest attention, the request you have
   made for the doctor's return to Europe; and after revolving the subject
   deeply in our minds, and spending part of two days in debating thereon,
   we still feel an ardent desire for his continuance in America. This
   arises from the critical state of Bishop Asbury's health, the extension
   of our work, our affection for, and approbation of the doctor, and his
   probable usefulness, provided he continue with us. We want to detain
   him, as we greatly need his services. But the statement you have laid
   before us in your address, of the success of the West India missions
   under his superintendence, the arduous attempt to carry the gospel
   among the native Irish requiring his influence and support, and the
   earnest request you have added to this representation; believing it to
   be for the glory of God,' hath turned the scale at present in your
   favor. We have, therefore, in compliance with your request, lent the
   doctor to you for a season to return to us as soon as he conveniently
   can, but at farthest by the meeting of our next General Conference.

   "Signed by order and in the behalf of the General Conference of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church in the United States of America,

   "Francis Asbury, "Richard Whatcoat. Baltimore, May 9, 1800."

   Having thus consented to a partial release of Dr. Coke from his
   engagements, the next important desideratum was how to supply his lack
   of service. The debilitated state of Bishop Asbury, and the great
   extension of the work in almost every direction, rendered it next to
   impossible for him to supply the wants of the Church in its
   superintendency, or to sustain the interests of the itinerancy in its
   various departments of labor. After a full consideration of this
   subject, it was finally agreed that another bishop should be elected
   and consecrated at this conference.

   Before, however, the conference went into the election, considerable
   conversation was had respecting the powers of the new bishop, some
   contending that he should be considered only as an assistant, and, in
   the absence of his principal, should have power to station the
   preachers, only with the advice and concurrence of a committee
   appointed by the annual conference. The views, however, of those
   prevailed who thought he should be every way equal in power with his
   senior in office, both as respected presiding in the conferences,
   ordaining and stationing the preachers, and the general superintendency
   of the work.

   This point being settled, they proceeded to ballot for a bishop. On the
   first count there appeared a tie between Richard Whatcoat and Jesse
   Lee. On the second balloting there were fifty-nine votes for Richard
   Whatcoat, and fifty-five for Jesse Lee, on which Mr. Whatcoat was
   declared to be duly elected. Accordingly on the 18th of May he was
   consecrated as a joint superintendent with Bishop Asbury, by prayer and
   the imposition of the hands of Bishops Coke and Asbury, assisted by
   some of the elders.

   Mr. Whatcoat was one of the preachers who was ordained a deacon and
   elder by Mr. Wesley, and accompanied Dr. Coke to America in 1784. He
   was born in England in the year 1736, and brought up under the
   influence of a religious education, by which he was saved from those
   vicious practices to which many youth are addicted. At the age of
   twenty-two he was made a partaker of the witness, and immediately
   brought forth the fruits of the Holy Spirit. In 1769 he entered as a
   probationer into the itinerant connection of Wesleyan Methodist
   preachers, then under the superintendence of Mr. Wesley. In this work
   he continued a faithful laborer, much beloved and respected by the
   people and confided in by his coadjutors in this work, until he
   embarked for America, then in the 48th year of his age. He was, of
   course, one of those who assisted in the organization of our Church at
   the Christmas conference, and was highly distinguished for the meekness
   and quietness of his spirit, as much as the prudence of his conduct,
   and the exemplariness of his deportment. From the time of this
   conference until his election to the office of a bishop, he had, with
   the exception of three years, discharged the duties of presiding elder,
   which, in those days especially, required labors and privations of no
   ordinary character, as both the districts and circuits were large, the
   people in general poor, and the calls for preaching numerous, and often
   far part. In the fulfillment of his duties in this station, he gave, it
   is believed, general satisfaction, and acquired the confidence and
   affection of both preachers and people. Those, indeed, who withheld
   their votes from him were actuated more from a conviction, it is said,
   of his lack of those peculiar talents which seemed essential for the
   office of a bishop, than from any want of confidence in either the
   depth of his piety, or measure of his prudence; and also from that
   kindred feeling for his competitor, who had been raised among
   themselves as an American preacher, and would therefore, as they
   thought, more familiarly enter into their feelings and views. To both
   the candidates, the Church had awarded the merit of sharing her
   confidence and affection, as having been many years distinguished for
   their pious zeal and indefatigable labors, as well as for their wisdom
   and consistency of conduct in council. But the manner in which Richard
   Whatcoat fulfilled the high trust confided to him, fully justified the
   wisdom of the conference in selecting him as one of their
   superintendents; for no man ever furnished more satisfactory evidence
   of his entire devotion to God, and of his unwavering attachment to the
   interests of religion, than Bishop Whatcoat did from the time of his
   consecration to his office till the day of his death. His meekness and
   modesty, his gravity and dignity of deportment, pointed him out as a
   fair sample for a primitive bishop, in whose integrity all could
   confide as a father and a friend, and his subsequent life justified the
   wisdom of the selection.

   Hitherto the allowance of a traveling preacher had been sixty-four
   dollars a year and his traveling expenses. At this conference it was
   raised to eighty, and the same for his wife or widow, sixteen dollars a
   year for each child under seven years of age, and twenty-four dollars
   for those over seven and under fourteen years. The same provision was
   made for supernumerary and superannuated preachers, their wives,
   widows, and orphans; and so it remained until the General Conference of
   1816, when the salary of the preachers, their wives and widows, was
   raised to one hundred dollars a year -- the allowance for children
   remaining the same as heretofore.

   In order to meet the increased demands for the support of the ministry,
   in addition to the class and quarterly collections, and the avails of
   the Book Concern, the money received for celebrating the rite of
   matrimony was to be brought to the conference, together with the income
   of the Chartered Fund, and what might be raised in public collections
   on the circuits and at the sessions of the conferences.

   Among the rules adopted at the conference of 1784, was one requiring
   every preacher, when admitted into the traveling ministry, to pay two
   dollars sixty-seven cents, and by a subsequent rule every member of the
   conference was to pay two dollars annually. This was to constitute a
   fund for the support of worn-out preachers, widows, and orphans. At the
   present conference it was ordered that this money should be
   appropriated to make up the deficiencies, together with any surplus
   which might remain in the hands of the stewards, after paying off the
   allowance of the preachers on the circuits.

   On the recommendation of Dr. Coke, who always manifested a lively
   interest in the welfare of the preachers and their families, those
   rules were adopted by this conference which recommend to the people to
   provide for each circuit a parsonage, "furnished at least with heavy
   furniture," or otherwise to "rent a house for the married preacher and
   his family, and that the annual conferences assist to make up the rent
   of such houses, as far as they can, when the circuit cannot do it."

   The rule for the trial of accused members was amended at this
   conference, so that the members before whom the delinquent was brought
   for trial were to judge of his innocence or guilt, according to the
   weight of evidence adduced; and also, that if the preacher who sat as
   judge in the case should dissent from the decision of the committee, he
   had the privilege of an appeal to the quarterly meeting conference.

   The rule requiring preachers to give an account of private donations
   from their friends was at this conference rescinded.

   In fixing the boundaries of the annual conferences, the number of which
   were to be seven, the New England and New York received their
   respective bounds as separate and distinct conferences.

   Hitherto no special provision had been made for the support of the
   bishops, they having had their temporal wants supplied by private
   benefactions, and from particular societies; but at this conference,
   and it has been a standing regulation ever since, it was ordered that
   each annual conference should pay its proportion toward their support.
   And that the annual conferences might feel a measure of responsibility
   to the General Conference for their acts and doings, they were required
   by a resolution of this conference to keep and send records of their
   proceedings to the General Conference that they might be inspected.

   It was also resolved that no preacher should hereafter have a seat in
   the General Conference, unless he had traveled four years, and was in
   full connection at the time:

   The bishops were authorized to ordain those African preachers, in the
   places where there were houses of worship for their use, who might be
   chosen by a majority of the male members of the society to which they
   belonged, and could procure a recommendation from the preacher in
   charge and his colleagues on the circuit, to the office of local
   deacons. The rule giving this authority was not incorporated among the
   printed regulations of the Discipline, but by a vote of the conference
   was only to stand on its records. Richard Allen, of Philadelphia, was
   the first colored man who received orders under this rule. Since that
   time, however, many in different places have been elected and
   consecrated, and since the General Conference of 1812, when the bishops
   were authorized to ordain local deacons to the office of elders, after
   four years' probation as deacons, several have been ordained elders.

   After passing these resolutions, and making sundry verbal alterations
   in the Discipline, not necessary to be particularly noticed, the
   conference adjourned on the 20th day of May to meet again in the city
   of Baltimore, on the 6th day of May, 1804.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 5

    From the close of the General Conference of 1800, to the end of the year
    1803

   Having, in the preceding chapter, detailed the doings of the General
   Conference of 1800, we will return to the annual conferences, and
   endeavor to give an account of the work of God in the various parts of
   their extensive fields of labor. This year and the two following were
   eminently distinguished for the outpouring of the Spirit of God, and
   the enlargement of his work in various directions. The heavens and the
   earth, indeed, appeared to be shaken by the mighty power of God, and
   very many sinners were brought to feel their need of Christ, to seek
   and to find him as their only Saviour.

   It seems that during the session of the General Conference much good
   had been done by the public and private labors of the preachers; and as
   they separated with much harmony of feeling, the Spirit of God wrought
   by their means in many of the places where they were stationed the
   present year.

   During the conference, a work of God commenced in that section of
   Baltimore called Old Town. Meetings were held here in private houses,
   which were attended by some of the preachers while not engaged in the
   business of the conference, by which means several souls were brought
   to the knowledge of the truth. From this beginning, the work spread in
   different directions though the city, in the churches as well as in
   private houses. Such a glorious work had not been seen in Baltimore for
   several years, and the old professors were much excited and encouraged
   at beholding their children and neighbors coming into the fold of
   Christ.

   About two weeks after the adjournment of the General Conference, an
   annual conference was held at Duck Creek Cross Roads, where many of the
   young converts, and some of the more experienced Christians from
   Baltimore, came for the purpose of attending the meetings. Here the
   Lord wrought powerfully. While the members of the conference were
   transacting their business in a private house, some of the younger
   traveling and some local preachers were almost constantly engaged in
   preaching to the people exhorting and praying with them; and such was
   the intenseness with which they pursued their work, that at the church,
   the meeting was held without intermission for forty-five hours. [6]
   Often, during these meetings, the voice of the preacher was drowned
   either by the cries of the distressed or the shouts of the redeemed.

   As these effects were new to many, they at first looked on with silent
   astonishment, until, before they were fully aware of it, both saints
   and sinners would be seized with a shaking and trembling, and finally
   prostrated helpless upon the floor. The result of these exercises was,
   that not less than one hundred and fifty souls were converted to God
   during the session of the Conference. Such a time of "refreshing from
   the presence of the Lord" had never before been witnessed in that part
   of the country.

   From this the work spread with great rapidity though the Eastern Shore
   of Maryland, and into the lower counties of the state of Delaware,
   bowing, in its course, the hearts of many stubborn sinners, who were
   brought to God by faith in Jesus Christ. Both preachers and people, in
   whose hearts the fire of Divine love had been kindled at these
   meetings, carried the sacred flame with them wherever they went, and
   thousands have doubtless praised God and are now praising him for the
   consolations of that blessed revival of godliness. It continued,
   indeed, to extend its hallowing influence on the Eastern Shore of
   Maryland, and in some other places, through the remainder of the
   summer.

   As the result of this glorious work in the little village of Duck
   Creek, no less than one hundred and seventeen persons joined the
   Church.

   Nor was the revival confined to this part of the country. In
   Philadelphia, in various circuits in the vicinity of Baltimore, in the
   state of Vermont, in some portions of Canada, Connecticut, and New
   Hampshire, the Spirit of the Lord was poured out, and many, very many,
   sinners were brought to the knowledge of the truth. It seems, indeed,
   that most of the preachers had received a new baptism of the holy
   Spirit -- like that which had been showered upon Calvin Wooster, and
   others in Canada, the preceding year; and wherever they went they
   carried the holy fire with them, and God wrought wonders by their
   instrumentality. But the most remarkable work was going on in the
   western country.

   Last year, 1799, was distinguished for the commencement of those great
   revivals of religion in the western country, which introduced the
   practice of holding "camp meetings." And as these revivals were
   characterized by signal displays of the power and grace of God, and
   eventuated in the conversion or thousands of souls, it will naturally
   be expected that a particular account should be given of their rise and
   progress.

   This work commenced under the united labors of two brothers by the name
   of McGee, one a Presbyterian and the other a Methodist preacher. The
   former, who had preached for some time in North Carolina and in the
   Houston country, moved into West Tennessee in the year 1796 or 1797,
   and in 1798 was settled over a congregation in Sumner county. In the
   year 1798, he latter, John McGee, moved into West Tennessee, and
   settled in Smith county. Though belonging to different denominations,
   those doctrines and usages by which each was distinguished from the
   other by no means interrupted the harmony of brotherly love. Hence they
   cordially united in their meetings, and strengthened each other's hands
   in the work of the Lord.

   In the year 1799 they set off on a tour though what was called the
   "Barrens," toward the state of Ohio, and on their way they stopped at a
   settlement on the Red River, to attend a sacramental occasion in the
   congregation under the pastoral charge of the Rev. Mr. McGready, a
   Presbyterian minister. On being introduced to him, Mr. John McGee was
   invited to preach, with which he complied; and he preached with great
   liberty and power. He was followed by his brother, the Presbyterian
   minister, and the Rev. Mr. Hoge, whose preaching produced such a
   powerful effect that tears in abundance attested that the people felt
   the force of the truths delivered. While Mr. Hoge was preaching, a
   woman in the congregation was so powerfully wrought upon that she broke
   through all restraint, and shouted forth the praises of God aloud. Such
   was the movement among the people, evidently under the impulses of the
   divine Spirit, that, though Messrs. McGready, Hoge, and Rankins,
   Presbyterian ministers, left the house, the two yoke-fellows, the
   McGees, continued in their places watching the "movement of the
   waters." William McGee soon felt such a power come over him that he,
   not seeming to know what he did, left his seat and sat down on the
   floor, while John sat trembling under a consciousness of the power of
   God. In the meantime there were great solemnity and weeping all over
   the house. He was expected to preach, but instead of that he arose and
   told the people that the overpowering nature of his feelings would not
   allow of his preaching, but as the Lord was evidently among them, he
   earnestly exhorted the people to surrender their hearts to him. Sobs
   and cries bespoke the deep feeling which pervaded the hearts of the
   people.

   This great and unusual work so excited the attention of the people that
   they came in crowds from the surrounding country, to inquire what these
   things meant; and this was the beginning of that great revival of
   religion in the western country which introduced camp meetings. The
   people came with horses and wagons, bringing provisions and bedding,
   and others built temporary huts or tents, while all, Presbyterians
   Baptists, and Methodists, united together in prayer, exhortation, and
   preaching, exerting all their energies to forward this good work.

   The good effects resulting from this meeting, thus casually, or rather
   providentially convened, induced them to appoint another on Muddy
   River, and then another on what was called the Ridge. Here a vast
   concourse of people assembled under the foliage of the trees, and
   continued their religious exercises day and night. This novel way of
   worshipping God excited great attention. In the night the grove was
   illuminated with lighted candles, lamps, or torches. This, together
   with the stillness of the night, the solemnity which rested on every
   countenance, the pointed and earnest manner with which the preachers
   exhorted the people to repentance, prayer, and faith, produced the most
   awful sensations in the minds of all present. While some were
   exhorting, others crying for mercy, and some shouting the praises of
   God in the assembly, numbers were retired in secluded places in the
   grove, pouring out the desire of their wounded spirits in earnest
   prayer. It often happened that these were liberated from their sins,
   and their hearts filled with joy and gladness while thus engaged in
   their solitary devotions; and then they would come into the encampment
   and declare what God had done for their souls. This information,
   communicated to their brethren in the artless simplicity of "new born
   souls would produce a thrill of joy which could hardly be suppressed:
   and thus they reciprocated with each other in their sorrows and joys,
   and excited one another to the exercise of faith in the promises of
   God, and to perseverance in the good work.

   The result of this last meeting was, according to the best estimate
   which could be made, the conversion of not less than one hundred souls.

   A still greater meeting of the same character was held soon after on
   Desha's Creek, near the Cumberland River. Among the many thousands of
   people who attended this extraordinary meeting, many, very many, were
   made partakers of the grace of life. It is said by an eye witness, [7]
   who himself largely participated of these solemn exercises, that at
   these meetings the people fell under the power of the word, "like corn
   before a storm of wind," and that many who were thus slain, "arose from
   the dust with divine glory beaming upon their countenances," and then
   praised God in such strains of heartfelt gratitude as caused the hearts
   of sinners to tremble within them. But no sooner had this first feeling
   of ecstasy subside than those young converts began to exhort their
   relatives and neighbors to turn to God and live. And truly it was
   difficult to resist the power of their words, for they spoke of what
   they felt, and their words were sharper than a "two-edged sword,"
   piercing the heart, and extorting the cry, "What shall I do to be
   saved?"

   Many of these were children of praying parents, and though uneducated,
   they spoke with a power and eloquence which "confounded the wisdom of
   the learned," and extorted the confession from many an unhumbled
   Pharisee, that "God was with them of a truth."

   Among others who were brought to the knowledge of the truth at this
   meeting, was John Alexander Granade, who after an exercise of mind for
   a considerable time bordering on despair, came forth a "burning and
   shining light," as a the advocate for the cause of Christ. He soon
   became distinguished among his brethren as the "western poet," and the
   "Pilgrims' Songs" were among the most popular hymns which were sung at
   those camp meetings, and perhaps became the fruitful source whence
   singing the numerous ditties with which the Church was, for some time,
   almost deluged. These songs, though thy possessed but little of the
   spirit of poetry, and therefore added nothing to true intellectual
   taste, served to excite the feelings of devotion, and keep alive that
   spirit of excitement which characterized the worshippers in those
   assemblies. Both Granade and Caleb Jarvis Taylor contributed much by
   their energetic labors to fan the flame of piety which had been kindled
   up in the hearts of the people in that country.

   It is not to be supposed that these meetings went on without
   opposition. This would be calculating too favorably of human nature in
   its present state of moral perversity. Not only the openly profane, the
   nonprofessor of godliness, but many of those who "had a name to live,
   but were dead," as well as some whose piety was unquestionable, looked
   on these meetings and beheld these strange exercises with mingled
   emotions of pity and abhorrence. The natural enmity of the carnal mind,
   in the first, mingled with the pride of philosophy of the second, and
   the prejudices of religious education, alloyed with some portion of
   religious bigotry in the third, created, altogether, a formidable array
   of opposition, which showed itself in all the variety of ways which the
   peculiarity of views and feelings in the above characters might
   dictate. Some would scoff, others would philosophize, while the latter
   would dogmatize in no stinted terms of religious intolerance, while
   they beheld those manifestations of what the friends of the cause
   justly believed to be the power and grace of God.

   But there was one argument which silenced them all. Often those very
   persons who were most violent in their opposition, most vociferous in
   their hard speeches against what they denominated "wild fire," would
   become so warmed by its heat, that their hearts were melted within
   them, and "falling down on their faces, they would worship God, and
   report that God was in them of a truth." This argument was
   irresistible. It was demonstration. And many such were presented during
   the progress of these meetings. In such cases, those who before had
   been blasphemers, and mockers, persecutors, and bigoted dogmatizers,
   were not only struck dumb, but the "tongue of the dumb was made to
   sing," and those very opposers of the work became the living witnesses
   for its divine and genuine character, and stood forth as its bold and
   fearless defenders.

   In the meantime the numbers attending these meetings were continually
   increased, -- some from a sincere desire to be benefited; others were
   attracted from curiosity, and not a few from motives of speculation, to
   arm themselves with arguments of resistance to their progress. What
   tended not a little to give them notoriety, and to excite the public
   attention toward them, was, the newspapers of the day were teeming with
   accounts of these camp meetings, some in favor and some against them --
   and all, whether friends or foes, were eager to gratify their
   curiosities, or benefit their soul, by becoming eye and ear witnesses
   of the manner in which they were conducted.

   Accordingly, in 1801 the numbers who attended those which were held in
   Kentucky were immense, some as occasional visitors, and others as
   residents on the ground through the progress of the meetings. The
   numbers varied, of course, according to the density or sparsity of the
   population in their immediate neighborhoods; and they have been
   estimated from three to twenty thousand. At one held in Cabbin Creek a
   Presbyterian minister who was present, and zealously engaged in
   promoting its objects, estimated the number at not less than twenty
   thousand.

   Though at this meeting the Methodists appeared to be the most actively
   engaged in the work, yet some of the Presbyterian brethren engaged
   heartily with them, while, others stood aloof, not knowing what
   judgment to form of it. Being, however, encouraged by the example of
   others, many of them united with zealous hearts in the cause, and at
   this great meeting the Methodists and Presbyterians joined their forces
   to push forward the work, and they seemed to bear down all opposition.
   The scene is represented as being indescribably awful! An eye witness
   thus writes concerning it: --

   Few, if any, escaped without being affected. Such as tried to run from
   it, were frequently struck on the way, or impelled by some alarming
   signal to return. No circumstance at this meeting appeared more
   striking than the great number that fell on the third night; and to
   prevent their being trodden under foot by the multitude, they were
   collected together and laid out in order, or on two squares of the
   meeting house, till a considerable part of the floor was covered. But
   the great meeting at Cane Ridge exceeded all. The number that fell at
   this meeting was reckoned at about three thousand, among whom were
   several Presbyterian ministers, who, according to their own confession,
   had hitherto possessed only a speculative knowledge of religion. Here
   the formal professor, the deist, and the intemperate, met with one
   common lot, and confessed, with equal candor, that they were destitute
   of the true knowledge of God, and strangers to the religion of Jesus
   Christ."

   In consequence of such a vast assemblage of people, it was impossible
   for any one voice to reach the whole of them with intelligible
   language: hence they were divined into several groups, and addressed by
   as many different speakers, while the whole grove, at times, became
   vocal with the praises of God, and at other times pierced with the
   cries of distressed penitent sinners. As before said, the scene was
   peculiarly awful at night. The range of the tents -- the fires
   reflecting lights though the branches of the trees -- the candles and
   lamps illuminating the entire encampment -- hundreds of immortal beings
   moving to and fro -- some preaching -- some praying for mercy, and
   others praising God from a sense of his pardoning mercy -- all these
   things presented a scene indescribably awful and affecting.

   As an instance of the manner in which some of those who attended these
   meetings from a sportive disposition were arrested and brought to a
   better state of mind, the following is related: -- A gentleman and a
   lady, of some standing in the gay circles of life, attended the above
   meeting with a vow to divert and amuse themselves at the expense of
   those whom they considered as deluded with a strange infatuation. With
   these thoughts they agreed that if one of them should fall the other
   should not desert him or her. They had not been long on the ground
   before the woman fell! The merry gentleman, instead of keeping his
   promise, frightened at the sight of his female friend on the ground,
   fled with great precipitancy. He did not, however, proceed more than
   two hundred yards, before he also was prostrate upon the ground, and
   was soon surrounded by a praying multitude.

   In 1801 this work was greatly aided by the energetic labors of the Rev.
   William McKendree (afterward bishop) who was this year appointed to the
   Kentucky district. Having been in the midst of the revivals in the
   lower part of the state, and having his soul fired with the sacred
   flame which was burning with such intensity among the people, he went
   up into the center of the settlements and carried the tidings among
   them of what God was doing by means of those extraordinary meetings.
   His congregations, composed chiefly of Methodists and Presbyterians,
   were powerfully affected when he gave them, at the conclusion of his
   sermon, an animated account of the commencement and progress of this
   work. It is said that while he held up before them the truths of the
   gospel, intermixed with narrations of the work of God at these
   meetings, his whole soul seemed to be filled with glory and with God,"
   and that his very countenance beamed with brightness. While he related
   with artless simplicity, and with glowing warmth, the manner in which
   God wrought upon the souls of the people, the many happy conversions
   which had been witnessed, and the astonishing effects which attended
   the preaching of God's word, the hearts of God's people begin to beat
   in unison with his own, while sinners were weeping in every direction
   under the melting influence of the Spirit of God.

   By this means these same meetings were introduced into the center of
   the state, and spread though all the settlements in the western
   country; and such was the eagerness of the people to attend, that the
   roads were literally crowded with those that were pressing their way to
   the groves; so much so that entire neighborhoods would be forsaken, for
   a season, of their inhabitants. And as the Methodists and Presbyterians
   were generally united together in these meetings, they took the name of
   "General Camp Meetings." By these means they spread all through
   Tennessee, Kentucky, and some parts of Ohio, carrying with them fire
   and destruction into the enemy's territories, and bowing the hearts of
   God's people as the heart of one man to the yoke of Jesus Christ. Of
   their subsequent progress, and the influence they have exerted on
   society, I need not here speak, as these things are known to all.

   Among the traveling preachers who entered into this work in those days,
   we may mention William Burke, John Sale, Benjamin Lakin, and Henry
   Smith, with a number of others, whose zealous efforts contributed
   greatly to spread the gospel in these new settlements. Mr. McKendree
   was the life and soul of this army of itinerants. Wherever he went,
   both by precept and example, he aroused the lukewarm to diligence,
   confirmed those who stood in the faith, and alarmed the fears of
   careless sinners by his powerful appeals to their consciences. By his
   means many local preachers who had moved into the country were induced
   to forsake their secular employments, and enter the ranks of the
   itinerancy, and they became powerful instruments of extending the
   revivals though the land. Despising alike the luxuries of life, and the
   frowns or flatteries of the world, they went forth under the banners of
   truth, everywhere proclaiming in the ears of the people that they must
   "fear God and give glory to his name, for the hour of his judgment is
   come."

   It will be seen by the preceding remarks that these camp meetings were
   not the result of a previously digested plan, but like every other
   peculiarity of Methodism, were introduced by providential occurrences,
   and were embraced and followed up by God's servants because they found
   them subservient to the grand design they had in view, namely, the
   salvation of the world by Jesus Christ. Indeed, they did not originate
   with the Methodist, but upon a sacramental occasion among the
   Presbyterians, at which time there was such a remarkable outpouring of
   the Divine Spirit in the people as inclined them to protract their
   exercises to an unusual period; and then this being noised abroad
   brought others to the place, and finally so many that no house could
   hold them; this induced them to go into the field, and erect temporary
   shelters for themselves, and to bring provision for their sustenance;
   and finding that God so abundantly blessed them in these meetings, they
   were led to continue them, until they at length became very general
   among the Methodists throughout the country.

   In order to give a connected view of the rise of camp meetings in the
   west, I have a little anticipated the regular date of the history, and
   shall therefore conclude what I have to say on this subject for the
   present, with a few reflections.

   I have simply related the facts in respect to this extraordinary work
   as I find them recorded in the historical sketches of those times. No
   doubt many now, as then, will be skeptically inclined in regard to the
   genuineness of the work. To remove the skepticism from the minds of
   candid inquirers after truth, (for such only will be convinced,) let it
   be remarked,
    1. That as to the facts themselves, they are indubitable -- that is,
       there can be no room to doubt that such meetings were held as above
       narrated, and that sinners were prostrated to the earth under the
       preaching of God's word -- that they cried for mercy -- were
       delivered in answer to prayer -- and that such, as well a old
       professors of religion, often shouted aloud the praises of God --
       and that many of these, perhaps most of them, afterward led
       "peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty." These facts are as
       well attested as any we have upon the pages of history.
    2. It is admitted that in such vast multitudes, assembled in the open
       air, under circumstances of such peculiar excitement, and many of
       them not well instructed in science or morals, there must have been
       some disorder, some mingling of human passions not sanctified by
       grace, and some words and gesticulations not in accordance with
       strict religious decorum. Every action, therefore, and every thing
       which was said and done, I am by no means careful to defend or
       pledged to justify.
    3. When we look into the book of God, we find some instances on record
       of persons having been affected in a similar way, who were
       manifestly under the divine influence. Thus Daniel says of himself,
       that when he saw the vision, "there remained no strength in me; for
       my comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no
       strength" and when the Lord had spoken to him he "stood trembling".
       see Daniel x., 8-11. So Saul of Tarsus, when saluted by the voice
       from heaven, fell helpless upon the ground, was struck blind, and
       remained so for three days. And may not the strong cries and tears
       of those persons who were struck under conviction at those camp
       meetings, have been produced from a cause similar to that which is
       recorded in Mark ix, 26, where it is said, "that the spirit cried,
       and rent him sore, and came out of him?"
    4. In examining the history of the work of God in his church at
       different periods, we find similar instances of mental and bodily
       exercises on record. Read, for example, President Edwards' account
       of the revival in New England, and Mr. Wesley's Journal,
       particularly from 1739 to 1742, and his correspondence with the
       Rev. Ralph Erskine of Scotland, in relation to this subject.

   In reference to the work in New England, in the early part of the
   eighteenth century, we have the following testimony of a convention of
   Congregational ministers, who assembled in Boston, July 7, 1743, for
   the express purpose of considering and reporting on the nature of this
   work. The following is an extract from their report:

   "We never before saw so many brought under soul concern, and with
   distress making the inquiry, What must we do to be saved?' and these
   persons of all characters and ages. With regard to the suddenness and
   quick progress of it, many persons and places were surprised with the
   gracious visit together, or near about the same time and the heavenly
   influence diffused itself far and wide, like the light of the morning.
   Also in respect of the degree of operation, both in a way of terror and
   in a way of consolation, attended in many with unusual bodily effects.
   Not that all who were accounted the subjects of the present work have
   had these extraordinary degrees of previous distress and subsequent
   joy: but many, and we suppose the greater number have been wrought on
   in a more gentle and silent way, and without any other appearances than
   are common and usual at other times, when persons have been awakened to
   a solemn concern about salvation, and have been thought to have passed
   out of a state of nature into a state of grace. As to those whose
   inward concern has occasioned extraordinary outward distresses, the
   most of them when we came to converse with them, were able to give what
   appeared to us a rational account of what so affected their minds,
   viz., a quick sense of their guilt, misery, and danger; and they would
   often mention the passages in the sermons they heard, or particular
   texts of Scripture, which were sent home upon them with such a powerful
   impression. And as to such whose joys have carried them into transports
   and ecstasies, they in like manner have accounted for them, from a
   lively sense of the danger they hoped they were freed from, and the
   happiness they were now possessed of; such clear views of divine and
   heavenly things, and particularly of the excellences and loveliness of
   Jesus Christ, and such sweet tastes of redeeming love as they never had
   before. The instances were very few in which we had reason to think
   these affections were produced by visionary or sensible
   representations, or by any other images than such as the Scripture
   itself presents unto us.

   "And here we think it not amiss, to declare, that in dealing with these
   persons, we have been careful to inform them, that the nature of
   conversion does not consist in these passionate feelings; and to warn
   them not to look upon their state as safe, because they have passed out
   of deep distress into high joys, unless they experienced a renovation
   of nature, followed with a change of life, and a course of vital
   holiness. Nor have we gone into such an opinion of the bodily effects
   with which this work has been attended in some of its subjects, as to
   judge them any signs that persons who have been so affected were then
   under a saving work of the Spirit of God. No: we never to much as
   called these bodily seizures convictions, or spoke of them as the
   immediate work of the holy Spirit. Yet we do not think them
   inconsistent with a work of God upon the soul at that very time; but
   judge that those inward impressions which come from the Spirit of God,
   those terrors and consolations of which he is the author, may,
   according to the natural frame and constitution which some persons are
   of, occasion such bodily effects; -- and therefore that those
   extraordinary outward symptoms are not an argument that the work is
   delusive, or from the influence and agency of the evil spirit."

   This document is said to have been signed by no less than sixty-eight
   ministers, all of whom concurred in the views therein expressed, while
   only fifteen refused their assent to an article in the same report
   which accorded to the practice, at that time a novelty in New England,
   of itinerating from place to place to preach the gospel -- a practice
   introduced by Mr. Whitefield, and followed by a few others who had been
   awakened to activity by his zealous labors.
    1. With these facts and examples before us, are we not justified in
       believing, that persons under the powerful operations of the Spirit
       of God, either convicting them suddenly and strongly of sin, or
       filling their souls with his own pure love, may have their animal
       functions suspended for a season, so that there shall "remain no
       strength in them?" Is there any thing either unscriptural or
       incredible in all this?
    2. Will it be denied by any believer in divine revelation, or even by
       a deist, that God can, and often does, so work upon the mind of
       man, as to make that mind fully conscious of his presence? He who
       affects to doubt this might as well throw off all disguise at once,
       and turn an open atheist, and deny that there is any God who
       presides over the destinies of men, or exercises any control over
       their understandings and affections.
    3. As the mind and body are so intimately connected that the one acts
       upon the other, is there, after all, any thing so very
       extraordinary in the supposition that under the strong excitement
       produced upon the one by the sudden flashes of truth, the other
       should be equally and suddenly affected in the manner already
       described? How common are the instances in which persons have been
       known to swoon away by receiving sudden news either of a joyful or
       an alarming character? Either great anguish or excessive joy has
       often been the means of depriving individuals of their physical
       strength. And what sorrow is equal to that which an awakened sinner
       feels when he is suddenly brought to see himself as he in reality
       is, a rebel against his God, and consequently exposed to wrath and
       hell! And must not the joy of such a person be proportionally great
       when he finds himself instantaneously delivered from that load of
       guilt, and filled with a "peace unknown to sensual minds?"
    4. It is frequently objected to exercises of this sort, that the
       passions are chiefly wrought upon. This indeed may be the case in
       many instances. And I would by no means plead for a religion which
       does not enter into the judgment, and influence the understanding
       as well as the affections. But yet, man is a creature of passions
       as well as of intellect. And as Christianity is not intended to
       destroy, but only to regulate the passions, as well as to enlighten
       the understanding and sanctify the heart, we must expect the
       passions to he moved, and the emotions of fear, hope, love, and joy
       to be excited in religious as well as in all other exercises. To
       these passions Christianity certainly addresses itself, as well as
       to the judgment, and moves man to action from fear, from hope, and
       from the promises of pardon, comfort, and protection, as well as
       from that eternal reward hereafter, which makes the Christian
       joyfully anticipate the pleasures of the future life. Those
       therefore who address themselves to the understanding only, as if
       men were merely intellectual beings, avail themselves of not one
       half of the motives with which the gospel furnishes its servants,
       to induce sinners to repent and believe in Christ, and to encourage
       believers to persevere in the path of duty.
    5. These things being so, is it any matter of wonder that, when the
       awfully sublime and truly affecting subjects of Christianity are
       presented to the mind, corresponding effects should be produced
       upon the passions, and that these, when violently agitated with
       either religious fear or joy, should also affect the body?
    6. But we do not place dependence upon these external signs as
       evidences in themselves of either penitence, conversion, or
       sanctification. As there may be a fear, a hope, and a love, which
       is not well founded, so there may be much bodily exercise without
       any spiritual profit. These things may or may not be. If a person
       who has had these exercises profess, in the meantime, to have
       experienced a change of heart, if he bring forth the fruit of
       righteousness in his subsequent life, we may then safely conclude
       that the work was effected by the Spirit of God; but if otherwise,
       if he still manifest the unhumbled spirit of the Pharisee, or bring
       forth the "works of the flesh," his profession cannot save him from
       the condemnation of the hypocrite, or the misery of the
       self-deluded.

   These remarks are submitted to the candid reader with the hope that
   they may assist him in making up an unbiased judgment in respect to
   these things; and though, in the course of our history, we shall be
   compelled to admit the humiliating fact, that some of the subjects of
   the above revivals brought forth fruit unto death, yet it will be
   equally plain that the influence of others on society generally was of
   a very hallowed character.

   Not less than twenty-four preachers were located this year, three
   withdrew, and four had died in peace. These latter were, William Early,
   Thomas Haymond, Benton Riggin, and Robert Benham. These had all been
   faithful in their labors, and died in the Lord.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 51,442; Last Year: 49,115;
   Increase: 2,327 -- Colored This Year: 13,452; Last Year: 12,236;
   Increase: 1,216 -- Total This Year: 64,894; Last Year: 61,351 --
   Increase: 3,543 -- Preachers This Year: 287; Last Year: 272; Increase:
   15.

  1801

   There were only seven annual conferences held this year, the first
   commencing in Camden, S. C., January 1, and the last in Lynn, Mass.,
   July 17.

   The work of God which had commenced last year under such favorable
   auspices, and which has been so fully detailed, continued this year, in
   many places, with increased rapidity and power. Bishop Asbury and his
   colleague, Bishop Whatcoat, made their annual tour of the continent,
   not only in visiting and presiding in the conferences, but also
   preaching to the people in the various cities, towns, and villages, as
   well as the new and scattered settlements through which they were
   enabled to pass. The revivals of religion which had been witnessed, the
   unabated confidence and attachment which had been manifested toward
   Bishop Asbury by the conference, and the relief afforded him in his
   arduous labors by the consecration of Mr. Whatcoat as a colleague
   seemed to put new life into him, so that he remarks, after attending a
   conference in Philadelphia, "My health is restored to the astonishment
   of myself and friends."

   "Surely," he says in connection with his allusion to the Philadelphia
   conference, "we may say our Pentecost is fully come this year."

   Having so fully narrated the progress of the work of God in the western
   country under date of 1800, it is not necessary to add any thing in
   respect to it here. In other parts of the country, however, the work
   went on under somewhat different circumstances, but with equal
   indications of divine power and goodness. In New Hampshire and Vermont
   there were signal displays of the grace of God in the awakening and
   conversion of souls. One of the preachers writes in the following
   strain respecting the state of things there: --

   "Landaff circuit, is New Hampshire, is all in a flame. Upward of one
   hundred have been converted to God; and the work goes on still in a
   glorious manner. In Chesterfield circuit nearly one hundred have joined
   our society, and the prospect is now brighter than it has been. In
   Vershire circuit, in Vermont, there is a good work. More than one
   hundred have joined society, and the power of the Lord is remarkably
   displayed; many fall down, being overwhelmed with the power of the
   Lord. Weathersfield circuit has been gradually gaining ground the whole
   year, and now the times of refreshing are come from the presence of the
   Lord. In the town of Athens we had a most melting time. The power of
   the Lord was present to heal, and eighty-three joined society on that
   day, although there was no society there before."

   It seems that the revivals in Canada and the western country began to
   exert an influence in other parts of the work, and lead to a similar
   method in promoting the cause of God. In the latter part of May of this
   year, in the town of Dover, Delaware state, a meeting was held for
   several days, at which time the Lord wrought powerfully upon the hearts
   of the people, so that on the last day of the meeting one hundred and
   thirteen persons united with the Church. Many more took their departure
   to their homes under a deep conviction of their sinfulness, and
   earnestly groaning for redemption in the blood of Christ.

   In the Baltimore district, which included a number of large circuits,
   it was estimated that upward of a thousand souls were converted to God
   in the space of a few months. In Annapolis, the metropolis of the state
   of Maryland, many were brought to the knowledge of salvation by the
   remission of sins, and there was great joy in that city.

   In Upper Canada, the glorious revival which has been already mentioned
   had extended along up the shore of Lake Ontario, even to the head of
   the lake, to Niagara, and thence to Long Point on the northwestern
   shore of Lake Erie, including four large four weeks' circuits. The
   district this year was under the charge of the Rev. Joseph Jewell, who
   traveled extensively through the newly settled country, preaching in
   log houses, in barns, and sometimes in groves, and everywhere beholding
   the displays of the power and grace of God in the awakening and
   conversion of sinners, as well as the sanctification of believers. A
   great work of God was carried on this year under the preaching of
   Joseph Sawyer, whose faithful labors on the Niagara circuit will be
   long and gratefully remembered by the people in that country; and it
   was during this revival that the present writer, after four or five
   years of hard struggling under a consciousness of his sinfulness, was
   brought into the fold of Christ; and here he wishes to record his
   gratitude to God for his distinguished grace, in snatching such a brand
   from the fire, and to his people for their kindness, and more
   especially to that servant of God, the Rev. Joseph Sawyer, under whose
   pastoral oversight he was brought into the Church.

   Nor should the labors and privations, the prayers and sufferings in the
   cause of Christ of that faithful servant of God, the Rev. James
   Coleman, be forgot. Ten. He preceded Mr. Sawyer in the Niagara circuit
   [8] and though not distinguished for shining talents as a preacher, he
   was beloved by the people of God for his fidelity in the work of the
   ministry, and for his deep devotion to their spiritual interests,
   evinced by his faithful attention to the arduous duties of his circuit.
   He had many seals to his ministry. And the writer of this remembers
   with gratitude the many prayers which James Coleman offered up to God
   in his behalf while a youthful stranger in that land, and while
   seeking, with his eyes but half opened, to find the way of "peace and
   pleasantness."

   The work also prevailed on the Bay of Quintie and Oswegochie circuits,
   under the labors of Sylvanus Keeler, Seth Crowell, and others. The
   latter was a young preacher of great zeal and of the most indefatigable
   industry; and going into that country he soon caught the flame of
   Divine love which had been enkindled by the instrumentality of Messrs.
   Wooster, Coate and Dunham. He entered into the work with great energy
   and perseverance, and God blessed his labors with much success. So
   greatly had God prospered the labors of his faithful servants in this
   province, that there were returned in the minutes of conference for
   this year 1,159 members of the Church. It had, indeed, extended into
   the lower province, on the Ottawa River, an English settlement about
   fifty miles west of Montreal. This new circuit was traveled by John
   Robinson and Caleb Morris, and they returned forty-five members in the
   Church.

   Like the new settlements in the western country, Upper Canada was at
   that time but sparsely populated, so that in riding from one
   appointment to another, the preachers sometimes had to pass though
   wildernesses from ten to sixty miles' distance, and not infrequently
   had either to encamp in the woods or sleep in an Indian hut; and
   sometimes, in visiting the newly settled places, they have carried
   provender for their horses over night, when they would tie them to a
   tree to prevent their straying in the woods; while the preachers
   themselves had to preach, eat, and lodge in the same room, looking at
   the curling smoke ascending though an opening in the roof of the log
   house, which had not yet the convenience of even a chimney.

   But in the midst of these labors and privations, they seemed to be
   abundantly compensated in beholding the blessed effects of their
   evangelical efforts, and the cordiality and high gratification with
   which they were received and treated, more especially by those whose
   hearts God had touched by his Spirit. For though these people were in
   the wilderness, and many of them poor, they seemed to be ripe for the
   gospel, and it was no less gratifying to its messengers than it was
   pleasurable to its recipients to behold its blessed effects upon the
   hearts and lives of such as "believed with a heart unto righteousness."
   While those who resisted the truth, often manifested their enmity by
   persecuting those who proclaimed it, such as did receive it in the love
   of it," evinced their affection and gratitude to those who published
   it, by making them welcome to their habitations, and entertaining them
   in the very best manner they could. For these self-denying labors, and
   sacrifices of these early Methodist preachers, thousands of immortal
   beings in Canada will doubtless praise God in that day "when he shall
   come to make up his jewels."

   A very serious affair occurred in Charleston, South Carolina, about
   this time. In 1801 and 1802 the Rev. Messrs. George Dougherty and John
   Harper were stationed in that city. Hearing that Mr. Harper had
   received some pamphlets from the north, containing resolutions to
   memorialize the legislature against slavery, notwithstanding the
   offensive documents were burned in presence of the mayor of the city, a
   lawless mob collected to avenge themselves on the person of Mr. Harper.
   He, however, providentially escaping from their fury, they seized on
   Mr. Dougherty, dragged him though the street to the pump, and having
   placed his head under the spout, commenced pumping water upon him, and
   in all probability they would have suffocated him, had not a pious
   woman, a Mrs. Kingsley, interfered in his behalf. With an intrepidity
   worthy of all praise, she resolutely placed herself between the
   infuriated populace and their intended victim, and stuffed her shawl
   into the mouth of the spout, and thus stopped the flowing of the water.
   This heroic act filled the persecutors of Dougherty with astonishment.
   In silent amazement they paused from their murderous work. At this
   moment of suspense, a gentleman with a drawn sword stood in the midst
   of them, and, taking Dougherty by the hand, boldly declared his
   intention to protect him from their violence at all hazards; and he
   then led him away, no one daring to interfere. Thus completing the
   victory which the "weaker sex" had so daringly begun, the man of God,
   thoroughly wet by the water of the pump, was rescued from the hand of
   violence, and restored to his friends in safety -- although it is said
   that his sufferings in this cruel affair laid the foundation of that
   pulmonary disease with which he afterward died. It is furthermore
   stated, that of all those concerned in this persecution not one
   prospered; most of them died miserable deaths, and one of them
   acknowledged that God's curse lighted upon him for his conduct in this
   affair.

   Thirty-two preachers located this year, three were returned
   supernumerary, and four, namely, James Tillotson, Abraham Andrews,
   Salathiel Weeks, and Charles Burgoon, after a faithful discharge of
   their duties as ministers of Christ, had died in the hope of
   everlasting life.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 57,186; Last Year: 51,442;
   Increase: 5,744 -- Colored This Year: 15,688; Last Year: 13,452;
   Increase: 2,236 -- Total This Year: 72,874; Last Year: 64,894 --
   Increase: 7,980 -- Preachers This Year: 307; Last Year: 278; Increase:
   29.

   There was no account rendered of the numbers in Kentucky and Tennessee,
   where those great revivals of religion had occurred, otherwise the
   increase would have appeared much larger than it does. As it is,
   however, it shows the blessed results of those revivals which have been
   before detailed.

   On the 29th day of January of this year, the Rev. Devereaux Jarratt
   departed this life in the 69th year of his age; and though he was never
   in connection with the Methodists, yet as he favored them in the early
   period of their ministry, and was greatly instrumental in promoting the
   work of God in Virginia in those days, it seems proper to give some
   account of his character, labors, and death. Mr. Jarratt was born in
   New Kent county, in Virginia, on the 6th of January, 1732, O. S. He was
   awakened to a sense of his lost and guilty condition by the reading of
   one of Mr. Flavel's sermons, and after a long course of mental
   discipline, a severe struggling against the inordinate corruptions of
   his heart, when about twenty-eight years of age, he was made a partaker
   of justifying faith in Jesus Christ. In his 30th year he began to
   prepare for orders in the English Church, and after due preparation he
   went to England and received consecration on Christmas day, in the year
   1762. Before his return he preached several times in London, and such
   was the zeal with which he spoke in the name of his divine Master, that
   he even then was called by some a Methodist, an appellation commonly
   given to those who manifested more than usual zeal in their ministry.

   On his return to America, in 1763, he was settled in the parish of
   Bath, Dinwiddie county, Virginia, and became a zealous and evangelical
   minister of Jesus Christ, by which means he incurred the displeasure of
   the lukewarm clergy of his own Church, a well as of those members who
   had "the form of godliness, but denied the power thereof." [9] This, no
   doubt, led him to seek for spiritual associates elsewhere, and we
   accordingly find him, as we have already seen, receiving and aiding the
   Methodist preachers when they came into his neighborhood -- for which
   service they to several instances recorded their gratitude.

   Mr. Jarratt continued his friendship for his Methodist brethren in
   general until the organization of the Methodist Episcopal Church in
   1784, when he manifested, if we may believe in the genuineness of the
   letters attributed to him which were published after his death, no
   little displeasure in their proceedings, and uttered some hard things
   against Dr. Coke, Bishop Asbury, and some others.

   But while he was dissatisfied with the Methodists, on account of their
   becoming an independent Church, he seemed equally as much so with most
   of the clergy of his own Church, because of their dereliction from the
   doctrines of their Church, and their manifest want of a conformity to
   the formularies of their religion, and especially those parts which
   enjoined experimental and practical piety. In this frame of mind he
   laments, in pathetic strains, the low state of religion in his Church,
   the want of evangelical zeal and enlightened piety in her clergy, and
   the general deadness to spiritual things throughout the country.

   I have made this short record of Mr. Jarratt, 1. Because I think it due
   to him as an active, zealous, and successful minister of Jesus Christ,
   whose friendship for the Methodists when they first visited Virginia,
   and for a considerable time after, greatly aided them in promoting the
   cause of God. For a number of years he was indefatigable in his gospel
   labors, and was instrumental in the conversion of many sinners.

   2. Because his posthumous letters have been referred to as an evidence
   of his regret that he had contributed so much to subserve the cause of
   Methodism. It is, indeed, to be lamented that any thing should have
   occurred to interrupt, in any degree, that harmony of Christian
   fellowship which evidently subsisted between him and the Methodists,
   and which had been for a number of years mutually beneficial, and had,
   accordingly, been reciprocated with the utmost good will. But on the
   organization of our Church, Mr. Jarratt found himself between two
   fires. On the one hand, he could not approve in his judgment of that
   organization, while his feelings held him to his old friends; and in
   this conflict between his judgment and feelings, the latter became
   somewhat irritated, and prompted him to say things which, it may be
   presumed, his more sober judgment would have condemned. On the other
   hand, while his judgment approved of the doctrine and formularies of
   devotion recognized in his own Church, he could not fellowship the
   conduct of her lukewarm clergy and members; and hence, on perceiving
   this inconsistency between faith and practice, he loudly condemned the
   one, while he warmly applauded the other. In this dilemma, a situation
   much to be deprecated by every conscientious minister of Jesus Christ,
   he seems to have said some things which may justly be regretted by his
   friends in both communions.

   It is not doubted, however, considering his general character, course
   of conduct, and the predominant tone of his writings, that his last end
   was "peace and assurance for ever" -- and that with Wesley and
   Fletcher, whom he so much admired, and with those Methodist preachers
   with whom he once took such sweet counsel, as well as with all those of
   every name who loved the Lord Jesus Christ, he is now united in
   ascribing salvation and honor to him who loved them and washed them in
   his own blood.

  1802

   This year there were seven annual conferences, and as they remained
   stationary, as to numbers, for several years; and were generally held
   for each section of the country about the same time of the year, I will
   here give the time and place of each, that the reader may see the
   general route taken by the superintendents every year.

   Oct. 1, 1801, the conference for the western preachers was held in
   Ebenezer, Tennessee: Jan. 1, 1802, in Camden, South Carolina: March 1,
   at Salem meeting-house, North Carolina: April 1, in Baltimore,
   Maryland: May 1, in Philadelphia: June 1, New York: July 1, in
   Monmouth, Maine. There were about twenty new circuits added this year,
   but as circuits were almost continually increased by the addition of
   new, and the division of old ones, by which their names were changed,
   it seems inexpedient to particularize them, unless something special
   shall render it necessary. As an evidence of the good effects of the
   revivals we have noticed, we may remark that there were sixty-seven
   preachers admitted on trial, and only ten located.

   This good work continued in various parts of the country, particularly
   in the west, by the instrumentality of camp-meetings, and also in some
   of the southern states. In Virginia, where the cause of religion had
   suffered severely on account of the secession and subsequent conduct of
   O'Kelley and his partisans, the Lord began again to show himself in
   mercy in the awakening and conversion of souls. At Mabry's and Merrit's
   chapels, and in Greenville circuit, there were remarkable displays of
   the power and grace of God, which eventuated in bringing hundreds of
   sinners into the light of the gospel. Norfolk and Portsmouth shared in
   the blessed work. In Rockingham an account is given of a meeting which
   continued not less than nine days, during which time almost all secular
   business was suspended, so entirely did the concerns of eternity occupy
   the time and attention of the people. It seems, therefore, that
   protracted meetings, as they have been more recently called, were not
   unknown in those days. The chief difference between those and such as
   have been held within a few past years consists in this, that the
   former were introduced without any previous design, but were the result
   of providential occurrences, while the latter were appointed with the
   express intention of being continued for several days, and hence, at
   first, were called "four days' meetings." The result of the one
   mentioned above was, that one hundred and seven in the immediate
   neighborhood were brought into the Church, exclusive of those who came
   from a distance, and were benefited by the meeting.

   There was also a great work of God which began last year on Flanders'
   circuit, in the state of New Jersey, under the labors of the Rev.
   Elijah Woolsey and his colleagues. Mr. Woolsey had proved himself a
   bold and hardy veteran in the cause of Christ, by volunteering his
   services for Upper Canada, in the year 1794, in company with Darius
   Dunham and James Coleman, where he labored for two years with much
   patience and industry, and saw the fruit of his efforts in the
   conversion of souls. In 1801 he was stationed on Flanders' circuit, and
   after cutting off those corrupt members of the Church who could not be
   reformed, he finally saw the blessed result of his labors in one of the
   most manifest displays of the grace of God ever witnessed in that part
   of the country. This work commenced at a quarterly meeting, at which it
   was judged there were not less than six thousand persons present. It
   seems that before the meeting commenced both brother Woolsey and the
   presiding elder, the Rev. Solomon Sharp, had a presentiment that the
   Lord was about to work at this meeting, and hence they went in the
   exercise of strong faith in the promises of God that it would be even
   so. When brother Woolsey arose to address the assembly, feeling "the
   word of the Lord like fire shut up in his bones," he informed them that
   God would work among them; and accordingly a shaking and trembling
   began to be visible in the assembly, accompanied with strong cries to
   God for mercy. The meeting continued until eleven o'clock at night, and
   some, judged, remained all night in these solemn exercises. The work
   thus commenced spread throughout the circuit, and great was the
   rejoicing of the people, both among the young converts and the old
   professors of religion. This revival eventuated in the conversion of
   many souls, and created a hallowing influence on the surrounding
   population.

   In Alexandria, in the District of Columbia, the quarterly meeting which
   began on Christmas day, continued sixteen days, and terminated in the
   conversion of upward of one hundred souls. In the states of North and
   South Carolina, Maryland, and Delaware, the Spirit of the Lord was
   poured out among the people in such a manner that some of the meetings
   were continued day and night, and hundreds became the subjects of the
   grace of life.

   In Vermont, also, the good work was extended in many places, though the
   labors of God's faithful ministers. Joseph Mitchell, Joseph Crawford,
   Elijah Chichester, and Elijah (now bishop) Hedding, had been
   instrumental, in the three or four preceding years, of carrying the
   glad tidings of salvation to the inhabitants along the shores of Lake
   Champlain, both in New York and Vermont, and had established many
   flourishing societies, which have continued gradually increasing until
   this day. This year William Anson was sent to form a circuit on Grand
   Isle, and such was his success, that there were returned for the next
   year one hundred and two members of the Church.

   Montreal, in Lower Canada, was visited this year by Joseph Sawyer. He
   found a few persons there who had belonged to the Methodist society in
   the city of New York before the Revolutionary War, who received him
   cordially, and assisted him in procuring a school-room for preaching. A
   Mr. McGinnis and his sister, both unmarried, were among the first who
   attached themselves to the society in Montreal, and they remained
   faithful during all the vicissitudes though which Methodism was called
   to pass in that city until their death.

   The Long Point circuit, in Upper Canada, was formed the latter part of
   this year, chiefly through the labors of Nathan Bangs [the author of
   this history -- DVM], who went into the work under the direction of the
   presiding elder of the district. In the towns of Burford and Oxford
   particularly there was a great work of God commenced under his labors
   which eventuated in the conversion of about one hundred souls.

   In the midst of this great work which was extending over the continent,
   and blessing thousands with its renovating influences, Bishop Asbury
   and his faithful colleague, Bishop Whatcoat, were moving among the
   churches, "as golden candlesticks," reflecting their luster on all
   around them, and, by their example, exciting them to activity and
   diligence in the cause of God. In imitation of the primitive
   evangelists, these bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church itinerated
   through the extent of the work, east, west, north, and south, not
   neglecting the remotest settlements in the wildernesses. And that they
   might not interfere with each other, nor both travel over the same
   ground, we find them in the latter part of last year, after holding a
   council with some of their brethren, determining to meet the Virginia
   conference, and from thence accompany each other as far as the New York
   conference; after which one was to continue on east to superintend the
   conferences in that direction, visiting all the eastern and northern
   states, and on through the western section of New York state to
   Pittsburgh in Pennsylvania, and thence though the districts of
   Virginia, until he met his colleague at the Virginia conference; the
   bishop who took the western tour was to pass on into the western states
   and territories, through Kentucky, Tennessee, Georgia, North and South
   Carolina, and so meet, as before stated, in the center of the work in
   Virginia. What a diocese was this! Each bishop was to have a traveling
   elder to accompany him. [10]

   According to this wise arrangement they shaped their course thereafter,
   spreading themselves as far as possible over the entire field of
   itinerant labor, and, by the aid of their traveling companions,
   preaching, wherever they came, to the people, and giving a vigorous
   impulse to the work of God. And as a sample of the manner in which
   their time was occupied, and the kind of fare they sometimes were
   obliged to put up with, take the following from Bishop Asbury's
   Journal: --

   "Why," says he, "should a living man complain? But to be three months
   together upon the frontiers, where generally you have but one room and
   fireplace, and half a dozen folks about you, strangers perhaps, and
   their families certainly (and they are not usually small in those
   plentiful new countries) making a crowd -- and this is not all -- for
   here you may meditate if you can, and here you must preach, read,
   write, pray, sing, talk, eat, drink, and sleep, or fly into the woods.
   Well! I have pains in my body ... which are very afflictive when I
   ride; but I cheer myself as well as I may with songs in the night." It
   certainly may be said of those who "desire the office of a bishop" in
   connection with laborings and sufferings such as these, if they do not
   "desire a good thing," they at least desire an office, not for its
   temporal emolument, nor for the sake of the ease and worldly grandeur
   it confers. After speaking of his arrival in New York for this year, he
   says, --

   "We advance toward the completion of four thousand miles for the
   present year. I have had great exercises on going though rain and
   continual labor; but have been blessed with great peace by my good and
   gracious God."

   The following account of the conference which he attended in the city
   of Baltimore, together with his remarks respecting a portion of his
   journal which was printed during his life-time, is inserted as due to
   him as a writer, and to the benevolence of his heart as a
   superintendent of the Church, as they show, on the one hand, that he
   was not responsible for the errors in his journal, which all who saw
   lamented, and, on the other, that he rejoiced in the temporal as well
   as spiritual prosperity of the preachers under his care. He says, --

   "Monday, 5. We had a day of fasting and humiliation for the conference,
   the continent, and the Church of God; I improved the occasion, and
   spoke from Acts xiv, 2:3. I was presented with a new impression of my
   journal; it is very incorrect; had I had an opportunity before it was
   put to press, I should have altered and expunged many things; the
   inaccuracies of grammar, and imperfections of composition incident to
   the hasty notices of a manuscript journal, are preserved in the printed
   copy. On Monday evening the conference rose: all the demands of the
   preachers were answered; money was advanced toward the purchase of
   horses; to those who had distant circuits and far to go, donations were
   made; and nearly two hundred dollars very liberally sent to the
   Monmouth conference, which is to meet in July next. Within the circling
   lines of this conference, we report to this sitting an addition to the
   society of three thousand souls and upward, besides those who may have
   died within the last eleven months. John Pawson's letter, and fifty
   copies of a volume of sermons, came safely to hand; his, and other
   letters, concerning the work of God, I read to my brethren."

   Among other tidings which came to him while at this conference, was
   that of the death of his pious mother, for whom he always felt a tender
   and filial regard; and as she belongs, in some sense, to the history of
   American Methodism, by having given birth to a son who was so closely
   identified with its interests, I think the reader will he pleased to
   read the following reflections which the bishop made on receiving the
   news of her death. The following are his remarks:

   While in Baltimore, I received an account of the death of my mother,
   which I fear is true. And here I may speak safely concerning my very
   dear mother: her character to me is well known. Her paternal descent
   was Welch; from a family ancient and respectable by the name of Rogers.
   She lived a woman of the world until the death of her first and only
   daughter, Sarah Asbury; how would the bereaved mother weep and tell of
   the beauties and excellences of her lost and lovely child! pondering on
   the past in the silent suffering of hopeless grief. This afflictive
   providence graciously terminated in the mother's conversion. When she
   saw herself a lost and wretched sinner, she sought religious people,
   but in the times of this ignorance few were 'sound in the faith,' or
   faithful to the grace given:' many were the days she spent chiefly in
   reading and prayer; at length she found justifying grace and pardoning
   mercy. So dim was the light of truth around her, from the assurance she
   found, she was at times inclined to believe in the final perseverance
   of the saints. For fifty years her hands, her house, her heart, were
   open to receive the people of God and ministers of Christ; and thus a
   lamp was lighted up in a dark place called Great Barre, in Great
   Britain. She was an afflicted, yet most active woman; of quick bodily
   powers, and masculine understanding; nevertheless, 'so kindly all the
   elements were mixed in her,' her strong mind quickly felt the subduing
   influences of that Christian sympathy which weeps with those who weep,'
   and rejoices with those who do rejoice.' As a woman and a wife she was
   chaste, modest, blameless -- as a mother (above all the women in the
   world would I claim her for my own) ardently affectionate as a mother
   in Israel,' few of her sex have done more by a holy walk to live, and
   by personal labor to support the gospel, and to wash the saints' feet;
   as a friend, she was generous, true, and constant. Elizabeth Asbury
   died January 6th, 1802, aged eighty-seven or eighty-eight years. There
   is now, after fifty years, a chapel within two or three hundred yards
   of her dwelling. I am now often drawn out in thankfulness to God, who
   hath saved a mother of mine, and, I trust, a father also, who are
   already in glory, where I hope to meet them both, after time, and
   cares, and sorrows, shall have ceased with me; and where glory shall
   not only beam, but open in my soul for ever. Amen."

   On account of some difficulties in the Church in the city of
   Philadelphia, which, it seems, could not be amicably adjusted, a number
   of the members withdrew from the Church, and established a separate
   place of worship, in a building which had been erected by Mr.
   Whitefield for an academy, and in which he used to preach whenever be
   visited that city. -- Hence these brethren were distinguished for a
   number of years as belonging to the Academy station.

   Believing them to have been influenced by pure motives, and as they
   adhered to the Methodist doctrine, and wished to be supplied with
   Methodist preaching, as well as to be governed by our discipline, the
   question was submitted to the conference, which sat in Philadelphia
   this year, whether or not the bishop should grant their request to have
   a preacher stationed over them. After mature deliberation, it was
   agreed, with only one dissenting vote, that their request should be
   granted, on such terms as the bishop could make. From that time forward
   the Academy was considered as a branch of the Methodist Episcopal
   Church, and it has been recognized a and regularly supplied with
   preachers by the bishops and conference. And although for some time
   there was not a perfect union between them and those brethren with whom
   the difference originated, yet the disaffection gradually wore way, and
   they both have continued to prosper and increase in number and
   respectability to the present day; and it is believed that long since
   all alienation of feeling between the two sections has fully died away.
   Indeed, Methodism in the city of Philadelphia has gradually increased
   in its resources, both temporally and spiritually, from the period of
   its introduction by Captain Webb, in 1766, until the present time; and
   although it has had its share of difficulties to contend with, it has
   never been wanting in putting forth its energies in proportion to its
   means for the enlargement of the Redeemer's kingdom, both at home and
   abroad.

   The increase of members for the present year, which may be seen below,
   shows the blessed effects of the numerous revivals which we have
   narrated for the two preceding years.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 68,075; Last Year: 57,186;
   Increase: 10,899 -- Colored This Year: 18,659; Last Year: 15,688;
   Increase: 2,971 -- Total This Year: 86,734; Last Year: 72,874 --
   Increase: 13,860 -- Preachers This Year: 358; Last Year: 307; Increase:
   51.

   This is the largest increase in any one year since 1790, when it was
   14,369, being 509 more then than now. The friends of the cause had also
   reason to congratulate themselves on the greater proportionate
   stability and perseverance of those who had entered the ranks of the
   itinerancy, there being a much less number than usually heretofore who
   exchanged the traveling for the local ministry.

  1803

   There were seven annual conferences this year, the New England
   conference being held for the first time in Boston, and the New York in
   Ashgrove, in the northerly part of the state of New York.

   There was an enlargement of the work of God this year in almost every
   direction, and "many people were added to the Lord." The camp-meetings
   which had commenced in the west under such favorable auspices,
   continued to spread with increased usefulness, thousands being
   attracted by the fame of their character, who otherwise might never
   have heard the gospel. This year they were introduced into various
   parts of the country. Two were held in the lower parts of Virginia, the
   first in Brunswick county, and the second at a place called the Barn,
   at both of which the Lord manifested himself in great power and
   goodness to the people.

   Similar meetings were held in Georgia, South and North Carolina, and in
   Maryland, at all of which there were remarkable displays of the
   awakening and converting grace of God, so that it may be said in truth,
   there were great revivals of religion through all those parts of the
   country. At a field meeting held in the vicinity of Middletown,
   Connecticut, there was a gracious work of God commenced, which
   terminated in the conversion of a number of souls.

   This year the work extended in the western part of the state of New
   York, and Otsego, Black River, Westmoreland, Pompey, and Ontario were
   added to the list of circuits in that part of the country.

   Samuel Merwin, Elijah Chichester, and Laban Clark, were this year sent
   as missionaries to Lower Canada; and Montreal, St. Johns, and Sorel,
   were included among the stations on the minutes of conference. Mr.
   Merwin visited Quebec, but not meeting with much encouragement, he
   stayed only about six weeks, when he came to Montreal, and spent the
   remainder of the year there, while Mr. Chichester, who was in Montreal,
   returned to the United States. Mr. Clark, after encountering a variety
   of difficulties in striving to form a circuit in the settlements along
   the Sorel, was reluctantly compelled to abandon the enterprise as
   hopeless, and he accordingly left that part of the country, and spent
   the remainder of the year among his brethren in the United States.

   In the great revivals of religion we have noticed, many young preachers
   were raised up, who went into the world as flaming heralds,
   contributing much by the energy of their preaching, and the
   faithfulness of their pastoral duties, to diffuse the spirit of
   reformation among the people.

   But the camp meetings were among the most efficient means of awakening
   the attention of the people to the things of eternity.

   As I have, however, heretofore entered so particularly into the details
   of the character and good effects of these camp meetings, it seems
   unnecessary to repeat them here, only to observe in general, that
   wherever they were introduced, similar effects followed, until at
   length they became very general among the Methodists throughout the
   country, and were often seasons of great "refreshing from the presence
   of the Lord."

   Four preachers; namely, Lewis Hunt, Edmund Wayman, John Leach, and
   Anthony Turck, after having fulfilled their ministry with fidelity and
   usefulness, took their departure this year from a scene of labor to a
   world of rest, as it is recorded of them all that they died in peace
   and triumph. Fourteen located, and six were returned supernumerary.

   Until last year the stations of the preachers were printed under their
   respective districts, as Georgia, South Carolina, &C., without naming
   the conferences of which they respectively belonged. In the year 1802
   the name of the conference was inserted at the head of the stations, so
   that it might be perceived at once to what conference each district,
   circuit, and preacher belonged. This year the same method was observed
   in taking the numbers, by which means the relative size and strength of
   each conference might be estimated. The following is the recapitulation
   of the

   Numbers in the Church

   By Conferences

   Western: Whites--7,738; Colored--464; Total--8,202

   S. Carolina: Whites--9,256; Colored--2,815; Total--12,071

   Virginia: Whites--13,099; Colored--3,794; Total--16,893

   Baltimore: Whites--12,513; Colored--6,414; Total--18,927

   Philadelphia: Whites--24,626; Colored--8,561; Total--33,187

   New England: Whites--2,927; Colored--14; Total--2,941

   New York: Whites--11,458; Colored--391; Total--11,849

   Totals This Year: Whites--81,617; Colored--22,453; Grand Total--104,070

   Totals Last Year: Whites--68,075; Colored--18,659; Grand Total--86,734

   Total Increases: Whites--13,542; Colored--3,794; Grand Total Increase:
   17,336

   Preachers This Year: 383

   Preachers Last Year: 350

   Increase: 33

   That we may see the comparative numbers of each conference in
   proportion to the extent of its territory, it is necessary to know the
   number of districts, circuits, and preachers of each, as well as the
   entire population of the territory comprehended in the bounds of each
   conference; but as the conferences were not bounded by state lines, it
   is not possible to estimate the comparative population of each; the
   following table, however, will exhibit the number of districts,
   circuits, preachers, and members in the several conferences
   respectively: --

   Conference

   Western: Districts--3; Circuits--17; Preachers--27; Members--8,202

   South Carolina: Districts--3; Circuits--19; Preachers--35;
   Members--12,071

   Virginia: Districts--4; Circuits--32; Preachers--44; Members--16,893

   Baltimore: Districts--4; Circuits--34; Preachers--59; Members--18,927

   Philadelphia: Districts--6; Circuits--49; Preachers--105;
   Members--33,187

   New England: Districts--2; Circuits--24; Preachers--35; Members--2,941

   New York: Districts--5; Circuits--38; Preachers--79; Members--17,336

   By comparing the two largest conferences, Philadelphia and New York, we
   shall perceive that the former had a population of as one preacher to
   about three hundred and twenty-five members, and the latter as one
   preacher to about two hundred and twenty members. This difference may
   be accounted for in the sparsity of the general population of Vermont
   and the Canadas, both of which were comprehended in the New York
   conference, and although three preachers were stationed in Lower
   Canada, they were considered as missionaries sent to make a trial for
   the introduction of Methodism, and from which no members were returned:
   whereas the Philadelphia conference, though it embraced much of the new
   counties in the northern part of Pennsylvania and in western New York,
   comprehended also the other settled counties along the western bank of
   the Hudson River, the Eastern Shore of Maryland, Delaware,
   Pennsylvania, and New Jersey, in some parts of which Methodism had,
   from its beginning, flourished more than in any other portion of our
   country. The peninsula of Maryland especially was considered the garden
   spot of Methodism in those days.

   If we take the Western and New England conferences, which are the two
   least, we shall find that the latter had a population of as one
   preacher to about one hundred and twenty-two members, and the former as
   one to four hundred and eighty-two. This difference is easily accounted
   for. In the western country, the Methodists were the evangelical
   pioneers among the people, and amid the great revivals which had
   originated at their camp meetings, they took the lead, and had already
   reaped a rich harvest of souls as the reward of their labors and
   sacrifices; while in New England, though the general population of the
   country was more dense than in the west, the Methodists had many sorts
   of opposition to contend with, doctrines adverse to their own to
   encounter, the prejudices of education, and denominational jealousies
   to oppose their progress. On these accounts, Methodism made but slow
   advances in New England; those who first joined its standard were
   generally of the poorer class, able to yield but a scanty support to
   the preachers, and it had, moreover, to contend against a strong
   current of opposition which set in against it: hence its members were
   comparatively small for several years. Indeed, it was not until the
   bands of sectarian bigotry were broken, and the bland influences of the
   gospel had in some measure softened the asperities arising from
   denominational peculiarities, that Methodism could stand erect and
   assert her liberties in New England.

   From a review of the work for the last three years, we find abundant
   cause for thankfulness to the great Head of the Church for what he had
   done by the instrumentality of his servants. Methodism began to he felt
   throughout the country; and while it provoked the opposition of some,
   it had been the means of stirring up many other denominations to put
   forth their efforts for the spread of evangelical principles and
   holiness though the land; and if "righteousness exalteth a nation," may
   we not believe that those great revivals of religion had a most happy
   and conservative influence upon our national character? Had those
   principles of infidelity with which the minds of many of the leading
   men of our Nation had been infected, and which, at one time, were
   descending with fearful rapidity to the lower ranks of society, been
   permitted to operate unchecked by any other barrier than a mere
   lifeless form of Christianity, or those restraints which a secular and
   civil education might interpose, is there not reason to apprehend that
   such streams of moral and intellectual, as well as political pollution,
   would have poured their poisonous waters over the land, as must have
   washed our civil and religious institutions into the whirlpool of
   destruction?

   Without attempting to disparage other denominations of Christians, who
   doubtlessly all contributed toward checking the overflowings of
   ungodliness by making a firm stand against the secret workings of
   infidelity, it must, I think, be admitted by all who reflect
   impartially on the subject, that the labors of the itinerating
   Methodist preachers tended mightily to purify the corrupt mass of mind,
   and to awaken attention to spiritual and divine things, and to call off
   the attention of the people from mere secular and political affairs, to
   the momentous concerns of eternity.

   And may we not hence see a reason why God wrought in such a remarkable
   manner, about this time, at the camp and other meetings? And why
   especially that he should have begun this work in the new countries? We
   know perfectly well, that in the settlement of new countries, being
   generally destitute of the ordinary means of grace, the minds of the
   people are apt to be occupied chiefly with temporal things, and thus,
   by habit, become forgetful of God and their eternal interests. In this
   state of things, and under such influences as were at work, our new
   territories were filling and growing up. And who should go after those
   wanderers? Who should follow them into the wilderness, and bring them
   into the fold of Christ? Let this duty devolve on whomsoever it might,
   the Methodists were among the first to discharge it. Their mode of
   preaching, too, plain, pointed, searching, extemporaneous, and
   itinerating from place to place, collecting the people in log houses,
   in school houses, in the groves, or in barns, was most admirably
   adapted to the state of society, and calculated to arouse the attention
   of a slumbering world to the concerns of religion.

   Such were the means employed, and such were the effects produced. And
   who will say that God did not lead to the adoption of this method as
   best adapted to answer the ends of redemption, namely, the salvation of
   the lost. To awaken the men of that generation from their profound
   stupor, that they might shake off the slumbers of infidelity, and
   acknowledge the hand of God in their deliverance from the charms of
   error with which they were deluded, God, it seems, interposed in the
   remarkable manner before narrated, and by "signs and wonders" in the
   symbolical heavens convinced the people that he "ruled in the armies of
   heaven, and commanded among the inhabitants of the earth."

   By this means, as before said, the minds of the people were awakened to
   their eternal interests, religion became the topic of conversation, of
   inquiry, and investigation, and thus that light was poured into the
   understanding, and conviction into the conscience, which led men to see
   the errors of infidelity, the unsatisfying nature of a mere form of
   godliness, and to feel the conservative influence which vital,
   experimental, and practical Christianity exerts upon individual
   character, upon social and civil communities, and of course upon stales
   and empires.

   What though the keen eye of criticism might detect some errors in
   doctrine or extravagance in conduct, originating from human weaknesses
   or unsanctified passions, -- shall we cast away the good on account of
   the bad? Who does not see that such a process would lead to the
   abandonment of every institution, civil as well as religious, on earth?
   That thousands of sinners were reformed, in heart and life, the most
   skeptical must acknowledge. And a thoroughly reformed sinner cannot be
   otherwise than a good citizen, a good ruler, husband, brother, and
   friend. To make Christian patriots, therefore, is to purify the
   political atmosphere from all poisonous exhibitions, and to make it a
   healthful medium for the civil respiration of all who move and have
   their being within its circumference.

   In addition to the direct influence which Christian principles were
   thus brought to exert on the heart and life, the itinerating mode of
   preaching had a tendency in the natural order of cause and effect, to
   cement the hearts of our citizens together in one great brotherhood. It
   is well known that our civil organization, into several state
   sovereignties, though under the partial control of the general
   government, naturally tended to engender state animosities, arising out
   of local and peculiar usages, laws, customs, and habits of life. What
   more calculated to soften these asperities, and to allay petty
   jealousies and animosities, than a Church bound together by one system
   of doctrine, under the government of the same discipline, accustomed to
   the same usages, and a ministry possessing it homogeneousness of
   character, aiming at one and the same end -- the salvation of their
   fellow-men by means of the same gospel, preached and enforced by the
   same method -- and these ministers continually interchanging from north
   to south, from east to west, everywhere striving to bring all men under
   the influence of the same "bond of perfectness?" Did not these things
   tend to bind the great American family together by producing a sameness
   of character, feelings, and views?

   And all this too without entering into the arena of politics at all, or
   siding, as a Church, with any political party. For it is a well-known
   fact, that the Methodist Episcopal Church has never embarked on the
   rough sea of political warfare. She has left all her ministers and
   members free, to act as individual members of the civil community as
   they might list, only enjoining upon all a due submission to the
   "powers that be" -- never attempting to dictate to any of her communion
   to what political party they should lend their influence, nor ever
   making civil polity the end of her exertions. The influence therefore,
   which she has exerted upon the civil destinies of the republic, has
   been altogether of an indirect and collateral character, growing out of
   that moral and religious stamp with which she strives to mark and
   distinguish all her children. That this conservative influence has been
   felt on the civil destinies of our country, originating from our
   religious institutions and the mode of carrying them into effect, is
   what is here contended for, and what, it is believed, all candid,
   impartial observers of the history of events and the connection between
   causes and effects must acknowledge.

   Being foremost in congratulating the first chief magistrate of our
   republic on his elevation to that high and responsible office, she has
   remained unabatedly attached to the constitution of the country,
   inculcating obedience to its magistrates and laws, and promulgating
   those doctrines and enforcing those duties which, if believed and
   discharged, will ensure peace on earth, and lead ultimately to
   immortality and eternal life in heaven.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [6] Here, then, was a protracted meeting held long before those which
   have been more recently established among us and some other
   denominations.

   [7] The Rev. John McGee, from whom much of this account is taken.

   [8] This part of the country was first visited by a local preacher from
   the United States by the name of Neel, who commenced preaching in the
   vicinity of Queenstown, amid much obloquy and opposition. He was a holy
   man of God and an able minister of the New Testament. His word was
   blessed to the awakening and conversion of many souls, and he was
   always spoken of by the people with great affection and veneration as
   the pioneer of Methodism in that country. Among those who first joined
   the society may be mentioned Christian Warner, who lived near what is
   now called St. David's, who became a class leader, and his house was a
   home for the preachers and for preaching for many years. He was
   considered a father in Israel by all who knew him. The first Methodist
   meeting house erected in that part of the country was in his
   neighborhood. This was built in 1801. Christian Warner has been dead
   many years; but several of his descendants are there, some of whom are
   members of the Church. Mr. Neel lived to see large and flourishing
   societies established through all that country, and at length was
   gathered to his fathers in a good old age.

   [9] Bishop Asbury, who preached the funeral sermon of Mr. Jarratt, says
   of him, "He was a faithful and successful preacher. He had witnessed
   four or five periodic revivals of religion in his parish. -- When he
   began his labors, there was no other, that he knew of, evangelical
   ministers in all the province of Virginia." -- "He traveled into
   several counties, and there were very few parish churches within fifty
   miles of his own, in which he had not preached: to which labors of love
   and zeal, was added, preaching the word of life on solitary
   plantations, and in meeting houses. He was the first who received our
   despised preachers. When strangers and unfriended, he took them to his
   house, and had societies formed in his parish. Some of his people
   became traveling and local preachers among us." -- "I verily believe
   that hundreds were awakened by his labors. They are dispersed -- some
   have gone to the Carolinas, to Georgia, to the western country -- some
   perhaps are in heaven, and some, it may be, in hell." This is a strong
   testimony in favor of Mr. Jarratt. Little did the lid the writer think
   when he penned it that a future day would reveal an edition of Mr.
   Jarratt's posthumous letters, containing such hard censures against the
   Methodists as are therein found. Indeed these censures are so much
   unlike the general tone and spirit of Mr. Jarratt, as they were
   exemplified in his life and conversation, that some, who revere his
   memory, have expressed doubts of their genuineness, or at least that
   their editor foisted in expressions which are not in the originals. On
   the truth of such a conjecture it is scarcely possible to decide; but
   on the reading of the letters, there does not appear to me anything,
   except the general character of their reputed author, to cause one to
   suspect their genuineness. Mr. Jarratt doubtless thought he had cause
   to complain, and under the influence of this impression, he seems to
   have expressed himself in a strain of invective somewhat unbecoming the
   character he sustained.

   [10] Asbury's Journal, vol. iii, page 43.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 6

    The General Conference of 1804, and of the Annual Conferences of 1804-5-6-7

   The fourth regular General Conference assembled in the city of
   Baltimore, on the 7th day of May, 1804. There were present one hundred
   and twelve members, but as the seats of five were, on examination,
   declared vacant, because the persons were not legally there, the
   conference was composed of one hundred and seven members, namely, four
   from New England, three from the Western, five from South Carolina,
   seventeen from Virginia, twenty-nine from Baltimore, forty one from
   Philadelphia, and twelve from New York Conference. [11]

   Bishops Coke, Asbury, and Whatcoat were present as presidents of the
   General Conference.

   After being organized, a motion was made and carried, that the
   conference proceed in the onerous task of reading and revising, in
   consecutive order, the entire Discipline, requiring, as before, that no
   old rule should be abolished without the concurrence of two thirds of
   the members present; but a motion to require a vote of two thirds to
   establish a new rule was lost. The right of fixing the times for
   holding the annual conferences was invested in the bishops, provided
   they should allow each conference to sit at least one week, while the
   places were to be fixed by the conferences themselves.

   The following provision was made in regard to presidents of conferences
   in the absence of a bishop: "But if there are two or more presiding
   elders belonging to one conference, the bishop or bishops may, by
   letter or otherwise, appoint the president; but if no appointment be
   made, or the presiding elder appointed do not attend, the conference
   shall, in either of these cases, elect the president, by ballot,
   without debate, from among the presiding elders."

   To restrict the power of the presiding elders in the employment of
   preachers whose application to be received into the traveling ministry
   had been rejected by an annual conference, it was ordered that such
   should not be employed without the consent of the conference, "under
   certain conditions."

   Provision was also made for the trial of a bishop in the interval of
   the General Conference, making it obligatory on the accusers to present
   their accusation in writing, a copy of which must be given to the
   accused himself. The bishops were, at this conference, prohibited from
   allowing any preacher to remain more than two years successively in any
   circuit or station. This has been a standing rule to the present time.

   As the articles of religion were adopted under the reign of the "old
   confederation," the article respecting the government of the United
   States recognized the "Act of Confederation," as the general bond of
   union to the several states. At this conference the phraseology of that
   article was altered so as to recognize the Constitution of the United
   States as the supreme law of the land, and the federal union of the
   states as a to "sovereign and independent nation" which "ought not to
   be subject to any foreign jurisdiction."

   The rule which made expulsion from the Church a penalty for marrying
   unawakened persons, was so altered at this conference, as to require
   that such should be put back on trial, with an explanatory note,
   stating that they did not prohibit persons from uniting in matrimony
   with those who are not members of our Church, provided they have the
   form and are seeking the power of godliness.

   The Book Concern, which had hitherto been carried on in the city of
   Philadelphia, was removed to the city of New York, and Ezekiel Cooper
   was reappointed editor and general book steward, and John Wilson his
   assistant.

   A rule was passed recommending to the annual conferences to restrict
   our preachers from improper publications, making it obligatory on them
   to submit their manuscripts to the book committee at New York, or to
   their annual conference.

   It was ordered that each quarterly meeting conference should appoint a
   secretary to take down its proceedings, in a book to be kept by one of
   the stewards of the circuit.

   It was ordered at this conference that the Discipline should he divided
   into two parts, the first part to comprehend the spiritual, and the
   second the temporal economy; and the spiritual part was directed to be
   printed separately, more especially for the benefit of the colored
   members of the Church at the south.

   It seems that in the address of the Wesleyan Methodist Conference to
   our General Conference, they earnestly solicited the return of Dr.
   Coke, whose labors among them they highly appreciated, more
   particularly in the missionary department of their work. This subject
   was referred to a committee to consider and report thereon, and they
   finally agreed to the following, which was concurred in by the
   conference: --

   "Dr. Coke shall have leave from this General Conference to return to
   Europe, agreeably to the request of the European Conferences, provided
   he shall hold himself subject to the call of three of our annual
   conferences to return when he is requested, but at farthest, that he
   shall return, if he lives, to the next General Conference."

   In conformity to this resolution, the following letter was addressed to
   the British Conference: --

   Very Dear and Respected Brethren: -- Your very kind and affectionate
   address, from your Manchester Conference, dated August 5, 1803, was
   presented to us by our mutual friend and brother, Dr. Coke. We always
   have received, and hope we ever shall receive such addresses from our
   European brethren, with the most cordial sentiments of Christian
   friendship; for it is our ardent wish that the European and American
   Methodists may improve and strengthen the bonds of Christian union,
   and, as far as possible, reciprocally build each other up in the great
   and glorious work, in which they are both so arduously employed. And we
   pray God, that our adorable Jehovah and Redeemer may graciously be
   pleased to prosper both you and us in the blessed work of proclaiming
   the honor of our God, and of saving the precious souls of mankind.

   We truly rejoice in the information given us, that the gospel of Christ
   continues to prevail among you; and that the mission among the native
   Irish is marked with hopeful and flattering prospects. Also we are much
   pleased with the account of your prosperous mission in the principality
   of Wales, in the Welsh language. Whenever we hear of the prosperity of
   Zion and of the success of the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, it
   gives us a pleasure far superior to our powers of expression: hence we
   are ready, upon such occasions, with overflowing hearts of love and
   gratitude, to proclaim with shouts of joy and gladness, Not unto us,
   not unto us; but unto the Lord' be more that human ascriptions of
   praise, of honor, and glory! May the united labors of your hands be
   prospered more and more!

   We also feel peculiar satisfaction at the information of the union and
   harmony which subsist among you in doctrine and discipline and that
   you, our elder brethren, are steadfast and persevering in the divine
   articles of the essential divinity and efficacious atonement of Jesus
   Christ, and of all the benefits and privileges flowing from, and
   connected with the same; we cordially embrace the same important
   truths, and are determined to stand fast and immovable in the support
   of this essential foundation of all our hopes.

   The Lord has greatly prospered our labors in these United States. We
   have at present increased to considerably more than one hundred
   thousand members; and the work still goes on in a great and glorious
   manner. Our brethren are much in the spirit of active perseverance in
   this blessed work; and, by the blessing of God, our hearts are cemented
   together in love, and are bound in the ties of harmony and unity.

   With respect to our much-esteemed friend, and beloved brother, Dr.
   Coke, he arrived among us last autumn, and was received by us with the
   sincerest sentiments of respect and affection. Since he came into these
   states, he has traveled about three thousand miles, visiting our
   principal societies, and preaching to crowded assemblies of our
   citizens. His time, we trust, has been profitably and acceptably spent
   among us, and we hope agreeably to himself. Your request for his return
   was taken into our most serious and solemn consideration; and, after a
   full and deliberate examination of the reasons which you assigned in
   favor of his return, we have concluded that there is a probability of
   his being more eminently useful at present, in the way you point out,
   than for us to retain him, especially as our beloved brother Asbury now
   enjoys better health than he did some years ago, and as we believe,
   with the assistance he can receive from our esteemed brother Whatcoat,
   the work of superintending the Church and societies can be accomplished
   in the absence of Dr. Coke. We therefore have consented to the doctor's
   return to Europe, upon the express condition that he will return to us
   at any time, when three of our annual conferences shall call him, or at
   farthest, that he shall return to our next General Conference.

   And now, dear brethren, we commend you to our common Lord, and to the
   word of his grace, hoping that you and we shall ever remain in the
   unity of the Spirit, and bonds of Christian and ministerial affection
   until we meet together around the throne of God. Pray for us. We are,
   very dear and much-respected brethren, truly and sincerely yours, in
   our Lord Jesus Christ.

   "Signed by order, and in behalf of the General Conference,

   "Francis Asbury, "Richard Whatcoat, "John Wilson, Secretary.

   "Baltimore, May 23, 1804."

   This year, for the first time, I find the boundaries of the several
   annual conferences fixed by the General Conference, and printed in the
   form of Discipline. They are as follows: --
    1. The New England conference shall include the district of Maine, the
       Boston, New London, and Vermont districts.
    2. The New York conference comprehends the New York, Pittsfield,
       Albany, and Upper Canada districts.
    3. The Philadelphia conference shall include the remainder of the
       state of New York, all New Jersey, that part of Pennsylvania which
       lies on the east side of the Susquehanna River, except what belongs
       to the Susquehanna district, the state of Delaware, the Eastern
       Shore of Maryland, and all the rest of the Peninsula.
    4. The Baltimore conference shall include the remainder of
       Pennsylvania, the Western Shore of Maryland, the Northern Neck of
       Virginia, and the Greenbrier district.
    5. The Virginia conference shall include all that part of Virginia
       which lies on the south side of the Rappahannock River and east of
       the Blue Ridge, and in that part of North Carolina which lies on
       the north side of Cape Fear River, except Washington, also the
       circuits which are situate on the branches of the Yadkin.
    6. The South Carolina conference shall include the remainder of North
       Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.
    7. The Western conference shall include the states of Tennessee,
       Kentucky, and Ohio, and that part of Virginia which lies west of
       the great river Kanawha, with the Illinois and Natchez; provided,
       the bishops shall have authority to appoint other yearly
       conferences.

   A bare inspection of the map of the United States will show the immense
   territory included in each of these conferences; and when it is
   recollected that the districts and circuits were proportionally large,
   it will be perceived that the preachers of those days were no "idle
   shepherds," but were emphatically laborers in this vast and fruitful
   field.

   These, with the exception of some important verbal amendments, and some
   regulations in reference to the Book Concern, which will be noticed in
   another place, comprehended the doings of this conference. The
   conference closed its session in peace on the 23d of May, and the
   members returned to their itinerant labors with renewed ardor,
   determined to spend and be spent in the cause of Jesus Christ.

   It appears from the records of those days, that the introduction of
   camp meetings added a new stimulus to the work of reformation, and put,
   as it were, new life and energy into the hearts of God's ministers and
   people. They were accordingly appointed in almost every part of our
   work, and were generally attended with most evident manifestations of
   the power and grace of God. It was estimated that about one thousand
   souls were brought from darkness to light, this year, at the various
   camp meetings which were held in the states of North Carolina,
   Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, and New York, besides those
   who were indirectly benefited by these meetings on their various
   circuits; for generally, the preachers and people returned from the
   camp meetings with their hearts fired and filled with the love of God,
   and were a means of carrying the sacred flame into their respective
   neighborhoods, where it was enkindled with fresh ardor, and burned with
   a steady blaze, consuming the sins of many a broken-hearted sinner.

   But while these extraordinary meetings were exerting a hallowed
   influence upon the older states, and were therefore hailed particularly
   by the Methodists as instruments of great good to the souls of the
   people, those in Kentucky ran into such wild excesses in some
   instances, as to bring them into disrepute in the estimation of the
   more sober part of the community.

   We have seen that some of the Presbyterian ministers were among the
   foremost in promoting these meetings, and in favoring the revivals
   which resulted from them. These, however, were opposed by many of their
   brethren, particularly those who held fast the doctrines of Calvinistic
   decrees, and blended with them the doctrine of irresistible grace,
   thereby aiding, indirectly, and without intending it, the fatalism of
   infidelity, within which the minds of many of the Kentuckians had been
   infected. Some of these ministers, in the judgment of those who have
   recorded the transactions of those days, were strangers to experimental
   religion, and therefore, when they undertook to instruct those awakened
   sinners who came to them for advice, they knew not how to meet their
   cases, nor how to adapt their instructions to the peculiar state of
   their minds. This created perplexity and confusion. Those whose souls
   were alive to God, by having received a baptism from above, were
   disgusted with the awkwardness of those spiritual advisers, and finally
   considered them to "physicians of no value." This led to disputings,
   and finally to a separation, which terminated in 1803 in the formation
   of what was called the "Springfield Presbytery." But these preachers,
   however sincere and fervent they might have been, did not surround
   themselves with those guards which are essential to the preservation of
   harmony, orthodoxy, and gospel order; and hence those who were licensed
   to preach by this presbytery, puffed up with their sudden elevation to
   office, and breathing in an atmosphere which inflated them with
   spiritual pride, threw off the restraints of a wholesome discipline,
   and soon proclaimed those destructive heresies which are subversive of
   all true religion. The Springfield Presbytery was dissolved in 1804,
   and some turned Quakers, and others ran into the wildest freaks of
   fanaticism. Hence originated those unseemly exercises so humiliating to
   recount, of jumping, dancing, jerking, barking, and rolling on the
   ground, by which these schismatics were at last distinguished and
   disgraced. And to finish the climax of absurdities, in the midst of
   this "confusion worse confounded," a company of Shaking Quaker
   preachers from the state of New York came among them with their
   new-fangled doctrines, and "drew away disciples" after them. Several of
   these dissentient ministers and quite a number of members were, by
   these means, drawn into this vortex of error and confusion.

   Another thing which added to the evils so much to be deprecated by
   every friend to gospel order, was the introduction, by some men of
   eminent talents, and considerable influence, of the Socinian and Arian
   heresies. These, indeed, were the precursors, in some measure, of the
   evils we have mentioned, and tended, by their soft and subtle
   speculations, gradually to sap the foundation of the Christian's hope,
   and to prepare the way for that wild confusion by which many minds
   became bewildered. These things, as before stated, tended to bring camp
   meetings into disrepute in Kentucky, and not a little to strengthen the
   cause of skepticism -- an infidelity to which many were strongly
   inclined, and which always battens itself upon the foibles and faults
   of religious professors -- a sort of food exactly suited to the
   vitiated and voracious appetite of an unbelieving multitude.

   But while these things were transacting among those who slid off from
   the mountain of gospel truth, the Methodists generally, and most of the
   Presbyterians who had favored these revivals, descried the danger from
   afar, and gave the alarm to their people. The latter, however,
   separated themselves from both the old Presbyterians, who were supposed
   to be defective in experimental religion, and too tenacious of the
   peculiarities of Calvinism, and from those wild fanatics we have
   already described, and established a community of their own under the
   jurisdiction of what has been called "The Cumberland Presbytery." [12]
   These have continued to increase in numbers and respectability to the
   present time, and no doubt have exerted a salutary religious influence
   within the sphere of their labors.

   The Methodists, however, adhered to their standards, and promoted the
   cause of the revivals without involving themselves in the
   responsibility of those wild rhapsodies and unseemly gesticulations
   which hung on the skirts of the camp and other meetings in Kentucky.
   The union which had subsisted between the different denominations
   became, from various causes, weaker and weaker, until finally each,
   arranging itself under its own standard, and using those religious
   appliances which were considered lawful and expedient, endeavored to
   promote the cause of piety in its own peculiar way, without improperly
   interfering with its neighbor. And although, from the causes we have
   enumerated, camp meetings became unsavory in most places in Kentucky,
   their birthplace, they traveled into the new state of Ohio, and there
   displayed the banners of the cross with all that vigor and success
   which had marked their progress in Kentucky and Tennessee, and also
   without suffering a deterioration from the wild excesses heretofore
   deprecated. What added to the beneficial influence of these meetings in
   Ohio, and tended to diffuse the spirit of reformation among the people
   in these new settlements, was, that many who had caught the sacred
   flame in Kentucky, from l803 to 1806, as if impelled by an invisible
   power, emigrated to Ohio; and while the Church was being sifted in
   Kentucky, and under the searching operation of a gospel discipline,
   much of the chaff was winnowed out, these pious emigrants were
   preparing a habitation for themselves and their children in a more
   congenial soil, better suited, from various circumstances, for the
   cultivation and growth of the fruits of the Holy Spirit.

   This year William Burke was the presiding elder of the Ohio district,
   and he contributed much by his labors and sacrifices to extend the
   Redeemer's kingdom in that newly-settled country. While William
   McKendree continued his labors in Kentucky, and exerted all his powers
   to check the progress of fanaticism which he saw afflicting the Church,
   as well as to confirm the wavering and the doubting, Mr. Burke, aided
   by several young men of zeal and perseverance, was carrying the
   spiritual warfare into the enemy's territories in Ohio, and thus was
   preparing the way of the Lord in that rising part of our country.

   This year a strong effort was made to introduce Methodism into the town
   of Marietta. In many places in the adjoining settlements it had taken
   firm hold of the hearts of the people, and several flourishing circuits
   had been formed; but as yet no impression had been made upon the
   inhabitants in Marietta, the oldest town in the state, and in which the
   Congregationalists held the religious sway. This year a camp meeting
   was appointed by the Rev. George Askins, on the public land in the
   immediate vicinity of the village; but though it was rendered a
   blessing to the people of God who assembled from a distance, no
   permanent impression appeared to be made on those for whom it was
   chiefly intended, and the meeting broke up with little hopes in the
   hearts of the preachers. They all agreed, however, to pray for an
   outpouring of the Spirit upon that place. The next year, under the
   superintendence of the Rev. Messrs. Jacob Young and George C. Light,
   another meeting was appointed, which was attended with the most blessed
   results; and among others who were made partakers of the grace of life
   was a professed disciple of Thomas Paine, by the name of Jonas Johnson.
   The change wrought in him was great and visible; and, being a most
   charming singer, by the exercise of his gift and his general
   deportment, he exerted great influence over others, and was
   instrumental of much good. He committed his infidel books to the flame,
   substituting in their place the Bible and Hymn book, and other
   religious books, and opened his house as well as his heart to the
   messengers of salvation. A class was soon formed of happy believers,
   which continued to flourish and increase in strength and numbers, and
   to exert a hallowed influence for many years on the surrounding
   population; and the church in Marietta, though at times suffering from
   the disaffection of some of its members, stands among her sister
   churches in Ohio as one of the stars to enlighten the minds of those
   who "sit in the land and shadow of death."

   While these things were going on in the western states the Lord was not
   unmindful of other parts of his vineyard. As has already been related,
   by means of camp meetings, which may be considered as ushering in a new
   era in the history of revivals of religion, the work of God spread
   rapidly in many parts of the older states. In addition to the general
   notice already taken of those, we may remark that this year there was
   an encouraging revival in the city of Philadelphia; not less than one
   hundred souls had been converted to God, and brought into the fold of
   Christ, under the labors of Joshua Wells and his colleagues.

   In Bedford, Amherst, and Campbell counties in Virginia, and some other
   places, under the labors of Stith Mead, the Lord poured out his Spirit,
   and more than eleven hundred souls were brought into gospel liberty in
   about six months.

   In the province of Maine there was a gracious work of God in several
   places. This began at the Conference which was held in the town of
   Buxton, upward of forty souls having been born unto God during the
   conference. In Beth and Readfield the work of God prevailed to a
   considerable extent. In Mississippi there was a number brought to the
   knowledge of the truth.

   This year Benjamin Young was sent as a missionary to Illinois, which at
   that time contained but few inhabitants, and these chiefly descendants
   of the French, who first settled in Kaskaskia and Cahokia in 1720. But
   though thus early explored by the French, and settlements commenced,
   the progress of the population in Illinois was extremely slow, as it is
   said that in 1800 the whole number of inhabitants was only two hundred
   and fifteen, and the territory was not erected into an independent
   state until 1818. Since that time, however, it has filled up with
   inhabitants within a surprising rapidity. The missionary so far
   succeeded in his labors that there were returned, on the minutes for
   the next year, sixty-seven members.

   This year, also, Nathan Bangs [the author of this work -- DVM]
   solicited and obtained the appointment of a missionary to a new
   settlement on the River Thames, [13] in Upper Canada. This place had
   long been on his mind as a promising field for missionary labor, and he
   had frequently offered himself to explore it in the name of the Lord,
   but his presiding elder objected, on account of the feeble state of his
   health and the unhealthiness of the climate. [14]

   While at the conference in New York this year, he made known his
   desires and impressions to Bishop Asbury, and he appointed him a
   missionary to that place. He accordingly left the city of New York in
   the latter part of the month of June, went into Upper Canada by the way
   of Kingston, thence up the country along the northwestern shore of Lake
   Ontario to the Long Point circuit, and thence on through Oxford to the
   town of Delaware, on the River Thames. Here he lodged for the night in
   the last log hut in the settlement, and the next morning, as the day
   began to dawn, he arose and took his departure, and after traveling
   through a wilderness of forty-five miles, guided only by marked trees,
   he arrived at a solitary log house about sunset, weary, hungry, and
   thirsty, where he was entertained with the best the house could afford,
   which was some Indian pudding and milk for supper, and a bundle of
   straw for this bed. The next day, about twelve o'clock, he arrived at
   an Indian village on the north bank of the River Thames, the
   inhabitants of which were under the instructions of two Moravian
   missionaries. While there the Indians were called together for worship,
   which was performed in a very simple manner, by reading a short
   discourse, and singing a few verses of a hymn. The missionaries and the
   Indians treated him with great respect and affection, and seemed to
   rejoice in the prospect of having the gospel preached to the white
   settlements on the banks of the river below.

   About 3 o'clock, P. M., he arrived at the first house in the
   settlement, when the following conversation took place between the
   missionary and a man whom he saw in the yard before the house. After
   the introductory salutation, the missionary inquired, "Do you want the
   gospel preached here?" After some deliberation, it was answered, "Yes,
   that we do. Do you preach the gospel?" "That is my occupation." "Alight
   from your horse, then, and come in, will you?" "I have come a great
   distance to preach the gospel to the people here, and it is now
   Saturday afternoon, tomorrow is the Sabbath, and I must have a house to
   preach in before I get off from my horse." After a few moments of
   consideration, he replied, "I have a house for you to preach in,
   provender for your horse, and food and lodging for yourself; and you
   shall be welcome to them all if you will dismount and come in."
   Thanking him for his kind offer, the missionary dismounted and entered
   the hospitable mansion in the name of the Lord, saying, Peace be to
   this house'. A young man mounted this horse and rode ten miles down the
   river, inviting the people to attend meeting at that house the next
   morning at ten o'clock, A. M.

   At the time appointed the house was filled. When the missionary rose
   up, he told the people that whenever a stranger makes his appearance in
   a place the people are generally anxious to know who he is, whence he
   came, where he is going, and what his errand is among them. "In these
   things," said he, "I will satisfy you in few words." He then gave them
   a short account of his birth and education, of his conversion and call
   to the ministry, and the motives which induced him to come among them,
   and concluded in the following manner: "I am a Methodist preacher, and
   my manner of worship is to stand up and sing, and kneel in prayer; then
   I stand up and take a text and preach, while the people sit on their
   seats. As many of you as see fit to join me in this method, you can do
   so; but if not, you can choose your own method." When he gave out his
   hymn, they all arose, every man, woman, and child. When he kneeled in
   prayer, they all, without exception, kneeled down. They then took their
   seats, and he stood up and gave out his text, "Repent ye, therefore,
   and be converted, that your sins may he blotted out, when the times of
   refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord;" and he preached,
   as he thinks, with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. Having
   concluded his discourse, he explained to his audience his manner of
   preaching, by itinerating through the country, his doctrine, and how
   supported, &c. He then said, "All you who wish to hear any more such
   preaching, rise up" -- when every man, woman, and child stood up. He
   then told them they might expect preaching there again in two weeks.

   Such a commencement, in a strange place, he considered as a token for
   good. He then sent on appointments through the settlements along down
   the river, which he filled in a manner similar to the above, and was
   everywhere received with great cordiality. He proceeded down the shore
   of Lake St. Clair, visited Sandwich, on the Canada side of the outlet
   of the lake, crossed over to Detroit, [15] and preached in the
   council-house, thence to Fort Malden, and down the shore of Lake Erie,
   in a settlement made up of Americans, English, Scotch, Irish, and Dutch
   emigrants. The people everywhere flocked together to hear the word.

   A more destitute place he had never found. Young people had arrived to
   the age of sixteen who had never heard a gospel sermon, and he found a
   Methodist family who had lived in that county for seven years without
   hearing a sermon preached. But although the people generally were
   extremely ignorant of spiritual things, and very loose in their morals,
   they seemed ripe for the gospel, and hence received and treated God's
   messenger with great attention and kindness. He continued among them
   about three months, when he left them for the Niagara circuit,
   intending to return again soon, but was prevented. He was succeeded the
   next year by William Case, who was instrumental of great good to the
   souls of the people. Societies and a regular circuit were formed, which
   have continued to flourish and increase to the present time.

   Forty-eight preachers located this year, [16] two were expelled, and
   four, namely, William Ormond, Nathan Jarrett, Rezin Cash, and David
   Brown, had died; having fulfilled their ministry with fidelity, they
   ended their lives and labors in peace.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 89,603; Last Year: 81,617;
   Increase: 7,986 -- Colored This Year: 23,531; Last Year: 22,453;
   Increase: 1,078 -- Total This Year: 113,134; Last Year: 104,070 --
   Increase: 9,064 -- Preachers This Year: 400; Last Year: 383; Increase:
   17.

  1805

   There were seven annual conferences held this year; and the minutes
   were so arranged that the stations of the preachers, as well as the
   questions and answers, were printed under their respective conferences,
   so that it might be seen, at one view, what was the relative strength
   of each section of the work.

   Nothing out of the ordinary course of things occurred this year. The
   work of God went gradually on, and much good was accomplished by means
   of the ministry of the word in various parts of the country. The camp
   meetings spread more and more in the middle and northern states, and
   they were generally attended with increasing interest; many, from the
   novelty of their character being induced to attend, who might otherwise
   never have heard the sound of the gospel; and not a few of these were
   brought to serious and solemn thought.

   This year, for the first time, a camp meeting was held on the Bay of
   Quinte circuit in Upper Canada, which was attended by the writer, being
   the first he ever witnessed. It was held in an open field, and the
   exercises were accompanied by a mighty display of the awakening and
   converting, as well as sanctifying grace of God. On the third day of
   the meeting such awful sensations were produced under the preaching,
   that many stout-hearted sinners were bowed before the Lord, while the
   people of God were "filled with joy unspeakable and full of glory." A
   great revival of religion was the consequence of this blessed meeting,
   particularly in the Bay of Quinte and Augusta circuits, which
   eventuated in the conversion of hundreds of precious souls.

   In the state of New York, among others, Croton had been selected as a
   suitable place for camp meetings, and for many years was considered as
   a hallowed spot on which the people of God from the city of New York,
   and the neighboring circuits, assembled for the worship and service of
   the triune God. And here many sinners have been born of the Spirit, who
   perhaps, otherwise might never have heard the joyful sound of
   salvation. It has, however, latterly been abandoned for another place.

   This year the Church was called to mourn over the demise of some of her
   most eminent and useful ministers.

   Of Tobias Gibson, who first carried the gospel to the inhabitants of
   Mississippi, we have already spoken. He is represented as a modest,
   unassuming man, deep in Christian experience, and most indefatigable in
   his labors. His ardent thirst for the salvation of souls often led him
   to those exertions which were too much for his physical strength; and
   these together with his frequent exposures in the midst of the western
   wildernesses, to cold and hunger, and to sleepless nights on the
   ground, laid the foundation for those infirmities which, finally
   prostrated his feeble frame and brought him to a premature grave.

   He preached his last sermon on New Year's day, in 1804. Its powerful
   and searching appeals were made a blessing to many; and long did some
   of the inhabitants of Natchez, which was the principal center of his
   labors in the west, remember his fervent prayers and faithful
   admonitions, particularly of those which accompanied this his last
   effort for their salvation. Being greatly esteemed by the people of
   God, as well as honored by all who could estimate true worth of
   character, they mourned over his departure from among them, as one
   mourneth over a son that served him. But while they beheld his calmness
   of spirit amid the sufferings of his body, his meekness, patience, and
   resignation to the divine will, as death approached, as well as the
   firm hope of everlasting life with which he anticipated his
   dissolution, they saw such indubitable evidences of the reality and
   excellence of Christianity, that they could but mingle with their
   sorrows the rejoicings of such as have hope in God. Infidelity itself
   shrunk from an inspection of his life, and recoiled at a view of that
   death which, though dark and gloomy in itself, was surrounded with so
   brilliant a light as to render the path into the other world luminous
   and inviting.

   Such was Tobias Gibson -- such were his labors and sufferings -- such
   his deep devotion to the cause of Christ -- and such the peaceful and
   triumphant manner of his death -- that he has left a name and character
   behind him which "shall be had in everlasting remembrance."

   Nicholas Watters was another of those burning and shining lights which,
   after having enlightened the world for a season, was this year
   extinguished by death. He was the brother of William Watters, the first
   Methodist preacher raised in America, and entered the itinerating
   ministry very soon after his younger brother. They were natives of
   Maryland, and after traveling and preaching with great acceptance in
   various parts of Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina, and
   Georgia, on the 10th of August, 1804, he ended his life and labors in
   peace, in the city or Charleston, South Carolina.

   Wilson Lee also exchanged the labors of an itinerant minister for the
   crown of glory prepared for the faithful. He entered the traveling
   connection in 1784, and soon went into the western country, where he
   continued in the exercise of his ministry, exposed to all the hardships
   incident to an itinerating life in new settlements, until 1792, when he
   returned to the older states, and was stationed on Salem circuit, New
   Jersey. From 1801 to 1803 he filled the office of presiding elder in
   the Baltimore district. In 1804 he found himself unable longer to do
   the duties of an efficient preacher, and was accordingly returned on
   the superannuated list. In the month of April of this year, while at
   prayer by the bed of a sick person, he had a sudden discharge of blood
   from the lungs; and from that time he lingered along the shores of
   immortality until October 11, 1804, when he died full of the hope of
   immortality, at the house of Walter Worthington, Ann Arundel county, in
   the state of Maryland.

   Wilson Lee has been considered among the most laborious, successful,
   and self-denying of our early ministers. Though naturally of a slender
   constitution, he hazarded the hardships of an itinerating life in the
   western country, and exhibited there all that self-devotion, hardy
   enterprise, and untiring zeal in the cause of God, which distinguished
   those men of God who planted the standard of the cross among the early
   settlers of Tennessee and Kentucky. As he rode from one settlement to
   another, and from fort to fort, he was often exposed to the ferocious
   savages of the wilderness, as well as to hunger and thirst, to tiresome
   days and sleepless nights. But his unquenchable thirst for the
   salvation of souls, his strong faith in God, and his burning zeal to
   advance his holy cause, compelled him on in spite of all opposition,
   amid those "perils in the wilderness," rejoicing in being counted
   worthy to suffer a little in the cause of Christ. Here he spent the
   best of his days, and exhausted his strength in striving to win souls
   to Jesus Christ and when he returned to his brethren in the older
   settlements, with a constitution shattered by the intensity of his
   labors, it was only to share with them in pursuing the path of
   obedience to his divine Master, and filling up what remained of the
   afflictions of Christ. Professing the justifying and sanctifying grace
   of God, he bore all things with patience, exhibiting in his spirit an
   example of meekness and gentleness, in his personal appearance of
   neatness and plainness, and in all his deportment modesty united with a
   firmness of purpose in carrying into execution the discipline of the
   Church. He, indeed, left nothing he could do undone which he deemed
   essential to provoke the cause of God. But his ever active mind, his
   persevering industry in his Master's work, operated so powerfully upon
   the material vehicle, that "the weary wheels of life stood still,"
   while in the meridian of his life and usefulness. He left, however, a
   name behind him, which was long remembered with affection and
   veneration by those of his contemporaries who survived him, and an
   example of devotedness to the cause of God which has stimulated many
   laborers to activity and diligence in cultivating their Master's
   vineyard.

   Benjamin Jones, John Durbin, and Daniel Ryan, of each of whom it is
   said that he filled up his days in unselfishness, took their departure
   to a better world in the course of last year.

   Two preachers, namely, Cyrus Stebbins and Roger Searl, withdrew from
   the connection, and joined the Protestant Episcopal Church.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 95,629; Last Year: 89,603;
   Increase: 6,026 -- Colored This Year: 24,316; Last Year: 23,531;
   Increase: 785 -- Total This Year: 119,945; Last Year: 113,134 --
   Increase: 6,811 -- Preachers This Year: 433; Last Year: 400; Increase:
   33.

  1806

   The seven annual conferences were held this year in the usual manner.

   This year a paper was submitted to the annual conferences, beginning
   with the Baltimore conference, by Bishop Asbury, in favor of calling a
   General Conference, of seven delegates from each annual conference, to
   meet in the city of Baltimore, in May, 1807, for the purpose of
   strengthening the episcopacy. This paper was referred to a committee,
   to consider and report thereon, and all the conferences, except
   Virginia, reported in favor of the proposition, and elected their
   delegates accordingly. The report set forth that, in consequence of the
   declining health of Bishop Whatcoat, who was then supposed to be near
   his end, the great extension of our work over the continent, and the
   debilitated state of Bishop Asbury's health, it had become necessary to
   strengthen the episcopacy, and likewise to provide for a more permanent
   mode of church government. The report, therefore, recommended that each
   of the seven annual conferences should elect seven delegates to meet in
   the city of Baltimore the succeeding May, and that, when so met, they
   should have power to elect one bishop or more, and also to provide for
   a future delegated General Conference, whose powers should be defined
   and limited by constitutional restrictions; for hitherto the General
   Conference possessed unlimited powers over our entire economy, could
   alter, abolish, or add to any article of religion or any rule of
   Discipline. As this depository of power was considered too great for
   the safety of the Church and the security of its government and
   doctrine; and as the assembling of all the elders, few or many, at the
   option of each annual conference, made the representation very unequal;
   and moreover, if all came who had a right to a sent, involved a great
   amount of expense, time, and money, Bishop Asbury was exceedingly
   desirous, before he should depart hence, to provide a remedy for these
   evils; and this desire was strengthened and excited to action at this
   time by the concurrent views and wishes of most of the oldest preachers
   in the conferences.

   It is proper to remark that this plan was concurred in, and the
   delegates were elected by all the annual conferences, until it was
   submitted to the Virginia conference, where, being warmly opposed by
   the Rev. Jesse Lee, who had great influence in that conference, a
   majority voted against its adoption, and so the whole plan was
   abandoned for the present -- for it was the understanding that, unless
   all the conferences concurred in the measure, it should not be carried
   into effect. This defeat of a favorite project, so feasible in itself,
   and apparently so necessary to the prosperity of the Church and the
   perpetuity of her institutions, was a source of great grief to Bishop
   Asbury, as well as of regret to those who had concurred in his views.

   After the return of Dr. Coke to Europe, he saw fit to change his
   relation from a single to a married life. He had married a Christian
   lady of a large fortune, of deep piety, and of ardent devotion to the
   cause of God, which she evinced after her marriage by cheerfully
   consecrating her income to advance the missionary cause, in which she
   found her husband, Dr. Coke, so deeply and zealously engaged. This fact
   he thought proper to communicate to his American brethren, together
   with a proposition to become a resident in America, on the condition
   that the continent should be divided into two parts, one of which to be
   under his superintendency, and the other under the superintendency of
   Bishop Asbury. This proposition was submitted to the several annual
   conferences, and an answer was returned to the doctor congratulating
   him on his happy marriage, but declining to accept of his proposal for
   a division of the work in this country according to his request,
   referring, however, the final decision of the question to the next
   General Conference.

   This year Methodism was introduced into some parts of Louisiana. This
   territory had been recently purchased by the United States from the
   French government for the sum of fifteen millions of dollars, and was
   admitted into the Union in 1811. The country was originally settled by
   the Spaniards and French, the descendants of whom, to distinguish them
   from other white inhabitants who have emigrated to the country, are
   called Creoles. In a large portion of the country the French language
   and manners prevailed, and their religious faith and practice were
   regulated by the Roman Catholic Church; but as the country is fast
   filling up by Anglo-Americans, and has been for some time connected
   with the Union as an integral part of the great American family, the
   language, manners, and institutions of Louisiana are becoming more and
   more conformed to those generally prevailing in other sections of the
   republic.

   At the time, however, of which we now speak, there were comparatively
   but few American settlers in the country, and these were scattered
   thinly in the wilderness or mingled among the French and Spanish
   inhabitants. As to true religion, it was a stranger to most of the
   people. Those who made any profession at all were chiefly of the Roman
   Catholic communion, and these were exceedingly loose in their morals,
   and much given up to sports and plays. The Sabbath was neglected as a
   day of sacred rest, or only attended to as a religious festival,
   alternately for devotional exercises and profane revelry. This being
   the general state of society as formed by the Creoles of the country,
   it could not be otherwise expected than that the emigrants who settled
   among them should gradually assimilate to their manners, modes of
   thinking and acting. Hence it is stated that profaneness of almost all
   sorts prevailed to an alarming extent, when, in 1806, the Rev. Elisha
   W. Bowman made his entrance among them as a messenger of the cross of
   Christ.

   The Mississippi district was this year under the presiding eldership of
   the Rev. Learner Blackman, whose charge included Nachez, Wilkinson,
   Claiborne, Ochitta, and Appalousas circuits, to the last of which Mr.
   Bowman was sent, with a view, if practicable, to form societies and
   establish regular preaching. He penetrated into some of the English
   settlements on the banks of the Mississippi River, amid many privations
   and hardships, and in some places was received by the people with
   gladness, while in others both himself and his message were rejected.
   He succeeded, however, in collecting congregations, and in forming a
   regular circuit, and a few classes, made up principally of members who
   had removed from the older states, who were happily reclaimed from
   their backslidden state by his instrumentality. The Rev. Thomas Lasley
   labored on the Ochitta circuit, which he found in a similar condition,
   in respect to religion and morals, to that of Appalousas. The success
   with which they cultivated this distant and wild field of labor may be
   estimated from the fact that they returned forty members of the Church,
   and that they opened the way for the successful prosecution of the work
   by those who succeeded them, though it was some time before Methodism
   gained much influence in that part of the country.

   This year a new district was formed, called the Lower Canada district,
   which included Montreal, Quebec, and Ottawa. I have before spoken of
   Montreal and Ottawa. Nathan Bangs [the author if this history -- DVM]
   volunteered his services for Quebec. After spending a few weeks in
   Montreal, to supply them until their preacher, Samuel Coate, arrived,
   he sailed down the River St. Lawrence for Quebec, and arrived there on
   Saturday morning. Having a few letters of introduction, he delivered
   them, and by great exertions succeeded in hiring a room and getting it
   seated that day, and he preached his first sermon on the Sabbath
   morning following to a tolerable congregation.

   The majority of the people in Quebec were French Roman Catholics,
   bigotedly attached to all their peculiarities, and, of course, opposed
   to all Protestant innovations. The next in number and influence were
   the members of the Church of England, and next to them the Church of
   Scotland, all manifesting a deadly opposition to Methodism. He found,
   however, a few who received him cordially, though with much timidity.
   Among others he called on a Scotch missionary by the name of Dick, who
   had succeeded in collecting a small congregation, and was treated by
   him with much affection and respect.

   It would doubtless be uninteresting to the reader to enter into a
   detail of the difficulties with which he had to contend, the mental
   trials he underwent in trying to plant the gospel in that hardened
   place, with but small means of support, [17] and few to countenance his
   undertaking. For a while the congregation was respectable, as to
   numbers, but they soon dwindled down to not more than a dozen steady
   hearers, and not more than three or four of these seemed to be under
   religious impressions. He has frequently held a prayer meeting with
   only one besides himself, when each would pray and then dismiss the
   meeting, though inwardly conscious of the divine approbation, yet with
   but faint hopes of success. He, however, formed a small society, which,
   under more faithful and skillful laborers, has since increased to a
   considerable number, and Methodism has now a firm standing in Quebec.

   An attempt was also made this year to establish a mission for the
   benefit of the French Catholic population of Lower Canada, and William
   Snyder, who understood and could preach in the French language, was
   appointed to this service. He entered upon his work in a French
   settlement, in the vicinity of Ottawa River, and for a time was
   cordially received and listened to with much attention, so that great
   hopes were entertained of a successful issue of his labors. Having
   occasion, however, to be absent from his field of labor for a few
   weeks, the parish priest took the opportunity to go among the people
   and warn them of the danger of hearing the "Protestant heretic,"
   threatening them with excommunication -- which, in their estimation,
   was a sure prelude to damnation -- if they did not desist. This so
   wrought upon their fears, that, upon the return of brother Snyder, not
   a soul dared to hear him or to receive him into his house. He was,
   therefore, reluctantly compelled to abandon the enterprise in despair,
   nor has any thing been done effectually for those people since. The
   charms of Roman Catholicism still hold them in bondage to their
   priests.

   In Massachusetts also, and in the province of Maine, the work so
   extended that New Bedford, Northfield, Centreharbor, Durham, and
   Vassalborough circuits were formed, while the work in many places on
   the older circuits was going forward with encouraging prosperity.
   Monongahela, Lycoming, and Staunton circuits, within the bounds of the
   Baltimore conference, were this year added to the list, which shows
   that the good work was still extending in the frontier settlements.

   But the most remarkable outpouring of the Spirit was among the people
   on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, and in some parts of Virginia,
   chiefly through the agency of a camp meeting which was held on the
   Eastern Shore at which, during the five days and nights it continued,
   it is stated that not less than one thousand souls were converted. This
   had been a favored place for Methodism from the time of its
   introduction; and this great work gave it a new impulse, and added
   fresh vigor to the souls of God's ministers and people. Religion,
   indeed, prospered generally throughout the bounds of the conferences,
   as may be seen from the increase of church members.

   Bishop Asbury, though deprived of the aid of his devoted colleague in
   consequence of sickness, attended to his duties with his usual
   diligence, and was much cheered with the prospects which loomed up
   before him in various parts of the work, more especially by the agency
   of the camp meetings, many of which he attended, and entered into their
   exercises with all the ardor of a youthful minister. We find him this
   year in Tennessee, Kentucky, and Ohio, traversing the new settlements,
   and encouraging his brethren and sons in the ministry, by his presence
   and example. Being in the state of Kentucky during one of their camp
   meetings, he says, "I ventured on the camp ground again, and preached
   at eight o'clock. I was weak and unwell, but was divinely assisted
   while enlarging on Philip. i, 1. May this weighty subject rest on the
   minds of the preachers, and on none more than the heart of the
   speaker!"

   After speaking of the Western conference, he says, "The brethren were
   in want, and could not suit themselves; so I parted with my watch, my
   coat, and my shirt." This was an instance of generosity rarely to be
   met with, and shows the deep interest he felt for his suffering
   fellow-laborers in that rugged field.

   Finishing his work in this part of his charge, be recrossed the
   Mountains, in doing which, he says, "One of the descents is like the
   roof of a house for nearly a mile. I rode, I walked, I sweat, I
   trembled, and my old knees failed. Here are gullies, and rocks, and
   precipices; nevertheless, the way is as good as the path over the Table
   Mountain -- bad is the best." He passed on through North and South
   Carolina, and in the city of Charleston he rested for a few days from
   his toils, though he says that he was "neither unemployed nor
   triflingly," but was happy in the midst of his friends, and surrounded
   by all the comforts which kindness could bestow." "If we call," he
   remarks, "for social prayer seven times a day, there are none to
   complain; the house is our own, and profane people board not with us.
   My time is spent in reading, writing, and receiving all who come,
   whites and Africans" -- "God the Lord is here." What a contrast between
   his external comforts here, and those which he enjoyed in many other
   places! But while he could say in every place, "God the lord is here,"
   he could not be otherwise than happy and contented inwardly.

   Among the deaths of preachers which occurred this year was that of
   Bishop Whatcoat, who departed this life at the house of Richard
   Bassett, Esq., ex-governor of the state of Delaware, on the 5th of
   July, 1806, in the seventy-first year of his age. Of his early life,
   conversion, and call to the ministry, we have already spoken, when
   giving an account of his election and consecration to the episcopal
   office. From that important period of his life, he gave "full proof of
   his ministry," fulfilling his high trust with fidelity, honored and
   beloved by all who knew him.

   From the time of his entrance upon his work as an itinerant
   superintendent of the Methodist Episcopal Church, until he was disabled
   by sickness and debility, he traveled regularly through his vast
   diocese, which extended over the entire continent, preaching almost
   every day to the people, visiting the annual conferences, sometimes in
   company with his venerable colleague, Bishop Asbury, and sometimes
   alone, discharging his responsible duties with marked satisfaction to
   all concerned. A complication of painful diseases arrested his career
   of usefulness, and compelled him to remit those public labors in which
   his soul had so long delighted. For thirteen weeks he bore, with the
   most exemplary patience, and devout resignation to the divine will, the
   excruciating pains with which his body was afflicted, expressing, in
   the midst of them all, his faith in Christ and his firm hope of
   everlasting life, and finally triumphed over the "last enemy," being
   "more than a conqueror through Him who loved him."

   Bishop Asbury, some time after Bishop Whatcoat's death, visiting the
   place of his sepulcher, at the Wesley Chapel, in Dover, Del., preached
   his funeral sermon from 2 Tim, iii, 10, "But thou hast fully known my
   doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity,
   patience." In the course of his sermon he remarked, in substance, "I
   have known Richard Whatcoat, from the time I was fourteen years of age
   to sixty-two years most intimately, and have tried him most accurately
   in respect to the soundness of his faith, on the doctrines of human
   depravity, the complete and general atonement of Jesus Christ, the
   insufficiency of either moral or ceremonial righteousness for
   justification, in opposition to faith alone in the merit and
   righteousness of Christ, and the doctrine of regeneration and
   sanctification. I have also known his manner of life, at all times and
   places, before the people, both as a Christian and a minister; his
   long-suffering, for he was a man of great affliction, both of body and
   mind, having been exercised with severe diseases and great labors." And
   from this intimate acquaintance with the man and his work, the bishop
   declares, that such was his unabated charity, his ardent love to God
   and man, his patience and resignation amid the unavoidable ills of
   life, that he always exemplified the tempers and conduct of a most
   devoted servant of God, and of an exemplary Christian minister.

   As he had lived for God alone, and had assiduously consecrated all his
   time and powers to the service of his church, so he had neither time
   nor inclination to "lay up treasures upon earth" -- hence it is stated
   that he died with less property than was sufficient to defray the
   expenses of his funeral. He could therefore say more in truth than most
   of the pretended successors of St. Peter, who is claimed by some as the
   first link in the episcopal succession, "Silver and gold have I none,
   but such as I have," "my soul and body's powers," I cheerfully
   consecrate to the service of God and man.

   These remarks of themselves sufficiently indicate the character of the
   deceased, without saying any thing more; yet it may be proper to add
   that though we do not claim for him deep erudition nor extensive
   science, he was profoundly learned in the sacred Scriptures, thoroughly
   acquainted with Wesleyan theology, and well versed in all the varying
   systems of divinity with which the Christian world has been loaded, and
   could therefore "rightly divide the word of truth, giving to every one
   his portion of meat in due season." For gravity of deportment, meekness
   of spirit, deadness to the world, and deep devotion to God, perhaps he
   was not excelled, if indeed equaled by any of his contemporaries or
   successors. "Sober without sadness, and cheerful without levity," says
   the record of his death, he was equally removed from the severe
   austerity of the gloomy monk, and the lightness of the facetious and
   empty-brained witling. His words were weighed in the balance of the
   sanctuary, and when uttered, either in the way of rebuke, admonition,
   or instruction, they were calculated to "minister grace to the hearer."
   It is said, that on a particular occasion, when in company with Bishop
   Asbury, the latter was complaining loudly of the perpetual annoyance of
   so much useless company: Bishop Whatcoat, with great modesty and
   meekness, mildly remarked, "O bishop, how much worse should we feel
   were we entirely neglected!" The former bowed an acquiescence to the
   remark, and acknowledged his obligations to his amiable colleague for
   the seasonableness of the reproof, but much more for the manner in
   which it was administered -- an occurrence alike creditable to them
   both.

   His preaching is said to have been generally attended with a remarkable
   unction from the holy One. Hence those who sat under his word, if they
   were believers in Christ, felt that it was good to be there, for his
   doctrine distilled as the dew upon the tender herb, and as the rain
   upon the mown grass. One who had heard him remarked, that though he
   could not follow him in all his researches -- intimating that he went
   beyond his depth in some of his thoughts -- yet he felt that he was
   listening to a messenger of God, not only from the solemnity of his
   manner, but also from the "refreshing from the presence of the Lord,"
   which so manifestly accompanied his word. The softness of his
   persuasions won upon the affections of the heart, while the rich flow
   of gospel truth which dropped from his lips enlightened the
   understanding.

   Such was Bishop Whatcoat. And while we justly attribute to him those
   qualities which constitute an "able minister of the New Testament," we
   present, as the distinguishing trait of his character, a meekness and
   modesty of spirit which, united with a simplicity of intention and
   gravity of deportment, commended him to all as a pattern worthy of
   their imitation. So dear is he in the recollection of those who, from
   personal intercourse, best knew and appreciated his worth, that I have
   heard many such say, that they would give much could they possess
   themselves of a correct resemblance of him upon canvass. But as he has
   left no such likeness of himself behind, we must be content with
   offering this feeble tribute of respect to his memory, and then strive
   so to imitate his virtues that we may at last see him as he is, and
   unite with him in ascribing "honor and dominion to him that sitteth
   upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever."

   Benjamin Iliff also, after traveling about four years, in which he won
   the confidence and affection of all who knew him, was taken from his
   labors to his rest in heaven, bidding adieu to his friends with these
   words, "I have lost sight of the world. Come, Lord Jesus, come
   quickly."

   Two, namely, Ralph Williston, and Comfort C. Smith, withdrew from the
   Church; the former connected himself first with the Lutheran, and then
   with the Protestant Episcopal Church, and was settled for some time in
   the city of New York, whence he removed to the south.

   One, Sylvester Foster, was expelled, forty-eight were located, ten
   returned supernumerary, and six superannuated.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 103,313; Last Year: 95,629;
   Increase: 7,684 -- Colored This Year: 27,257; Last Year: 24,316;
   Increase: 2,941 -- Total This Year: 130,570; Last Year: 119,945 --
   Increase: 10,625 -- Preachers This Year: 452; Last Year: 433; Increase:
   19.

  1807

   Seven conferences were held this year, at which Bishop Asbury, being
   deprived of the services of his colleague, Bishop Whatcoat, was obliged
   to attend alone, and to discharge the duties devolving upon the
   episcopal office. Speaking of this hard toil, after traveling through
   Vermont, New Hampshire, and part of Massachusetts, he exclaims, "Must I
   walk through the seven conferences, and travel six thousand miles in
   ten months?" This, however, by the blessing of God, he was enabled to
   do, though it cost him many a wearisome day, in clambering the
   mountains, and crossing the valleys, in his journey from one extreme
   part of the continent to the other. In these journeyings he was
   frequently compelled to lodge in taverns; but, whatever might be the
   character of the house or the people, he always made it a point to
   propose prayer in every place where he stopped, though it might be only
   for a breakfast or dinner, and seldom was he denied this privilege. In
   this way he performed the work of a missionary, in the most emphatical
   sense of that word. But that which he considered more than a
   compensation for all labors and sacrifices -- sacrifices to which few
   modern missionaries submit, was the consolation of religion in his own
   heart, and the spread of the work of God in almost every part of the
   continent.

   This year John Travis was sent to form a new circuit in the new
   territory of Missouri. Missouri at that time was considered a part of
   Louisiana, and the first settlers were chiefly of the Roman Catholic
   persuasion; but the tide of emigration, which was then setting toward
   the west with a strong current, was rolling the inhabitants from the
   older states into that country with great rapidity, and every year with
   increasing numbers. Though this territory was not admitted into the
   Union until 1820, yet at this time there were in it not less than
   16,000 inhabitants, about one-fifth of whom were slaves. Though on the
   western bank of the Mississippi River the land is low and swampy, and
   of course untenable and unhealthy, yet beyond this the lands rise in
   beautiful undulations, and when brought under cultivation, proved to be
   rich and fertile, and therefore invited the industrious husbandman to
   take up his residence on them.

   Though the population was sparse, the roads bad, and the people
   generally averse to the self-denying truths of the gospel, Mr. Travis
   succeeded in attracting the attention of some to the things of
   religion, and he returned the next year, as the fruit of his labor,
   fifty-six members of the Church; and the work of God has continued to
   spread through that southwestern section of country, keeping pace with
   the extension of the settlements as they gradually penetrated farther
   and still farther into the woods and prairies of Missouri.

   Notwithstanding Savannah, the chief city in the state of Georgia, was
   visited by that distinguished servant of God, the Rev. John Wesley, as
   early as 1736, in the very infancy of the colony, yet it seems that no
   effectual efforts had been made since his departure amid the unmerited
   reproach heaped upon him by his enemies, to plant Methodism in that
   place until this year. Wesley left the town in 1737, and in 1740
   Whitefield, who succeeded Wesley, founded his orphan house, which
   remains only to tell the benevolence of its founder in connection with
   the failure of his project -- for it has long since crumbled to ruins
   -- but it appears that during the seventy years of interval from the
   time that Wesley left those ungrateful people, no opening was presented
   for the establishment of Methodism, until 1807.

   It is true that, as early as 1790, Hope Hull was sent to Savannah, and
   he preached a few times in a chair-maker's shop belonging to a Mr.
   Lowry; but such was the opposition manifested toward him that he was
   assailed with mob violence, and his success was small and the prospects
   very discouraging. He was followed, in 1796, by Jonathan Jackson and
   Josiah Randle, but they left the place without making any permanent
   impression. In 1800 John Garvin made an ineffectual attempt to collect
   a society in Savannah, and though he succeeded, with many difficulties,
   in inducing a few to attend his meetings for a season, yet he also
   abandoned the place in despair. The next attempt was made by a Mr.
   Cloud, an apostate from Methodism, but who assumed the name of a
   Methodist preacher for the nonce [for the time being -- DVM]; and
   though he attracted some attention for a short time, and even procured
   from the corporation the lease of a lot on which he erected some
   buildings, yet he was soon forsaken by the people, and left to his own
   wanderings. This movement only tended to increase the existing
   prejudices of the people against the Methodists, and accordingly
   rendered their future progress the more difficult.

   At the South Carolina conference held in Sparta, Georgia, December 29,
   1806, the subject of making another attempt to establish Methodism in
   Savannah was presented to the conference by a forcible appeal from some
   warm friends of the cause. Bishop Asbury, whose heart burned with
   intense desire for the prosperity of religion, and who always had his
   eye fixed on all important posts, pressed the subject upon the
   conference with great earnestness, and the conference responded to the
   call with much cordiality and zeal. Commending the case to the Church
   for special prayer, Samuel Dunwody, at that time young in the ministry,
   but humble, bold, and zealous in the cause of his Master, was selected
   by the bishop, and sent to Savannah. He at first procured a small room,
   where he taught some children, and his ministerial labors were, for a
   time, confined to the family where he resided, to his school-room,
   poor-house and hospital. At the end of the year he returned twelve
   members, five whites and seven colored, as the reward of his labors.

   Though a small beginning was thus made, it was some time before
   Methodism was established in Savannah. The prejudices of the people
   rose high, and the cause was much impeded by the imprudent conduct of
   two of the preachers who succeeded Mr. Dunwody. But, after hard
   toiling, they finally succeeded, by soliciting and from various parts
   of the country, in erecting a house of worship in 1812, which was
   dedicated to the service of almighty God by Bishop Asbury, and was
   called Wesley Chapel. This took place about seventy-five years after
   the town was visited by John Wesley, and the spirit which vented itself
   in opposition to him seems to have descended to their posterity, and
   shown itself to similar acts of hostility to his followers; yet by
   patient perseverance in well-doing, this prejudice has been measurably
   overcome, and the cause of Methodism has taken a firm stand in
   Savannah, and is exerting a salutary influence on its citizens.

   This was a very prosperous year generally throughout the connection,
   and many were brought to the knowledge of the truth and added to the
   Church through various parts of the United States. In the older states
   the camp meetings were multiplied, and attended with the most happy
   consequences, particularly in Maryland, Delaware, Virginia, and
   Georgia. In the city of New York there was a remarkable revival of
   religion, attended, in some instances, with symptoms similar to those
   which had been exhibited at the camp meetings in the western country.

   James Lattomus and Peter Jayne took their departure to a world of rest,
   leaving a testimony behind them of devotedness to the cause of God.
   Thirty-two were located, six returned supernumerary, eight
   superannuated, and one, Nathan Felch, had withdrawn and connected
   himself with the Protestant Episcopal Church.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 114,727; Last Year: 103,313;
   Increase: 11,414 -- Colored This Year: 29,863; Last Year: 27,257;
   Increase: 2,606 -- Total This Year: 144,590 [18] ; Last Year: 130,570
   -- Increase: 14,020 -- Preachers This Year: 516; Last Year: 452;
   Increase: 64.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [11] This is the first account I find of the names and number from each
   annual conference. And as it may be satisfactory to some, the names are
   given, as follows:-- New England Conference. -- George Pickering,
   Joshua Taylor, Thomas Lyell, Reuben Hubbard. Western Conference. --
   William Burke, Thomas Milligan, John Watson, Lowther Taylor.* South
   Carolina Conference. -- Josiah Randall, George Dougherty, Hanover
   Dunning, Moses Matthews, James Jenkin. Virginia Conference. -- Jesse
   Lee, Samuel Risher, Daniel Hall, John Cocks, John Buxton, Humphrey
   Wood, Joseph Moore, Jesse Coe, Jonathan Jackson, Christopher Mooring,
   Daniel Ross, Samuel Gerrard, John Gainwell, William Allgood, Alexander
   McCaine, Joseph Pennell, Philip Bruce. Baltimore Conference. -- John
   Potts, Solomon Harris, Henry Willis, Enoch George, Hamilton Jefferson,
   Thomas Lucas, John Simmons, Jesse Stoneman, William Knox, Lawrence
   McCombs, Joshua Wells, John Pitts, Henry Smith, Seely Bonn, Peter B.
   Davis, David Stevens, James Ward, Samuel Coate, James Quinn, Daniel
   Hitt, Daniel Fiddler, John West, Nicholas Snethen, William Watters,
   James Hunter, Lasley Matthews, Thornton Fleming, Nathaniel B. Mills,
   James Paynter. Philadelphia Conference. -- John McClasky, Thomas
   Sargeant, Thomas Ware, Thomas Smith, Joseph Everett, William McLenehen
   David Bartine, Richard Swaim, Joseph Totten, Anning Owen, Elijah
   Woolsey, William Vredenburgh, Robert Dillon, Gamaliel Bailey, Robert
   Sparks, Joseph Stone, Ezekiel Cooper, Walter Fountain, Benjamin
   Bidlack, William Colbert,, William Mills, Joseph Jewell, Richard
   Sneath, Johnson Dunham, Edward Larkins, John Crawford, James Smith,
   Daniel Ryan,* James Herron, Richard Lyon,* Jacob Gruber,* Solomon
   Sharp, Gideon Knowlton,* William Bishop, Eber Cowles, James Moore,
   Caleb Kindle, Morris Howe, George Roberts, William P. Chandler, David
   James. New York Conference. -- Freeborn Garrettson, Michael Coate,
   Ralph Williston, John Wilson, Daniel Ostrander, Augustus Jocelyn,
   Joseph Crawford, Nathan Emery, James Campbell, Aaron Hunt, Abner Wood,
   Joseph Sawyer. Of these one hundred and seven who composed that
   conference, only eighteen are now, (Dec. 20, 1838,) in the itinerancy:
   G. Pickering, D. Hall, J. Paynter, N. B. Mills, J. Moore, W. Burke, J.
   Wells, J. Quinn, P. Fiddler, T. Fleming, T. Ware, D. Bartine, E.
   Woolsey, E. Cooper, John Crawford, J. Gruber, D. Ostrander, and A.
   Hunt; two have left us, and some others have located; but most of them,
   together with the three bishops who then presided, are dead; and
   fourteen of those who belonged to the conferences hold a supernumerary
   relation. * Those marked thus (*) were not entitled to a seat, by a
   vote of the conference.

   [12] This presbytery, which was not established until 1810, abjured the
   offensive features of Calvinism, adopted the Arminian doctrine of
   general redemption, the universality of the atonement of Jesus Christ,
   and dispensed with a liberal education as a necessary prerequisite of a
   gospel minister.

   [13] This place was, through mistake, printed on the minutes, La
   French.

   [14] Perhaps no part of our country is more subject to fever and ague,
   or "lake fever," as it was called, than that along the banks of the
   River Thames, occasioned by the stagnant swamps which are formed a
   little distance from the river on each side, and the unwholesomeness of
   the water which the people were obliged to use. The missionary arrived
   there in the month of August, and in the month of September the fever
   began to rage; and during its progress, in almost every family less or
   more were sick, and in some instances every member of a family was
   prostrated at the same time, though it seldom proved fatal. When the
   missionary first visited their houses, he was generally presented with
   a bottle of whisky, and urged to partake of it as a preservative
   against the fever; but he declined the beverage, and told them they
   might, if they chose, drink their whisky, and he would drink water and
   tea, and see who would have the better health; and when the fever
   commenced its ravages, as above described, so that he could visit
   scarcely a house without seeing more or less sick, he constantly
   traveled the country in health, until about the close of the sickly
   season, when he too was seized with the prevailing disease, but by
   timely remedies he escaped with only three paroxysms. This is mentioned
   chiefly to show the mistaken notion under which many people labor, who
   suppose that the use of ardent spirits is a preventive against any
   epidemical disease. It is believed that it induces it in nine cases out
   of ten, instead of preventing it.

   [15] Detroit, at that time, seemed to be a most abandon place. On his
   second visit, the missionary was introduced to a Congregational
   minister, who told him that he had preached in Detroit until none but a
   few children would come to hear; and, said he, if you can succeed,
   which I very mach doubt, I shall rejoice. On the third visit, which was
   on Sabbath, sure enough, only a few children came to the place of
   worship, and no one appearing to take any interest in hearing the
   gospel preached there, our missionary shook off the dust of his feet as
   a testimony against them, and took his departure from them. In about
   four weeks after this, the town was consumed by fire. The report was
   that it took fire from a man smoking a cigar in a stable, and the
   houses being chiefly built with wood, the flames spread so rapidly that
   nearly every house on each side of the main street was consumed. It
   was, however, soon rebuilt, and has since greatly flourished, and now
   we have a large and influential church in that place.

   [16] Among these was the Rev. Thomas Lyell, who soon after joined the
   Protestant Episcopal Church, and succeeded the Rev. Joseph Pilmoor, in
   the city of New York. He is still living, had has maintained a
   reputable standing in that Church, and retains, it is believed, his
   affection for his Methodist brethren.

   [17] In those days we had no missionary society to furnish pecuniary
   aid to those preachers who went to "break up new ground," as it was
   called, though Bishop Asbury was in the habit of begging as he passed
   through the country to supply the wants of the most needy.

   [18] There is an error of nine in the printed minutes for this year.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 7

    The General Conference of 1808

   This conference assembled in the city of Baltimore, May 1, 1808, and
   was composed of one hundred and twenty-nine members, namely, nineteen
   from the New York, seven from the New England, eleven from the Western,
   eleven from the South Carolina, eighteen from the Virginia, thirty-one
   from the Baltimore, and thirty-two from the Philadelphia conference.

   For the first time since the organization of the Church in 1784, Dr.
   Coke was absent from the General Conference, and as Bishop Whatcoat had
   deceased, Bishop Asbury was the sole president of the conference. After
   the organization of the conference, by the appointment of a secretary
   and the adoption of rules for the government of its proceedings, the
   conference appointed a committee of correspondence, to take into
   consideration certain communications from the British conference, and
   from Dr. Coke, and to report thereon.

   It will be recollected that, in accordance with the earnest request of
   the British conference, the General Conference of 1804 had agreed to
   the return of Dr. Coke to Europe, and that he might have liberty to
   reside there until this General Conference, unless sooner recalled by
   three of the annual conferences. After his return to Europe, and after
   his marriage, he made a proposal, as before related, to come over, and
   take up his permanent residence in America, on condition that the
   continent should be divided as nearly equal as might be, between him
   and Bishop Asbury, as the superintending bishops. Though this
   proposition was not agreeable to the American preachers, and therefore
   was not acceded to by them in their reply to Dr. Coke's circular, yet
   it shows most manifestly the strong obligation which the doctor felt to
   fulfill his contract with the General Conference, and of his intention,
   provided his wishes were complied with, to make America his permanent
   residence in future.

   It seems, however, that the answer to his circular gave him some
   uneasiness, from an apprehension that his American brethren were
   dissatisfied with his conduct. To remove, therefore, all cause of
   disquietude from their minds, and to explain more fully his views and
   wishes, he sent to this General Conference, the following letter:--

   "To The General American Conference

   "City of Durham, (England,) Nov. 10, 1807

   "Very ear and greatly respected brethren. My absence from your solemn
   meeting calls for a minute explanation of my motives for absence, and
   my future views. I did not expect, during my different short visits to
   your connection, to have any thing to do in the management of your
   work, except the honor of presiding at your General Conference, and
   preaching in your pulpits. I never returned to England without your
   leave, from the time I offered myself to be wholly yours and whatever
   my own private judgment might have been, I should, in every instance,
   have considered your vote as the voice of God, if you had, on the
   whole, judged it best to have refused that leave. The last time I
   visited you, I came over without any expectation of returning. I
   settled my little affairs in this country, and brought over with me
   every thing I had, except those parts of my library which I should not
   soon want, but which I left in such a manner that on the shortest
   notice they might be sent over to me -- and also such copies of my
   commentary as I wished that my European brethren would be so kind as to
   sell for me. I did not take a decisive farewell of my brethren in
   Europe, as I was not sure whether you would, in your circumstances, as
   they respected Bishop Asbury, receive me as an efficient superintendent
   or bishop among you in any degree or manner: for this reason only I
   consented to carry over to you an address which contained a clause in
   it requesting my return to Europe. I should otherwise have strongly
   objected to the clause: however, I repeatedly gave very strong
   intimations, both to the British and Irish conferences, of the
   improbability of my return. I write not the above as if I did not
   highly prize my situation in the European connection. As general
   superintendent of their missions at home and abroad, as president of
   the Irish part of the connection, as having all their pulpits in the
   United Kingdom open to me when and as often as I please, and in many
   other respects possessing influence for great usefulness, I feel myself
   under unspeakable obligations to my European brethren. But I have made
   the above observations to convince you, that I held and kept my
   obligations and engagements to you, to strengthen your episcopacy
   whenever you pleased, most sacred. It is true, I wrote to you a
   circular letter, which, I now acknowledge, was out of order; and
   therefore I beg pardon for writing it: but I did not intend to be
   irregular. I hardly knew what to write in order to bring matters to an
   explanation. For I was assured that you yourselves, after due
   explanation, would not wish to draw me out of a very extensive and
   successful sphere of usefulness, merely to preach; and instead of
   strengthening the episcopacy, have less to do in the management of the
   work than the preacher who superintends the smallest circuit in
   America.

   "And now, you will ask, What are we to expect from you.' I will answer
   with the most perfect candor. If it be your judgment and vote that my
   residence with you will probably assist to preserve your union; and you
   agree that I shall have a full right to give my judgment in every
   thing, in the general and annual conferences, on the making of laws,
   the stationing of the preachers, sending out missionaries, and every
   thing else, which, as a bishop or superintendent belongs to my office,
   I will, on receiving your answer, settle our affairs with the utmost
   expedition, and come over to you for life. You may observe, I do not
   desire any decisive power. I want no new condition. I only want to be
   perfectly ascertained, that if I reside with you, I shall be authorized
   by you to fulfill my office in the way above mentioned; without which
   our reciprocal engagements would be a perfect nullity, and I should be
   entirely the same among you, except in the article of preaching. By
   this proposal I break no engagement: I want nothing but a an
   explanation, and a part of that liberty which I have in the European
   connection. In Europe, I give my judgment in the two conferences, and
   in the representative meetings for preparing the stations of preachers
   for the conference, as far as I judge it my duty, on every point, and
   have also a vote when we do vote on any subject. In missionary matters
   I am here allowed a negative; and my committee a negative; this last I
   do not desire in America; but I desire the power of doing extensive
   good. If this cannot at present be granted by the authority of the
   Genera Conference, you may insert me in your minutes as formerly: or
   you may first insert the resident bishop or bishops, and add a N. B.,
   Dr. Coke (or Bishop Coke, as you please) resides in Europe, till he be
   called to the States by the General conference, or by the annual
   conferences; or if this be not agreeable, you must expel me, (for
   dropping me out of your public minutes will be to all intents and
   purposes an expulsion,) and leave what I have done for your connection
   to God alone: and though you forget me, God will not forget me.

   "I do assure you, very dear and respected brethren, that I love and
   esteem you highly, and am, with most unfeigned sincerity, your
   affectionate and faithful servant,

   "T. COKE.

   P.S. -- My precious wife desires that she may not be considered in the
   least degree in this business. She is no hindrance to me in any thing,
   but a blessing in all things. We are always, as it were, I traveling,
   and I annually visit and preach at more places than I did for many
   years before my marriage."

   There was further cause of dissatisfaction with Dr. Coke. It seems
   that, in the spring of 179l, Dr. Coke, on the eve of his departure for
   England, addressed a confidential letter to bishop White, bishop of the
   Protestant Episcopal Church of Pennsylvania, in which he proposed a
   union between that and the Methodist Episcopal Church, on certain
   conditions, with which the officers of that Church did not see fit to
   comply. As several versions have been given of this affair, to prevent
   misunderstandings hereafter, I think it proper to give the letter of
   Dr. Coke entire. It is as follows: --

   "Right Rev. Sir -- Permit me to intrude a little on your time upon a
   subject of great importance.

   "You, I believe, are conscious that I was brought up it the Church of
   England, and have been ordained a presbyter of that Church. For many
   years I was prejudiced, even I think to bigotry, in favor of it; but
   through a variety of causes or incidents, to mention which would be
   tedious and useless, my mind was exceedingly biased or the other side
   of the question. In consequence of this I am not sure but I went
   further in the separation of our Church in America than Mr. Wesley,
   from whom I had received my commission, did intend. He did indeed
   solemnly invest me, as far as he had a right so to do, with episcopal
   authority, but did not intend, I think, that an entire separation
   should take place. He, being pressed by our friends on this side of the
   water for ministers to administer the sacraments to them, (there being
   very few of the clergy of the Church of England then in the States,)
   went further, I am sure, than he would have gone, if he had foreseen
   some events which followed. And this I am certain of -- that he is now
   sorry for the separation.

   "But what can be done for a re-union, which I much wish for; and to
   accomplish which, Mr. Wesley, I have no doubt, would use his influence
   to the utmost? the affection of a very considerable number of the
   preachers and most of the people is very strong toward him,
   notwithstanding the excessive ill usage he received from a few. My
   interest also is not small; both his and mine would readily, and to the
   utmost, be used to accomplish that (to us) very desirable object; if a
   readiness were shown by the bishops of the Protestant Episcopal Church
   to re-unite.

   "It is even to your Church an object of great importance, We have now
   above sixty thousand adults in our society in these States, and about
   two hundred and fifty traveling ministers and preachers; besides a
   great number of local preachers, very far exceeding the number of
   traveling preachers; and some of those local preachers are men of very
   considerable abilities. But if we number the Methodists as most people
   number the members of their Church, viz., by the families which
   constantly attend the divine ordinances in their places of worship,
   they will make a larger body than you probably conceive. The society, I
   believe, may be safely multiplied by five on an average to give us our
   stated congregations; which will then amount to three hundred thousand.
   And if the calculation which, I think, some eminent writers have made,
   be just, three-fifths of mankind are un-adult, if I may use the
   expression,) at any given period, it will follow that all the families,
   the adults of which form our congregations in these States, amount to
   seven hundred and fifty thousand. About one-fifth of these are blacks.

   "The work now extends in length from Boston to the south of Georgia;
   and in breadth from the Atlantic to Lake Champlain, Vermont, Albany,
   Redstone, Holstein, Kentucky, Cumberland, &c.

   "But there are many hindrances in the way. Can they be removed?
    1. Our ordained ministers will not, ought not to give up their right
       of administering the sacraments. I do not think that the generality
       of them, perhaps none of them, would refuse to submit to a
       re-ordination, if other hindrances were removed out of the way. I
       must here observe, that between sixty and seventy only out of the
       two hundred and fifty have been ordained presbyters, and about
       sixty deacons (only.) The presbyters are the choicest of the whole.
    2. The other preachers would hardly submit to a re-union, if the
       possibility of their rising up to ordination depended on the
       present bishops in America. Because, though they are all, I think I
       may say, zealous, pious, and very useful men, yet they are not
       acquainted with the learned languages. Besides, they would argue,
       -- If the present bishops would waive the article of the learned
       languages, yet their successors might not.

   "My desire of a re-union is so sincere and earnest, that these
   difficulties almost make me tremble; and yet something must be done
   before the death of Mr. Wesley, otherwise I shall despair of success
   for though my influence among the Methodists in these states as well as
   in Europe is, I doubt not, increasing, yet Mr. Asbury, whose influence
   is very capital, will not easily comply; nay, I know he will be
   exceedingly averse to it.

   "In Europe, where some steps had been taken, tending to a separation,
   all is at an end. Mr. Wesley is a determined enemy of it, and I have
   lately borne an open and successful testimony against it.

   "Shall I be favored with a private interview with you in Philadelphia?
   I shall be there, God willing, on Tuesday the 17th of May. If this be
   agreeable, I will beg of you just to signify it in a note, directed to
   me at Mr. Jacob Baker's, merchant, Market Street, Philadelphia; or, if
   you please, by a few lines sent me by the return of the post at Philip
   Rogers's, Esq., in Baltimore, from yourself or Dr. Magaw, and I will
   wait upon you with my friend Dr. Magaw. We can then enlarge on these
   subjects.

   "I am conscious of it, that secrecy is of great importance in the
   present state of the business, till the minds of you, your brother
   bishops, and Mr. Wesley, be circumstantially known. I must therefore
   beg that these things be confined to yourself and Dr. Magaw, till I
   have the honor of seeing you.

   "Thus, you see, I have made a bold venture on your honor and candor,
   and have opened my whole heart to you on the subject, as far as the
   extent of a small letter will allow me. If you put equal confidence in
   me, you will find me candid and faithful.

   "I have, notwithstanding, been guilty of inadvertencies. Very lately, I
   found myself obliged (for the pacifying of my conscience) to write a
   penitential letter to the Rev. Mr. Jarratt, which gave him great
   satisfaction: and for the same reason I must write another to the Rev.
   Mr. Pettigrew. When I was last in America, I prepared and corrected a
   great variety of things for our magazines, indeed, almost every thing
   that was printed, except some loose hints which I had taken of one of
   my journeys, and which I left in my hurry with Mr. Asbury, without any
   correction, entreating that no part of them might be printed which
   would be improper or offensive. But through great inadvertency (I
   suppose) he suffered some reflections on the characters of the two
   above-mentioned gentlemen to be inserted in the magazine, for which I
   am very sorry and probably shall not rest till I have made my
   acknowledgment more public; though Mr. Jarratt does not desire it.

   I am not sure whether I have not also offended you, sir, by accepting
   one of the offers made me by you and Dr. Magaw, of the use of your
   churches, about six years ago, on my first visit to Philadelphia,
   without informing you of our plan of separation from the Church of
   England. If I did offend, (as I doubt I did, especially from what you
   said on the subject to Mr. Richard Dellam, of Abington,) I sincerely
   beg yours and Dr. Magaw's pardon. I will endeavor to amend. But, alas!
   I am a frail, weak creature.

   "I will intrude no longer at present. One thing only I will claim from
   your candor -- that if you have no thoughts of improving this proposal,
   you will burn this letter, and take no more notice of it (for it would
   be a pity to have us entirely alienated from each other, if we cannot
   unite in the manner my ardent wishes desire.) But if you will further
   negotiate the business, I will explain my mind still more fully to you
   on the probabilities of success.

   "In the meantime, permit me, with great respect, to subscribe myself,
   right reverend sir, your very humble servant in Christ,

   Thomas Coke. Richmond, April 24,1791. "The Right Rev. Father in God,
   Bishop White."

   The following is Bishop White's answer: --

   "Rev. Sir -- My friend, Dr. Magaw, has this day put into my hands your
   letter of the 24th of April, which, I trust, I received with a sense of
   the importance of the subject, and of the answer I am to give to God
   for the improvement of every opportunity of building up his Church.
   Accordingly, I cannot but make choice of the earliest of the two ways
   you point out, to inform you, that I shall be very happy in the
   opportunity of conversing with you at the time proposed.

   "You mention two difficulties in the way of the proposed union. And
   there are further difficulties which suggest themselves to my mind. But
   I can say of the one and of the other, that I do not think them
   insuperable, provided there be a conciliatory disposition on both
   sides. So far as I am concerned, I think that such a disposition
   exists.

   "It has not been my temper, sir, to despond in regard to the extension
   of Christianity in this new world: and in addition to the promises of
   the great head of the Church, I have always imagined that I perceived
   the train of second causes so laid by the good providence of God, as to
   be promoting what we believe to be his will in this respect. On the
   other hand, I feel the weight of most powerful discouragements, in the
   increasing number of the avowed patrons of infidelity, and of others,
   who pretend to confess the divine authority of our holy religion, while
   they endeavor to strip it of its characteristic doctrines. In this
   situation, it is rather to be expected, that distinct Churches,
   agreeing in fundamentals, should make mutual sacrifices for a union,
   than that any Church should divide into two bodies, without a
   difference being even alleged to exist, in any heading point. For the
   preventing of this, the measures which you may propose cannot fail of
   success, unless there be on one side, or on both a most lamentable
   deficiency of Christian temper.

   "I remember the conversation you allude to with Mr. Dellam: I hope I
   did not express myself uncharitably, or even indelicately. As to
   personal offense toward me, it is out of the question: for I had not at
   that time any connection with St. Paul's Church. But this, as well as
   the other parts of your letter, may be discoursed of at the proposed
   interview. Therefore, with assurance of the desired secrecy, and with
   requesting you to accept a like promise of candor to that which I
   credit from you, I conclude myself at present Your brother in Christ,

   "And very humble servant,

   "W. W." [19]

   It will be perceived that the above correspondence was considered by
   the parties concerned as altogether confidential, and was so kept,
   according to Bishop White's account of the transaction, until the
   summer of 1804, when he communicated the fact, in answer to their
   inquiries, to the Rev. Simon Wilmer, of the Protestant, and the Rev.
   John McClaskey, of the Methodist Episcopal Church. "The matter being
   variously reported," says Bishop White, "a copy of the letter was,
   after some lapse of time, delivered to the Rev. Dr. Kemp, of Maryland,
   and at last published in a controversy raised in the diocese."

   The letter being thus made public, it is not strange that many of the
   friends of Dr. Coke, and of the Methodist Episcopal Church, to whom
   these things were unknown until now, should have been dissatisfied with
   Dr. Coke, and demand from him an explanation. Thus called from him the
   following letter to this General Conference [20] : --

   "Near Leeds, (Yorkshire,) Jan. 29,1808.

   "To The General American Conference

   "My Very Dear Brethren: -- I wrote to you a letter about two months
   ago, directed to the care of my dear brethren, the Messrs. Cooper and
   Wilson, in which I briefly opened my mind to you concerning my relation
   toward you, observing, to this purport, that if you judged that my
   being with you would help to preserve your union, if I was allowed to
   give my opinion or judgment on every station of the preachers, as far
   as I chose, and also upon every thing else that could come under the
   inspection of the bishops or superintendents, you might call me; and we
   would settle our affairs in Europe as soon as possible, and sail for
   America, and be with you for life. Without your compliance with the
   latter point, viz., in respect to a full right of giving my judgment, I
   should be so far from being useful in preserving union, that I should
   merely fill the place of a preacher.

   "But there is one point more which I must also notice. I find that a
   letter which I wrote to Bishop White in 1791 has been animadverted
   upon, though, if I mistake not, the letter itself has not been
   published.

   "There are very few of you who can possibly recollect any thing of what
   I am next going to add. Many of you were then only little children. We
   had at that time no regular General Conferences. One only had been held
   in the year 1784. I had, indeed, with great labor and fatigue, a few
   months before I wrote this letter to Bishop White, prevailed on James
   O'Kelly and the thirty-six traveling preachers who had withdrawn with
   him from all connection with Bishop Asbury, to submit to the decision
   of a General Conference. This conference was, to be held in about a
   year and a half after my departure from the States. And at this
   conference, held, I think, the latter end of 1792, I proposed and
   obtained that great blessing to the American connection, a permanency
   for General Conferences, which were to be held at stated times.
   Previously to the holding of this conference, (except the general one
   held in 1784,) there were only small district meetings, excepting the
   council which was held at Cokesbury College either in 1791 or 1792.
   Except the union which most justly subsisted between Bishop Asbury on
   the one hand, and the preachers and people on the other, the society,
   as such, taken as an aggregate, was almost like a rope of sand. I
   longed to see matters on a footing likely to be permanent: Bishop
   Asbury did the same: and it was that view of things, I doubt not, which
   led Bishop Asbury, the year before, to call and to endeavor to
   establish a regular council, who were to meet him annually at
   Cokesbury. In this point I differed in sentiment from my venerable
   brother. But I saw the danger of our situation, though I well knew that
   God was sufficient for all things. I did verily believe then, that,
   under God, the connection would be more likely to be saved from
   convulsions by a union with the old Episcopal Church, than any other
   way -- not by a dereliction of ordination, sacraments, and the
   Methodist discipline, but by a junction on proper terms. Bishop White,
   in two interviews I had with him in Philadelphia, gave me reason to
   believe that this junction might be accomplished with ease. Dr. Magaw
   was perfectly sure of it. Indeed, (if Mr. Ogden, of New Jersey, did not
   mistake in the information he gave me,) a canon passed the house of
   bishops of the old Episcopal Church in favor of it. Bishop Madison,
   according to the same information, took the canon to the lower house.
   But it was there thrown out,' said Mr. Ogden, to whom I explained the
   whole business, because they did not understand the full meaning of
   it.' Mr. Ogden added, that he spoke against it, because he did not
   understand it; but that it would have met with his warm support, had he
   understood the full intention of it.

   "I had provided in the fullest manner, in my indispensably necessary
   conditions, for the security, and, I may say, for the independence of
   our discipline and places of worship. But I thought (perhaps
   erroneously, and I believe so now) that our field of action would have
   been exceedingly enlarged by that junction, and that myriads would have
   attended our ministry in consequence of it, who were at that time much
   prejudiced against us. All these things unitedly considered, led me to
   write the letter, and meet Bishop White and Dr. Magaw on the subject in
   Philadelphia.

   "But it may be asked, why did I not consult Bishop Asbury, before I
   took these steps? I answer, It was impossible. I was at and near
   Philadelphia, and he was somewhere in the south. We had finished our
   district meetings, and he was to be in the state of Maryland about the
   time of my sailing for England. I wanted that every thing should he
   prepared against my return, God willing, in about a year and a half,
   for further consideration -- that Bishop White, &c., should have time
   to consult their convention -- and that I might also lay the matter
   before Bishop Asbury, and correspond with him upon the subject, and
   after that, if proper, bring the business before the General
   Conference, which was to be held in order to take into consideration
   James O'Kelly's division. Before I sailed for England, I met Bishop
   Asbury at New castle in the state of Delaware, (from which place I went
   on board,) and laid the matter before him, who, with that caution which
   peculiarly characterizes him, gave me no decisive opinion on the
   subject.
    1. "The next objection (and, I think, the only important one
       remaining) is the following: If you did not think that the
       episcopal ordination of Mr. Asbury was valid, why did you ordain
       him? Was there not duplicity in this business?' I answer,
    2. I never, since I could reason on those things, considered the
       doctrine of the uninterrupted apostolic succession of bishops as at
       all valid or true.
    3. I am of our late venerable father Mr. Wesley's opinion, that the
       order of bishops and presbyters is one and the same
    4. I believe that the episcopal form of church government is the best
       in the world, when the episcopal power is under due regulations and
       responsibility.
    5. I believe that it is well to follow the example of the primitive
       church as exemplified in the word of God, by setting apart persons
       for great ministerial purposes by the imposition of hands, but
       especially those who are appointed for offices of the first rank in
       the church.

   "From all I have advanced, you may easily perceive, my dear brethren,
   that I do not consider the imposition of hands, on the one hand, as
   essentially necessary for any office in the church; nor do I, on the
   other hand, think that the repetition of the imposition of hands for
   the same office, when important circumstances require it, is at all
   improper.

   "If it be granted that my plan of union with the old Episcopal Church
   was desirable, (which now, I think, was not so, though I most sincerely
   believed it to be so at that time,) then if the plan could not have
   been accomplished without a repetition of the imposition of hands for
   the same office, I did believe, and do now believe, and have no doubt
   that the repetition of the imposition of hands would have been
   perfectly justifiable for the enlargement of the field of action, &c.,
   and would not, by any means, have invalidated the former consecration
   or imposition of hands. Therefore, I have no doubt but my consecration
   of Bishop Asbury was perfectly valid and would have been so even if he
   had been re-consecrated. I never did apply to the general convention or
   any other convention for reconsecration. I never intended that either
   Bishop Asbury or myself should give up our episcopal office, if the
   junction were to take place; but I should have had no scruple then, nor
   should I now, if the junction were desirable, to have submitted to, or
   to submit to a reimposition of hands in order to accomplish a great
   object: but I do say again, I do not now believe such a junction
   desirable.

   "I have thus simply and candidly, though in few words, told you my
   whole mind on this subject. I do not consider my solemn engagements to
   you invalidated by any thing I have done, or you have done. But I
   charge you by the glory of God, and by every tie of love, gratitude,
   and candor, that you take no step which may injure my character. And
   now I conclude with assuring you that I greatly love and esteem you;
   that it is a delight to me to pray for your prosperity, and that I am
   your very affectionate brother and faithful friend,

   T. COKE."

   These letters, having been read in the conference, were referred to the
   committee of correspondence, who reported the following answer to Dr.
   Coke: --

   "Baltimore, May 25th, 1808

   "Very Dear and Much-Respected Brother: -- Your letters of Nov. 6th,
   1807, and Jan. 29th, 1808, together with the address of the British
   Conference to our General Conference, were severally read to us in our
   open conference; and the different subjects therein contained were
   seriously and solemnly considered, in all their various bearings and
   connections.

   "We have answered the address of the British Conference in a separate
   letter from this, which you, as one of that body, will see. We have
   complied with their request, in agreeing that you may continue with
   them, till you are called to us by the General Conference, or by all
   the annual conferences respectively.

   "Your two letters were respectfully received and had a salutary effect
   upon our minds. The reasons which you have assigned for some former
   transactions, and the ingenuous candor which you have manifested, in
   frankly acknowledging and declaring the motives and inducements that
   led you to those measures; together with your affectionate
   acknowledgment that in certain cases you were mistaken as to your views
   of some of the points in question; as likewise your manifest friendship
   and good will to this connection and your American brethren, and your
   evident solicitude to retain a place and standing among us; taking
   these circumstances collectively, they had a great influence upon some
   of our minds, in removing certain suspicious fears, which had been
   imbibed, rather unfavorable to your standing among us.

   "You may be assured that we feel an affectionate regard for you; that
   we gratefully remember your repeated labors of love toward us; and that
   we sensibly feel our obligations for the services you have rendered us.
   We hope that no circumstance will ever alienate our Christian affection
   from you, or yours from us. We wish to maintain and to cultivate a good
   understanding and brotherly unity with you, and with all our European
   brethren. In full conference, of near one hundred and thirty members,
   we entered into a very long conversation, and very serious and solemn
   debate, upon sundry resolutions which were laid before us, relative to
   your case. Probably on no former occasion, in any conference in
   America, was so much said in defense of your character and to your
   honor as I ministerial servant of God and of his church. Your worth,
   your labors, your disinterested services, fatigues, dangers, and
   difficulties, to serve your American brethren, were set forth
   pathetically, and urged with the force of reason and truth, in an
   argumentative manner and our candid and impartial judgments were
   constrained to yield to the conclusion, that we were bound by the ties
   of moral and religious obligations to treat you most respectfully, and
   to retain a grateful remembrance of all your labors of love toward us.
   During the debate your name was mentioned, and your character spoken of
   with much respect and affection. Our deliberations and arguments on
   this head terminated to the adoption of the following resolutions, viz:
   --
    1. Resolved, That the General Conference do agree and consent that Dr.
       Coke may continue in Europe till he be called to the United States
       by the General Conference or by all the American conferences
       respectively.
    2. Resolved, That we do retain a grateful remembrance of the services
       and labors of Dr. Coke among us; and that the thanks of this
       conference are hereby acknowledged to him, and to God, for all his
       labors of love toward us, from the time he first left his native
       country to serve us.
    3. Resolved, That Dr. Coke's name shall be retained in our minutes,
       after the names of the bishops, in a N. B. Dr. Coke, at the request
       of the British Conference, and by consent of our General
       Conference, resides in Europe; he is not to exercise the office of
       superintendent among us, in the United States, until he be recalled
       by the General Conference or by all the annual conferences
       respectively.'

   "Your name is accordingly printed in the minutes which were put to
   press after the adoption of the above resolutions.

   "We have elected and set apart our beloved brother Wm. McKendree to the
   office of a bishop or superintendent, and he has entered upon the
   duties of the office. Our venerable Asbury is yet spared among us, and,
   although he bears the weight of more than threescore years, he is able
   to travel and visit all the annual conferences. May his life be long
   preserved for God's glory, and the service of his church!

   "We have, upon the whole, had great peace, harmony, and unity, during
   our sitting in General Conference: we expect to close in a few days;
   and we trust in God that all things will work together for the divine
   glory and the promotion of the blessed work of religion.

   "Our next General Conference is to be May 1st, 1812, in New York, and
   is to be composed of a select number, of one for every five members
   belonging to the annual conferences respectively.

   "We judge it proper to inform you, that our brother Ezekiel Cooper has
   voluntarily resigned his office as editor and general book steward. It
   was the wish and desire of the General Conference, that he should
   continue to serve the connection in that important department; but he
   has given us a final answer, that he declines the appointment, and
   wishes another to be appointed to take his place. The conference have
   accordingly accepted his resignation, and voted their thanks to him for
   the great services he has rendered in that department, for nine years
   past; and they have also voted their full approbation of his conduct in
   the management of the book business, greatly to the advancement of that
   concern, and to the benefit of the connection.

   "We have now chosen our brethren John Wilson and Daniel Hitt, the
   editors and general book stewards, who are to carry on the business in
   New York as usual. You will therefore consider and understand, that our
   brother Ezekiel Cooper, of his own voluntary choice, has resigned, and
   is released from any responsibility in any account you may have with
   the Book Concern; and that all your accounts and business with that
   department or the agents thereof are to be transferred to and done with
   the said John Wilson and Daniel Hitt in future.

   "We have had a glorious work in various parts; we had an addition last
   year of 7,405; our connection now amounts to more than 150,000. Surely
   the Lord is with us.

   "We hope, dear brother, that you will bear us in mind before the throne
   of grace. We shall certainly pray for our brother Dr. Coke, his beloved
   wife, and all our European brethren. May the Lord long preserve your
   life, and bless you with, every necessary favor of Providence and grace
   to complete your felicity in time and through eternity!

   "We are, very dear and much-respected brother, yours affectionately in
   the bonds of the gospel and unity of the Spirit of grace.

   "Signed in behalf and by order of the General Conference."

   The following resolutions also passed the conference in relation to his
   case: --

   "The committee to whom was referred the case of Dr. Coke, taking into
   consideration the circumstances of the case, as it respects the request
   of the British Conference, the relative situation of the doctor, and
   the most prudent measures for us to adopt, in order to promote and
   perpetuate a good understanding and Christian unity between us and our
   European brethren, are of opinion we should comply with the request
   made in the address of the British Conference for the doctor's
   continuance with them; and also, that we should respectfully retain the
   doctor's name in our minutes, agreeably to his request in his second
   proposition on that head -- therefore, your committee report the
   following resolutions: --
    1. "Resolved, That the General Conference do agree and consent that
       Dr. Coke may continue in Europe 'till he be called to the United
       States by the General Conference, or by all the annual conferences
       respectively.'
    2. "Resolved, That we do retain a grateful remembrance of the services
       and labors of Dr. Coke among us and that the thanks of this
       conference are hereby acknowledged to him; and to God, for all his
       labors of love toward us, from the time he first left his native
       country to serve us.
    3. "Resolved, that Dr. Coke's name shall be retained in our minutes
       after the names of the bishops, in a N. B. Dr. Coke, at the request
       of the British Conference, and by consent of our General
       Conference, resides in Europe: he is not to exercise the office of
       superintendent or bishop among us in the United States, until he be
       recalled by the General Conference, or by all the annual
       conferences respectively.'
    4. "Resolved, That the committee of correspondence be, and are hereby
       directed, to draft two letters, one to the British Conference, the
       other to Dr. Coke, in answer to their respective letters to us; and
       therein communicating with them respectively the contents of the
       above resolutions.'

   The following address, referred to in the letter above inserted, of the
   British to the American Methodist General Conference, will show the
   state of feeling existing between the two bodies, and the earnest
   desire the former had for the continued services of Dr. Coke: --

   "Very Dear Brethren in the Lord: -- The pleasing, account you gave us,
   in your last address, of the prosperity of religion in the United
   States, calls on us for the most lively expressions of thankfulness to
   God, who has so wonderfully displayed his love among you; the more so,
   as we have heard, by very recent accounts, that the operations of
   divine grace are continued, with increasing effect, on the hearts of
   thousands in your highly-favored country. May the Lord still prosper
   his blessed work, till the whole earth is filled with his glory!

   "While we ascribe all the good that is done to God alone, as the sole
   fountain of light and life, we do not forget the instruments which it
   pleased him to employ. The names of Asbury and Whatcoat are mentioned
   in our assemblies with the greatest respect and affection. Mr.
   Whatcoat, we are informed, is called to his eternal ward. This is,
   doubtless, a very great loss to you, though to him an unspeakable gain.
   Yet, you well know, that the glorious Head of the church, who saw good
   to remove him, can supply his place with a pastor after his own heart,
   equally qualified to superintend his mourning flock. The venerable Mr.
   Asbury, whose praise is in all the churches, is still with you, -- a
   burning and a shining light. We never lose sight of the zeal he showed
   for the salvation of souls, at the hazard of his life, during the war
   on the continent, when all others forsook it and fled. To speak our
   sentiments on this subject, might pain his mind; we therefore restrain
   ourselves, being well assured that he needs no encomiums of ours to
   recommend him to you! May his last days be crowned with increasing
   success in his great ministerial labors!

   "Respecting our union, dear brethren, we think of no separation from
   you, save the great Atlantic. Our doctrine, and manner of spreading the
   gospel, are the same, and we mutually rejoice in each other's welfare.
   On this principle, we conclude, that you will greatly rejoice to hear
   of the flourishing state of vital godliness among us. In this kingdom,
   so long distinguished by every privilege congenial to real religion,
   there has been this year an increase of above seven thousand members to
   our Society, near a thousand in Ireland, where the missionaries have
   been greatly blest in their arduous undertaking, particularly in
   weakening the destructive influence of the man of sin and, we trust, in
   hastening the total overthrow of idolatry and superstition.

   "What you have said concerning our present worthy secretary, the Rev.
   Dr. Coke, is no matter of wonder to us, who have long known his value,
   the honor which our Lord has put upon him, and have enjoyed the fruit
   of his labor. By a vote of our conference this day, he was requested to
   continue with us, in case his engagements with you, which he has
   repeatedly stated to us, should admit of it.

   "Our conference has been numerous, and many important subjects have
   been brought before us; but, thanks be to God, we have been graciously
   preserved from the evil one, and are drawing toward a conclusion in the
   utmost harmony and love.

   "That the eternal God may be your refuge, and the everlasting arms be
   underneath you; and that the good will of Him who dwelt in the bush may
   be ever manifested among you, is the earnest prayer of; very dear
   brethren, yours, in endless love.

   "Signed, in behalf of the conference,

   "John Barber, President. "Liverpool, August 11, 1807."

   The answer of the General Conference to this is as follows: --

   "Baltimore, 25th May, 1808

   "Very Dear Brethren and Fathers in Christ: -- Your very affectionate
   address to the Methodist General Conference in America,' has been read
   in our conference, and afforded us great consolation. Feeling with you
   that our doctrine and manner of spreading the gospel are the same,'
   that we are united under one glorious Head, suffering in the same
   cause, and traveling to the same world of rest, we cannot but rejoice
   in your prosperity. Yes, brethren, we rejoice to hear that the great
   Head of the church has owned your labors, and given hundreds and
   thousands of precious souls to your labors and prayers. But above all,
   we feel constrained to return thanks to the Father of lights for
   presiding over your conference, and enabling you to draw to a close in
   harmony and love; and again to go out into the hedges and highways, the
   towns and cities, and lift up your united voice for the recovery of a
   lost and sinking world. O brethren, if God so wonderfully owned and
   blest the labors of the few that first engaged in spreading the gospel
   on the itinerant plan in your highly-favored land, so that a little one
   has become a thousand,' what may we not expect from the labors of
   hundreds and thousands, provided they continue equally pure in
   doctrine, holy in life, and zealous for the glory of the Redeemer's
   kingdom?

   "We also, in this highly-favored country, have cause of unceasing
   gratitude and love to our common Lord, for his boundless love toward
   us. Although we have had a vast extent of country to travel over, in
   many parts stupendous chains of rocky mountains to climb, and
   uncultivated regions to explore, yet hitherto we have been kept one;
   and our labors have been crowned with success beyond our most sanguine
   expectations. Not only in our towns and populous cities, and the
   country adjacent to the Atlantic, have we seen the pleasure of the Lord
   prosper in our hand; but also to the westward beyond the river Ohio, to
   the Mississippi and the Missouri, we have seen the travail of the
   Redeemer's soul coming borne to God. In those places where but a few
   years ago the wild beast of the forest prowled after his prey, and the
   tawny savage lurked in wait to murder the innocent, now houses are
   raised for the worship of God, precious souls have been converted by
   hundreds and thousands, and the songs of Zion are heard. Truly the
   wilderness and the solitary place have become glad, and the desert
   blossoms as the rose. This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in
   our eyes.

   "Our numbers are still increasing; we added more than seven thousand
   members to our societies the last year. There are now upward of one
   hundred and fifty thousand members within the bounds of our charge. The
   prospects are still opening and pleasing. The fields are white unto the
   harvest. Our missionaries in the interior and upon the frontier have
   been successful. But we wish to rejoice with trembling. All the honor
   and praise be ascribed to God for ever.

   "Your request for the continuance of our beloved brother Dr. Coke among
   you has been taken into the most serious and solemn deliberation in our
   conference; and in accordance with your request, a vote has passed that
   he may continue with you until he may be called to us by all the annual
   conferences respectively, or the General Conference. We are, however,
   not insensible of his value, or ungrateful for his past labors of love.
   And we do sincerely pray that the everlasting God may still be with
   him, and make him a blessing to hundreds and thousands of immortal
   souls.

   "Our venerable father, Mr. Asbury, is still spared to us; and
   notwithstanding he carries the weight of threescore and three years, he
   has been enabled regularly to visit all the annual conferences, and to
   preside in our General Conference. We esteem this a peculiar blessing.

   As the pious Whatcoat is taken from us to his eternal reward, we have
   elected and set apart our beloved brother William McKendree, who has
   been well tried and found faithful in the work of the ministry nearly
   twenty years, to fill his place as joint superintendent with Mr.
   Asbury. And we hope that the mantle of Elijah will rest upon Elisha.
   Our conference has been large, and business of the greatest importance
   has come before us; but through the infinite goodness of God we have
   been preserved in union, and are now drawing toward a close in harmony
   and love.

   "Respecting our union, brethren, we can say with you, we know no
   separation save the Atlantic. And we wish, so far as circumstances will
   permit, ever to cultivate the most cordial affection.

   "And now, dear brethren and fathers, praying that the God and Father of
   our Lord Jesus Christ may be your guide and support in life and death,
   and that we may all meet in our Father's house above, we remain yours,
   in unceasing love.

   "Signed by order and in behalf of the conference." [21]

   As a variety of conflicting commentaries have been made on these
   proceedings, and especially upon the letters of Dr. Coke, some of them
   discreditable to his character, and others to the character of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church, it seems proper to subjoin a few remarks,
   with a view to set the matter in a just point of light, referring the
   reader, for a more full vindication of those transactions, to the book
   entitled, "An Original Church of Christ," and to the "Defense of our
   Fathers." Let it be remembered then,
    1. That the letter of Dr. Coke to Bishop White was his own simply, for
       which no one is responsible but himself, for he consulted not the
       General Conference at all, nor even Bishop Asbury or Mr. Wesley.
       Nay, it appears from the letter itself that Dr. Coke was fully
       sensible that Bishop Asbury would be averse to the plan of the
       union between the two Churches. If, therefore, there be any thing
       reprehensible in the letter or in the plan proposed, neither the
       Methodist Episcopal Church, Bishop Asbury, nor Mr. Wesley is to be
       held responsible for it, as neither the one nor the other was at
       all consenting to the proposition. But,
    2. It seems that Dr. Coke himself designed his letter only as
       preparatory to an interview on the subject with Bishop White,
       should the proposition be favorably viewed by the latter. It was,
       therefore, purely a confidential communication from one friend to
       another, the writer requesting Bishop White to burn the letter in
       case he should not view the subject favorably; and even if he
       should, the preliminaries were to be discussed afterward, and the
       whole subject submitted to the General Conference, whose negative
       would have nullified the entire proceedings. The letter, therefore,
       should be considered only as an incipient step towards a union
       which the writer greatly desired as a means, according to his
       judgment at the time, of realizing a greater amount of good than
       could be in their separate action. If, therefore, the end proposed
       could have been realized without any sacrifice of principle, or the
       use of unlawful means, it might have been sanctioned by all good
       men in each communion, without any impeachment of either motive or
       judgment. In the estimation of Bishop White himself, as appears
       from his answer to Dr. Coke, such a union might have been effected
       without any dereliction of duty on either side, provided the terms
       of the compact could have been made mutually agreeable. Futurity
       alone can fully declare whether the motive in making or rejecting
       the proposition were most in accordance with the Divine will, or
       most conducive to extensive and permanent good. In any, and in
       every event, the severe censures which have been cast upon Dr.
       Coke, and the unwarrantable conclusions respecting the organization
       of the Methodist Episcopal Church, are not justified or sustained
       by the facts in the case, however much we may deprecate the making
       or rejecting the movements of either party in the premises.
    3. The most weighty objection, however, to Dr. Coke, in making the
       proposal, is, that he thereby expressed a doubt of the validity of
       his own ordination, and of course of those on whom he had laid his
       hands. The reader is requested to notice that this objection has
       been raised by the Protestant Episcopalians who consider
       presbyterial ordination invalid, and who profess a belief in the
       uninterrupted succession of a third order in the church,
       denominated bishops, made such by a triple consecration; but as
       this belief is founded upon no substantial proof, as such an order
       cannot be traced, nor therefore insisted upon as essential to
       constitute a valid ministry, the objection itself can have no solid
       foundation; more especially as Dr. Coke himself says expressly, in
       the above letter to The General Conference, that he had no
       confidence in the doctrine of succession, and therefore considered
       his consecration by Wesley and others as perfectly valid.

   But Dr. Coke's letter above quoted, sets this matter at rest by the
   most explicit avowal on this point. In whatever sense Bishop White
   might have understood him, it is manifest that Dr. Coke never meant to
   insinuate that his own ordination by Mr. Wesley, or that of those who
   had received it at his hands, was wanting in any thing to make it
   valid. This is a contradiction put upon the letter of Dr. Coke not
   authorized by the letter itself, and is expressly contradicted in the
   one he addressed to the General Conference.
    1. But as before said, whatever error may have been committed in this
       affair, the Methodist Episcopal Church is not accountable for it.
       It is believed that Dr. Coke betrayed too much precipitancy in
       reference to this subject -- that his great desire for extensive
       usefulness led him to make the proposal, which he did without due
       consideration -- that before he thus committed himself to those who
       were watching him, with perhaps some jealousy, he should have
       consulted and obtained the consent of his worthy colleague, as well
       as Mr. Wesley's and the General Conference. It is, moreover, highly
       probable that Dr. Coke misunderstood the views of Mr. Wesley, when
       he told Bishop White that had he foreseen some things, he would not
       have gone so far. No other intimation, so far as I have been able
       to learn, was ever given that Mr. Wesley ever repented of what he
       had done for his American brethren. His last letter to Ezekiel
       Cooper, but a few days before his death, and the record he made in
       his journal in reference to this business, both prove that Dr. Coke
       labored under a mistake when he said this. What Mr. Wesley said in
       regard to Mr. Asbury's calling himself a bishop, and to Cokesbury
       College, no more proves that he repented of what he had done, than
       it does that a father is sorry that he has a promising son, merely
       because he finds it necessary to chastise him for his good.

   It should be observed that Dr. Coke does not say in his letter to
   Bishop White that he had authority from Mr. Wesley to say that the
   latter regretted the steps he had taken in the organization of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church, but gives it as his opinion only that such
   were Mr. Wesley's views and feelings.

   The fact is, Dr. Coke had become alarmed -- unnecessarily so, as
   subsequent events proved -- from the disposition manifested by O'Kelly
   and his partisans, fearing that a convulsion would take place in the
   Methodist Episcopal Church, and that they would become scattered
   abroad. To prevent such a calamity, Bishop Asbury proposed the council,
   which had but an ephemeral existence, and did not answer the design of
   its institution, to which neither Dr. Coke nor O'Kelly was agreed, the
   former submitting to it from deference to Bishop Asbury, proposing in
   the mean time a General Conference as a substitute, which was brought
   about in 1792, at which time O'Kelly withdrew.

   Under these alarming apprehensions for the safety of the church, Dr.
   Coke made the proposition for a union with the Protestant Episcopal
   Church, from a hope of enlarging the sphere of usefulness for his
   Methodist brethren, by creating a concentration of action for the
   ministry of both communions, and thereby inspiring more public
   confidence in the cementing principles of Christianity and the
   stability of its institutions. As, however, his fears were groundless,
   so the union proposed was both impolitic and unnecessary he himself
   lived to see and acknowledge.

   It is hoped, therefore, that we may hear no more of the doubts of Dr.
   Coke respecting the validity of his ordination. And whatever errors he
   may have committed in this affair, let them find an apology in that
   common frailty of human nature from which none are exempt -- the
   imperfection of human judgment -- and be buried in the same tomb in
   which the remains are deposited which once shrouded a spirit of no
   common mold -- a spirit actuated by the noblest principles of
   philanthropy, piety, and faith.

   We claim not for Dr. Coke perfection or infallibility of judgment; but
   we do claim for him an unsullied reputation, a purity of motive,
   guiding and actuating an extended desire for usefulness to his
   fellow-men, and which a close and critical inspection of his character
   and conduct makes to shine out with increased luster and a more
   enduring brightness. And if the same amount of goodness can be awarded
   to those who have made this vindication necessary -- if the same
   apology for merely human weaknesses will serve to set off their virtues
   in the same conspicuous light -- we shall rejoice in anticipating, by
   the abounding mercy of God in Christ Jesus, our eternal union with them
   all, in ascribing honor and glory to Him who hath washed them and us in
   his own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God for ever and
   ever.

   There was another very important matter submitted to this General
   Conference. We have already seen in the preceding chapter, the efforts
   which were made by Bishop Asbury and most of the annual conferences, to
   convene a delegated General Conference in 1807, but that the measure
   was defeated by the vote of the Virginia conference. Not despairing of
   accomplishing an object so desirable in itself; the subject was
   presented to this General Conference in the following memorial: --

   "Very Dear Brethren: -- We are as one of the seven eyes of the great
   and increasing body of the Methodist Episcopal Church in these United
   States, which is composed of about five hundred traveling, and about
   two thousand local preachers, together with upwards of one hundred and
   forty thousand members; these, (with our numerous congregations and
   families, spread over an extent of country more than two thousand miles
   from one end to the other, amounting, in all probability, to more than
   one million of souls, which are, directly or remotely, under our
   pastoral oversight and ministerial charge,) should engage our most
   sacred attention, and should call into exertion all the wisdom and
   talents we are possessed of; to perpetuate the unity and prosperity of
   the whole connection, and to establish such regulations, rules, and
   form of government, as may, by the blessing of God in Jesus Christ,
   promote that cause of religion which is more precious to us than
   riches, honor, or life itself, and be conducive to the salvation or
   souls, among the generations yet unborn. The fields are white unto
   harvest before us, and the opening prospect of the great day of glory
   brightens continually in our view, and we are looking forward with
   hopeful expectations for the universal spread of scriptural truth and
   holiness over the habitable globe. Brethren, for what have we labored
   -- for what have we suffered -- for what have we borne the reproach of
   Christ, with much long-suffering, with tear: and sorrow -- but to serve
   the great end and eternal purpose or the grace of God, in the present
   and everlasting felicity of immortal souls?

   "When we take a serious and impartial view of this important subject,
   and consider the extent of our connection, the number of our preachers,
   the great inconvenience, expense, and loss of time, that must
   necessarily result from our present regulations relative to our General
   Conferences, we are deeply impressed with a thorough conviction that a
   representative or delegated General Conference, composed of a specific
   number, on principles of equal representation, from the several annual
   conferences, would be much more conducive to the prosperity and general
   unity of the whole body, than the present indefinite and numerous body
   of ministers, collected together unequally from the various conferences
   to the great inconvenience of the ministry, and injury of the work of
   God.

   "We therefore present unto you this memorial, requesting that you will
   adopt the principle of an equal representation from the annual
   conferences, to form in future a delegated General Conference, and that
   you will establish such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry
   the same into effect.

   "As we are persuaded that our brethren in general, from a view of the
   situation and circumstances of the connection, must be convinced, upon
   mature and impartial reflection, of the propriety and necessity of the
   measure, we forbear to enumerate the various reasons and arguments
   which might be urged in support of it. But we do hereby instruct,
   advise, and request every member who shall go from our conference to
   the General Conference, to urge, if necessary, every reason and
   argument in favor of the principle, and to use all their Christian
   influence to have the same adopted and carried into effect.

   "And we also shall and do invite and request our brethren in the
   several annual conferences which are to sit between this and the
   General Conference, to join and unite with us in the subject matter of
   this memorial. We do hereby candidly and openly express our opinion and
   wish, with the firmest attachment to the unity and prosperity of the
   connection; hoping and praying that our chief Shepherd and Bishop of
   our souls, the Lord Jesus Christ, may direct you in all wisdom,
   righteousness, brotherly love, and Christian unity.

   "We are, dear brethren, in the bonds of gospel ties, most
   affectionately yours, &c.

   "By order and in behalf of the New York conference, without a
   dissenting vote.

   "(Signed) Francis Ward, Sec'y. "Coeyman's Patent, May the 7th, 1807."

   This memorial, it seems, had been submitted to several of the annual
   conferences, and concurred in, as appears by the record, by the New
   England, Ohio, and South Carolina conferences; and, accordingly, it had
   been requested, that as full a representation as practicable, should
   attend the present session of the General Conference, that a full
   expression of the voice of the several annual conferences should be
   heard in regard to this measure.

   After the memorial was read, it was referred to a committee of two
   members from each annual conference, chosen by the representatives of
   each conference from among themselves; and the following members
   composed the committee: --

   New York Conference -- Ezekiel Cooper, John Wilson; New England
   Conference -- George Pickering, Joshua Soule; Western Conference --
   William McKendree, William Burke; South Carolina Conference -- William
   Phoebus, Josias Randle; Virginia Conference -- Philip Bruce, Jesse Lee;
   Baltimore Conference -- Stephen G. Roszell, Nelson Reed; Philadelphia
   Conference -- John McClaskey, Thomas Ware.

   On Monday, the 16th, the committee presented the following report,
   which, after a long debate, was rejected by a vote of 57 for and 64
   against it: --

   "Whereas, it is of the greatest importance that the doctrine, form of
   government, and general rules of the United Societies in America be
   preserved sacred and inviolable and whereas every prudent measure
   should be taken to preserve, strengthen, and perpetuate the union of
   the connection:

   "Therefore, your committee, upon mature deliberation, have thought it
   advisable that the third section of the form of Discipline shall be as
   follows, viz: --

  SECTION III

    "Of the General Conference

     * The General Conference shall be composed of delegates from the
       annual conferences.
     * The delegates shall he chosen by ballot without debate, in the
       annual conferences respectively, in the last meeting of conference
       previous to the sitting of the General Conference.
     * Each annual conference respectively shall have a right to send
       seven elders, members of their conference, as delegates to the
       General Conference.
     * Each annual conference shall have a right to send one delegate in
       addition to the seven, for every ten members belonging to such
       conference, over and above fifty, so that if there be sixty members
       they shall send eight; if seventy, they shall send nine, and so on
       in proportion.
     * The General Conference shall meet on the first day of day, in the
       year of our Lord 1812; and thenceforward on the first day of May,
       once in four years perpetually, at such place or places as shall be
       fixed on by the General Conference from time to time.
     * At all times when the General Conference is met, it shall take two
       thirds of the whole number of delegates to form a quorum.
     * One of the general superintendents shall preside in the General
       Conference; but in case no general superintendent be present, the
       General Conference shall choose a president pro tem.
     * The General Conference shall have full powers to make rules,
       regulations, and canons for our church, under the following
       limitations and restrictions, viz:

     * "The General Conference shall not revoke, alter, or change our
       articles of religion; nor establish any new standards or rules of
       doctrine contrary to our present existing and established standards
       of doctrine.
     * "They shall not lessen the number of seven delegates from each
       annual conference, nor allow of a greater number from any annual
       conference than is provided for in the fourth paragraph of this
       section.
     * "They shall not change or alter any part or rule of our government,
       so as to do away episcopacy, or to destroy the plan of our
       itinerant general superintendency.
     * "They shall not revoke or change the general rules of the United
       Societies.
     * "They shall not do away the privileges of our ministers or
       preachers of trial by a committee, and of an appeal.
     * "Neither shall they appropriate the produce of the Book Concern, or
       of the Charter Fund, to any purpose other than for the benefit of
       the traveling, superannuated, supernumerary and worn-out preachers,
       their wives, widows, and children.
     * "Provided, nevertheless, that upon the joint recommendation of all
       the annual conferences, then a majority of two thirds of the
       General Conference succeeding, shall suffice to alter any of the
       above restrictions."

   After discussing this report for one whole day, it was, by a vote of
   the conference, postponed until the reconsideration of the question
   respecting the manner in which the presiding elders should thereafter
   be appointed. After it was decided that they should continue to be
   appointed as heretofore by the bishops, on Wednesday the 18th, the
   consideration of the report was resumed, and after some debate the
   entire report was, as before stated, rejected by a majority of seven
   votes.

   The rejection of this report was a source of much regret and
   disappointment to most of the older preachers who were present, and
   particularly to Bishop Asbury, as they clearly saw the necessity of
   adopting some plan by which the doctrines of the church, its form of
   government, and its general rules, might be preserved from
   deterioration, and also by which a more equal representation from the
   several annual conferences should be secured. These things led to
   further consultation upon the subject, and it issued finally in the
   adoption, almost unanimously, of the following regulations and
   limitations: --

   Question Who shall compose the General Conference, and what are the
   regulations and powers belonging to it?

   Answer
    1. The General Conference shall be composed of one member for every
       five members of each annual conference, to be appointed by
       seniority or choice, at the discretion of such annual conference;
       yet so that such representatives shall have traveled four full
       calendar years from the time they were received on trial by an
       annual conference, and are in full connection at the time of
       holding the conference.
    2. The General Conference shall meet on the first day of May, in the
       year of our Lord 1812, in the city of New York, and thenceforward
       on the first day of May once in four years perpetually, in such
       place or places as shall be fixed by the General Conference from
       time to time; but the general superintendents, with or by the
       advice of all the annual conferences, or, if there be no general
       superintendent, all the annual conferences respectively, shall have
       power to call a General Conference, if they judge it necessary, at
       any time.
    3. At all times when the General Conference is met, it shall take two
       thirds of the representatives of all the annual conferences to make
       a quorum for the transacting of business.
    4. One of the general superintendents shall preside in the General
       Conference; but in case no general superintendent be present, the
       General Conference shall choose a president pro tempore.
    5. The General Conference shall have full powers to make rules and
       regulations for our Church, under the following limitations and
       restrictions, viz.:
         1. The General Conference shall not revoke, alter, or change our
            Articles of Religion, nor establish any new standards or rules
            of doctrine, contrary to our present existing and established
            standards of doctrine.
         2. They shall not allow of more than one representative for every
            five members of the annual conference, nor allow of a less
            number than one for every seven.
         3. They shall not change or alter any part or rule of our
            government, so as to do away episcopacy, or to destroy the
            plan of our itinerant general superintendency.
         4. They shall not revoke or change the general rules of the
            United Societies.
         5. They shall not do away the privileges of our ministers or
            preachers of a trial by a committee, and of an appeal; neither
            shall they do away the privileges of our members of trial
            before the society or by a select number, and of an appeal.
         6. They shall not appropriate the produce of the Book Concern or
            of the Charter Fund to any purpose other than for the benefit
            of the traveling, supernumerary, superannuated, and worn-out
            preachers, their wives, widows, and children.
         7. Provided, nevertheless, that, upon the joint recommendation of
            all the annual conferences, then a majority of two-thirds of
            the General Conference succeeding, shall suffice to alter any
            of the above resolutions."

   The unanimity with which these restrictive regulations were adopted by
   the conference, shows the deep sense which was very generally felt of
   the propriety of limiting the powers of the General Conference, so as
   to secure for ever the essential doctrines of Christianity from all
   encroachments, as well as those rules of moral conduct, so succinctly
   and precisely embodied in the General Rules, and also to prevent the
   appropriations of the available funds of the church from being diverted
   to other objects than those for which they had been established. Call
   these rules, therefore, restrictive regulations, or a constitution of
   the Church -- for we contend not about names merely -- they have ever
   since been considered as sacredly binding upon all succeeding General
   Conferences, limiting them in all their legislative acts, and
   prohibiting them from making inroads upon the doctrines, general rules;
   and government of the church.

   Before this, each General Conference felt itself at full liberty, not
   being prohibited by any standing laws, to make whatever alterations it
   might see fit, or to introduce any new doctrine or item in the
   Discipline, which either fancy, inclination, discretion, or
   indiscretion might dictate. Under this state of things, knowing the
   rage of man for novelty, and witnessing the destructive changes which
   have frequently laid waste churches, by removing ancient landmarks, and
   so modifying doctrines and usages as to suit the temper of the times,
   or to gratify either a corrupt taste or a perverse disposition, many
   had felt uneasy apprehensions for the safety and unity of the church,
   and the stability of its doctrines, moral discipline, and the frame of
   its government; and none were more solicitous upon this subject than
   Bishop Asbury, who had labored so long with an assiduity equaled by
   few, if indeed any, and suffered so much for the propagation and
   establishing of these important points; he therefore greatly desired,
   before he should be called hence, to see them fixed upon a permanent
   foundation. The lively satisfaction, too, with which this act of the
   conference was received generally, both by ministers and people,
   abundantly proves the wisdom which presided in that council which
   devised these resolutions, and applauds the prudence and caution with
   which they were so cordially adopted. And although the progress of
   events has dictated the expediency of some modification in the
   iron-like bond of the proviso, yet time and experience have borne a
   faithful testimony to the salutary influence of the restrictions
   themselves, on the peace and unity of the church.

   The death of Bishop Whatcoat, and the absence of Dr. Coke, left Bishop
   Asbury alone in the superintendency. This was a burden, in the present
   enlarged state of the work, he was not able long to bear; and hence a
   resolution passed the conference on the twelfth day of its session, for
   the election and consecration of an additional bishop. Before, however,
   this motion prevailed, a motion for the election of seven additional
   bishops, one for each annual conference, with Bishop Asbury at their
   head, was largely and ably discussed by some of the leading members of
   the conference on each side. Those, however, who were in favor of this
   motion, were also in favor of either abolishing or greatly restricting
   the office of presiding elder, and making the episcopacy so large as in
   a great measure to supersede the necessity of that office. But as it
   was finally settled by a large majority of the conference, that this
   officer should be continued in the church, and likewise continue to be
   appointed by the bishop, so the motion for adding seven additional
   bishops, notwithstanding the plausibility with which the measure was
   urged upon the conference, was finally rejected by a strong vote.

   It was then moved that two additional bishops be elected and
   consecrated. This also, after a free interchange of views, was decided
   in the negative, when the resolution in favor of one was adopted almost
   unanimously. The next question to be decided, was, who should be the
   man.

   On the same day on which the resolution passed, the conference
   proceeded to the election by ballot, and on counting the votes, it was
   found that out of 128, the number of members present, William McKendree
   had 95 in his favor, [22] and was therefore declared to he duly
   elected; and on the 17th of May, 1808, he was consecrated in the Light
   Street church by Bishop Asbury, assisted by the Rev. Messrs. Freeborn
   Garrettson, Philip Bruce, Jesse Lee, and Thomas Ware.

   Mr. McKendree had been commended to the attention and approbation of
   the conference, by a long, laborious, and faithful service in the
   itinerant field of labor, during which time God had set his seal to his
   ministry in a most remarkable manner.

   William McKendree was born of reputable parents, in King William
   county, in the State of Virginia, on the 6th day of July, 1757, and was
   educated in the Church of England. In the year 1787, in the 30th year
   of his age, under the ministry of the Rev. John Easter, Mr. McKendree
   was awakened to a sense of his lost condition, and thence led to seek
   and obtain an interest in the atoning blood of Christ. Impelled by an
   inextinguishable thirst for the salvation of souls, he was led into the
   "ministry of reconciliation," and in 1788 was received on trial in the
   Virginia conference. He soon gave evidence of great ardor of mind in
   the cause of God, and of superior abilities as a preacher of the
   gospel.

   In the great agitation which was produced by the conduct of O'Kelly and
   his partisans, his mind became for a short season greatly perplexed
   with the controversy which arose out of the questions which were then
   mooted, and, fearing that the course taken by the conference might
   prove injurious to the cause of religion, he declined taking a regular
   appointment for that year. He was, however, soon convinced of his
   error, and, at the request of the bishop, was stationed in Norfolk,
   Va., in 1793. These things led him to a more critical inquiry into
   those points of controversy then agitated, and the result was a more
   thorough conviction than ever of the scriptural character of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church, and of his duty to adhere to it with
   firmness and fidelity, which he did to the end of his life.

   In 1796 he was appointed to the charge of a district in the Virginia
   conference, which trust he fulfilled with great fidelity and success
   for three years, when he was removed to the Baltimore district, over
   which he presided one year with great dignity and usefulness, laboring
   with assiduity to spread "the knowledge of salvation by the remission
   of sins."

   At the end of this term he was selected by Bishops Asbury and Whatcoat,
   who were going on their tour to the western country, to take charge of
   the district which then comprehended the whole of the western
   conference. Here he had to travel about fifteen hundred miles every
   three months, in order to pass around and through his district. He
   entered upon this new field of labor with that enlightened zeal which
   had heretofore distinguished him, and was the happy and honored
   instrument of extending the Redeemer's kingdom far into these new
   settlements, in some parts of Tennessee, Kentucky, and Ohio. While
   here, the camp-meetings commenced, before described, which were
   instrumental in promoting the extensive revivals of religion with which
   those parts of the country were so highly favored. Into this work he
   entered with all his soul, traveling and preaching through the
   settlements, and was everywhere hailed as a messenger of God. Here he
   was instrumental, in connection with those associated with him in this
   good work, in laying the foundation of that living temple which has
   been erected in that country.

   It was from this field of labor that Mr. McKendree came to the General
   Conference in 1808. And such was the confidence inspired in his wisdom
   and integrity, in his zeal and prudence in promoting the cause of God,
   and such a halo of glory seemed to surround his character, that the
   finger of Providence appeared to point to him as the most suitable
   person to fill the office of a superintendent.

   Though personally unknown to most of the younger members of the
   conference, yet a sermon which he delivered in the Light Street church
   on the Sabbath morning previously to the day of his election, had such
   an effect on the minds of all present, that they seemed to say, with
   one accord, "This is the man of our choice, whom God hath appointed to
   rule over us." He was accordingly elected and consecrated as before
   related; and his subsequent life and conduct prove that the choice fell
   upon the right man, though his administration was often subjected to
   the severest test and most critical scrutiny.

   At this conference, Ezekiel Cooper resigned his station as editor and
   general book steward, and John Wilson and Daniel Hitt, the former
   having served four years as the assistant of Mr. Cooper, were elected
   to fill the station. A rule also passed the conference prohibiting any
   one to serve in this office more than eight years successively.

   The following regulation was adopted in respect to the election and
   consecration of local preachers to the office of deacons: --

   "The bishops have obtained liberty, by the suffrages of the conference,
   to ordain local preachers to the office of deacons, provided their
   characters pass in examination, and obtain the approbation of the
   yearly conference, with a testimony from the quarterly meeting of their
   respective circuits, after proper examination, signed by the president
   and countersigned by the secretary."

   The following rules respecting raising supplies were adopted: --

   Every annual conference has full liberty to adopt and recommend such
   plans and rules as to them may appear necessary, the more effectually
   to raise supplies for the respective allowances. "If the respective
   allowances are not raised, as provided for, the connection shall not be
   accountable for the deficiency, as in case of debt."

   The section respecting the trial and expulsion of members for a
   delinquency in the payment of debts, and other disputes, was so amended
   as to allow a legal process when it is judged the case is such as to
   require it.

   In the question respecting permitting "strangers" at the meeting of the
   class and society, the word "strangers" was exchanged for the words,
   "those who are not of our society," so as to read, "How often shall we
   permit those who are not of our society to meet in class or society?"

   After these transactions, together with a few verbal alterations in
   some sections of the Discipline, which do not much affect the sense, on
   the 26th day of the month the conference adjourned, never more to meet
   under the same circumstances, as hereafter the conference was to be
   composed of delegates chosen by the respective annual conferences.

   In conformity to the resolution of the conference in relation to Dr.
   Coke, the following was inserted in the minutes: --

   Dr. Coke, at the request of the British Conference, and by consent of
   our General Conference, resides in Europe. He is not to exercise the
   office of superintendent among us in the United States, until he be
   recalled by the General Conference, or by all the annual conferences
   respectively."

   From this period, therefore, Dr. Coke resided in Europe, until he
   commenced the missionary voyage to Asia, in which he fell a martyr to
   his work, in the midst of the Indian ocean, where he was entombed
   beneath its coral sands, until the last trumpet shall bid his "sleeping
   dust" awake to everlasting life and glory.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [19] Memoirs Protestant Episcopal Church, page 343.

   [20] This and the former letter to the General Conference, are among
   the documents of said conference, preserved in the handwriting of Dr.
   Coke himself, italicized as herein printed.

   [21] The proper signatures are wanting in the copies whence the above
   letters are taken.

   [22] I do not find on the journal of the conference any record of the
   names of those for whom the others voted, but I believe they were
   divided between Ezekiel Cooper and Jesse Lee, the former having 8 votes
   in his favor.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 8

    From the close of the General Conference of 1808, to the commencement of the
    General Conference of 1812

  1808

   There were no additional conferences created this year, the whole of
   the work in the United States and Territories, as well as in Upper and
   Lower Canada, being comprehended in the seven already existing.

   It appears that both preachers and people were generally satisfied with
   what had been done by the last General Conference, and the experience
   of thirty years has abundantly tested the wisdom of the plan of
   securing an equal representation from the sever annual conferences,
   acting, when together, under the limitations which that conference saw
   fit to impose. The preachers, therefore, went to their several stations
   with hearts burning with love to their fellowmen, and a determination
   to devote themselves entirely to their peculiar work. And though but
   few new circuits were added this year, yet the work of God gradually
   increased and spread among the people, both in the old and new
   countries.

   Bishop Asbury felt himself greatly relieved from the burden of
   responsibility resting upon him as the sole superintendent, by the
   active and diligent manner in which the newly elected and consecrated
   bishop entered upon the labors of his office: -- "The burden," he
   remarks, "is now borne by two pair of shoulders instead of one -- the
   care is cast upon two hearts and heads." He, however, by no means
   remitted any of his labors, but with the same characteristic ardor and
   diligence, we find him moving through the general work, giving tone to
   the spirit of reformation which was now pervading different portions of
   the country, particularly through the agency of camp-meetings. Hence we
   find him this year, in company with Bishop McKendree, after passing
   through some of the older settlements of Pennsylvania, crossing the
   mountains and descending into the valley of the Mississippi and
   notwithstanding the growing infirmities of body under which he often
   groaned, he visited several of their camp-meetings, and preached to the
   people, exhorting them to steadfastness in the faith.

   While here he had an opportunity of manifesting the tender
   sensibilities of his soul over the grave of one of his departed
   friends. Passing by the grave, he says: --

   "It was as much as I could do to forbear weeping I mused over her
   speaking grave. How sweetly eloquent! Ah! the world knows little of my
   sorrows -- little knows how dear to me are my many friends, and how
   deeply I feel their loss. But they all die in the Lord, and this shall
   comfort me."

   His colleague, Bishop McKendree, also entered upon his work with equal
   diligence, making the entire circuit of the continent from year to
   year. One reason assigned by Bishop Asbury why it became him to visit,
   as nearly as practicable, every part of the work was, that the
   preachers and people ought to know their bishop, and that he ought to
   know them, so as to be able to sympathize with them in their wants and
   sufferings, to understand their true state, as well as to set an
   example to all which they might safely and profitably imitate. Hence,
   while in the western country, he says, "I feel for the people of this
   territory; but we must suffer with them if we expect to feel for them
   as we ought; and here are the disadvantages of a local episcopacy,
   because it cannot be interested for its charge as it should be, because
   it sees not, suffers not with, and therefore feels not for the people."
   And therefore for the first year of Bishop McKendree's episcopal
   labors, his father in the gospel led him around from one part of the
   work to another, introduced him to the conferences, and made him
   acquainted, as far as possible, with the people of his charge. And what
   a charge! To travel from Georgia to Maine, from thence through Vermont
   and along the lakes unto the western states, following the waters of
   the Ohio, the Mississippi, the Tennessee and the Cumberland rivers,
   ascending the hills and crossing the intervening valleys, lodging
   sometimes in log huts, and not infrequently in the woods, attending the
   conferences, preaching almost every day, receiving visitors, writing
   letters, and hearing the grievances of discontented individuals! This
   was labor! and labor, too, actually performed by those who were at that
   time honored with presiding over the Methodist Episcopal Church. And
   does the reader wish to hear how such travels and labors were
   performed? Let Bishop Asbury answer. Speaking of his departure from a
   camp-meeting which he and Bishop McKendree had attended in Tennessee,
   he says: --

   "The right way to improve a short day is to stop only to feed the
   horses; and let the riders, meanwhile, take a bite of what they may
   have been provident enough to put into their pockets."

   As they thus moved around from one annual conference to another, Bishop
   Asbury could direct the attention of his colleague to the fields which
   had been sown by those who had already cultivated the ground.

   Take another extract from his journal for this year, as an instance of
   the mode in which they traveled, and of the feelings which were
   inspired under these things, and the prospects before them. They were
   now in the state of Georgia, having crossed the mountains from
   Tennessee and arrived among the older settlements. While here he says:
   --

   "My flesh sinks under labor. We are riding in a poor thirty dollar
   chaise, in partnership, two bishops of us, but it must be confessed
   that it tallies well with the weight of our purses. What bishops! Well
   -- but we have great news, and we have great times, and each western,
   southern, and the Virginia conference will have one thousand souls
   truly converted to God. Is not this an equivalent for a light purse?
   And are we not well paid for starving and toil? Yes, glory to God!"

   This, indeed, was the reward for which he looked, for it may surprise
   some readers to know that the salary of these bishops amounted to the
   enormous sum of eighty dollars a year, besides their traveling
   expenses. Yet this is the fact, and from this pittance they had to
   supply themselves with clothes and traveling apparatus. Hence he refers
   in the above extract, to the "weight of their purses."

   While, however, they were, in some places, called upon to suffer these
   privations, yet, in other places, they knew "How to abound, having all
   things" needful for temporal comfort, surrounded by the kindest
   friends, and comforted by their unaffected greetings of friendship.
   Under these circumstances, they poured out their hearts in grateful
   acknowledgments to God for his goodness in raising them up friends to
   comfort them and administer to their wants, at the same time expressing
   a fear lest those abundant marks of favor should make them forget their
   dependence on God, or neglect him as the "Giver of every good and
   perfect gift." But whether in want or abounding in plenty, they went on
   their way, rejoicing it all the good things which the Lord was doing
   for the people, and contributing by their preaching and example to
   invite all their brethren to diligence and perseverance in their
   respective spheres of labor. This was an efficient general
   superintendence, worthy of the name, and answering the end of its
   institution.

   Among other places, the new settlements in some portions of the state
   of Ohio were this year visited with outpourings of the Divine Spirit.
   We have already noticed the influence which the camp-meetings exerted
   on the inhabitants of that country, and that their continuance, freed
   from the wild irregularities which had rendered them suspicious in some
   places, was a means of diffusing the spirit of reformation and of sound
   piety through the settlements. Along the banks of Paint Greek and the
   Great Miami, the work flourished greatly during this and several
   subsequent years, so that, as before stated, in the mouth of September,
   1807, an annual conference was held in Chillicothe, and another in
   1809.

   This year was distinguished by a very considerable revival of religion
   in the Mad river country. Among others who were made partakers of
   divine grace, was a Mr. Kenton, who was one of the first adventurers
   into the wilderness of Kentucky and Ohio, and had been a companion of
   the celebrated Boone, the hardy pioneer into Kentucky. Kenton, after
   living for some time near Maysville in Kentucky, finally settled on the
   banks of Mad river. He had often displayed the most intrepid courage in
   contending with the savages of the wilderness, in conquering and
   slaying the wild beasts of the forest, and enduring all those hardships
   which are incident to the life of a rover through the western woods and
   prairies. And though once or twice taken a prisoner by the savages, yet
   such was his vigilance and fearlessness, that he escaped from their
   grasp, and survived all the perils of a hunter's life. Yet this haughty
   lord of the forest fell before the "sword of the spirit which is the
   word of God." He who had fled from the face of civilization, and more
   than once moved his residence to avoid coming in contact with his white
   neighbors who were settling around him, was at length caught in the
   Gospel net, and brought a willing captive to the Lord Jesus Christ.

   About this time, a camp-meeting was held in his immediate neighborhood.
   Attracted by the fame of their character, and wishing to gratify a
   laudable curiosity, Kenton mingled with the crowd who attended the
   meeting, and listened with attention to the ambassadors of Christ.
   Light broke in upon his understanding, and conviction penetrated his
   conscience. He who had boldly grappled with the wild beasts of the
   forest, and fearlessly contended with ferocious Indians, was now seen
   to tremble and weep under the power of Gospel truth. After laboring
   some time in silence under the pressure of that guilt which he now felt
   preying upon his spirits, he asked and obtained an interview with the
   preacher, the Rev. Mr. Sale, to whom he unbosomed himself in the
   following strain: --

   "Sir, I wish to open my mind to you freely, but must enjoin the most
   profound secrecy. I have been a wretched sinner; but the Lord has
   spared my life. I have been in so many battles, encountered so many
   dangers, so many times taken prisoner by the Indians -- have run the
   gauntlet -- have been taken into the woods by the Indians, stripped,
   and tied fast on the back of a wild colt, stretched and lashed fast
   with my hands under its flanks, my heels under its breast, and then let
   loose to the mercy of the wild animal, till some of my limbs were
   broken; and I at last miraculously escaped. I have been wounded so
   often, and encountered various other difficulties; but after all have
   been firm to my purpose and unshaken in my resolutions and
   determinations. And now, sir, by the help of God, I am determined to
   get religion and serve the Lord. Do you think sir, I will ever give it
   up?"

   After an interchange of some thoughts in reference to this momentous
   subject, and enjoining secrecy upon Mr. Sale, they returned to the
   encampment. That night the general -- for such was his title -- was in
   great agony of mind, and was earnestly engaged in seeking for
   redemption in the blood of Christ. The next morning he was heard
   proclaiming aloud himself, what he had the night before so solemnly
   requested to be kept a profound secret. He was declaring what God had
   done for his soul, and many praised God on his account.

   Such a change, on such a man, could not but have a most powerful and
   salutary influence on the minds of others, especially as his subsequent
   life gave irrefutable evidence of the reality of the work. This is
   given as one specimen among hundreds which might he selected, in proof
   of the good effects of these meetings.

   In the southwestern part of the country a new circuit was formed along
   the banks of the Tombigbee river, by the labors of Matthew P.
   Sturdevant. This being a new and thinly settled country, the preacher
   was subjected to those difficulties and hardships which were
   inseparable from the mode of life adopted by the Methodist itinerants
   of those days. He succeeded, however, in forming a circuit, so that in
   1810 to we find, on the minutes of conference for Tombigbee, eighty six
   members -- seventy-one whites, and fifteen colored.

   In New England the work of God had slowly progressed in several places,
   and this year Smithfield and Palmyra circuits were added to those
   heretofore formed. The latter was in the Kennebeck district, much of
   which embraced the newly settled countries in the province of Maine.
   Through the labors of such men as the Rev. Messrs. Elijah Hedding,
   Joshua Soule, Thomas Branch, John Broadhead, Elijah R. Sabin, and
   Oliver Beale, who were this year the presiding elders in the New
   England conference, Methodism was gradually, and in some places
   powerfully, advancing, both in the older and in some of the new
   settlements in the New England states. While Thomas Branch was leading
   forward the young men under his care in the regions of Vermont, where
   Methodism now numbered about one thousand six hundred members, Elijah
   Hedding (now bishop) was equally indefatigable in exploring the
   settlements and villages among the hills and valleys of New Hampshire;
   and the province of Maine was blessed with the labors of Joshua Soule
   (now bishop) and Oliver Beale, whose example in the work committed to
   their care, stimulated the preachers on their respective districts to
   activity and diligence in their respective spheres of labor.

   But among those whose early labors that were devoted to the salvation
   of the people in New England, we must not forget to mention the name of
   Rev. George Pickering. As early as 1795 we find him stationed in
   Hartford, Connecticut; and, after filling the stations of New London,
   Lynn, and Boston, he was appointed a presiding elder in 1797, which
   office he filled for several terms, with the needful intervening years
   in stations, until age and infirmities obliged him to intermit his more
   extensive labors for those better suited to his declining years.

   When Mr. Pickering entered this field, in 1793, there was but one
   district, which was then in charge of Jesse Lee, including eighteen
   circuits, twenty-six preachers, and two thousand two hundred and sixty
   members. At the time of which we are now speaking, there were six
   districts, fifty-four circuits, seventy-five preachers, and eight
   thousand eight hundred and twenty-five church members. Mr. Pickering,
   therefore, may be said, in some sense, to have grown up with the
   Methodist Episcopal Church in New England, as he very soon followed Mr.
   Lee, and has ever since shared in its weal or woe, during all the
   vicissitudes through which it has passed in that part of our work; and
   he still lives to labor and rejoice with his brethren. And though the
   above number may appear small in comparison with most of the other
   conferences, yet it must be remembered that Methodism in that country
   had to contend with an opposition of a peculiar character, arising from
   the modes of thinking and habits of the people on religious subjects,
   and also that other churches were, in many instances, as much benefited
   by the labors of the Methodist ministry as were the Methodists
   themselves. Here, as well as in some other places, many who were
   awakened and converted to God by our ministry, were received into other
   communions, and a spirit of reformation, by this means, was diffused
   among the various evangelical denominations. These things are mentioned
   not by way of complaint against others, but merely as matters of fact,
   for we rejoice in all that the Lord our God has done, or may do, by
   whatever instrumentality he may see fit to work.

   While these things were going forward in the more exterior parts of the
   field of labor, God was not unmindful of the people in the cities and
   villages in the other states. In the city of New York, the work of
   reformation continued with encouraging prosperity, and many were made
   partakers of the "grace of life." In the city of Philadelphia also,
   there was an outpouring of the Spirit upon the congregations, and quite
   a number was added to the church. Through the agency of camp-meetings
   many parts of the country were blessed, particularly on the eastern
   shore of Maryland, where hundreds of sinners were happily converted to
   God; and his people were made to rejoice abundantly in beholding these
   manifest displays of the mercy and love of God toward their fellow-men,
   as well as in their own enjoyment of the reviving influences of the
   Holy Spirit.

   A remarkable work of God commenced this year in the penitentiary of
   Richmond, in Virginia, under the faithful labors of the Rev. Stith
   Mead, who undertook to carry the consolations of religion to those
   unhappy people. By preaching to them himself, and procuring the help of
   other ministers, and by circulating among them small religious books,
   their minds were led to consider their ways, a godly sorrow for sin was
   awakened in their hearts, and they were directed to look by faith to
   Jesus Christ for pardon and salvation. The result of this good work
   was, that in the course of a few months about thirty of these prisoners
   were formed into a society, furnishing satisfactory evidence that they
   had "passed from death unto life."

   Twenty-nine preachers were located this year, seven were returned
   supernumerary, seven superannuated, one had been expelled, and two,
   John Richards [23] and Dyer Burg, had withdrawn. George Dougharty
   Bennet Kendrick, Henry Willis, and Richard Swaim had died.

   The obituary notices of preachers now began to be considerably
   lengthened in the published minutes, and as all can have recourse to
   these for information respect mg their character, labors, and deaths, I
   must, to make room for other matters more essentially connected with
   the history of the Church, continue to omit, or modify these, as the
   nature of the case may seem to require.

   Of George Dougharty we have already spoken in the account of the work
   in Charleston, S. C. It is stated that his character stood exceedingly
   high in his conference, both as a preacher and a presiding elder,
   furnishing the most indubitable evidence of his readiness and
   qualification to fill with dignity and usefulness any department of the
   work to which he might be called. After filling the stations allotted
   him in the church with great fidelity, and discharging the duties of
   his office as long as he was able to move, he manifested his courage in
   the cause of God, by bringing forward a resolution in the last
   conference he attended, in 1807, declaring "that if any preacher should
   desert his station through fear, in time of sickness or danger, the
   conference should never employ that man again."

   It is said that he sustained this resolution, however rigid it may
   appear, with such force and energy of argument, that he carried his
   cause, and thus, like a general who dies in the arms of victory, he
   triumphed in this last public act of his life over all opposition.

   His last sufferings were indescribably severe; but he bore them with
   that meek submission to the divine will by which he had ever been
   distinguished during his active life; and on the 23d day of March,
   1807, he took his departure from a world of labor and suffering, to a
   land of rest and joy, after having devoted the last nine years of his
   life to the services of the sanctuary.

   His abilities as a preacher were of a high order, and they were guided
   in their exercise by that wisdom and prudence, and attended by that
   "unction from the holy One," which made them subservient to the
   advancement of the cause and interests of Jesus Christ. Whenever he
   spoke in the name of God, he most evidently spoke of what he knew and
   felt, and not merely from a speculative knowledge of the truths of God.
   And hence his word was in "power, and in much assurance, and in the
   Holy Ghost," the hearts of God's people vibrating to the truths he
   uttered, while sinners were made to feel that they stood in the
   presence of a man commissioned of "God to show unto them the way of
   salvation."

   The life of such a man is an expressive comment upon the gospel he
   preaches, and his death a powerful attestation to its truth and
   excellence. He indeed, while struggling in the arms of death, and in
   full view of eternity, said with holy triumph, "The goodness and love
   of God to me are great and marvelous, as I go down the declivity of
   death." And so unclouded was his understanding and tranquil his spirit
   in the hour of his dissolution, that his true greatness was never
   before so fully appreciated by his friends.

   Henry Willis was also a "burning and a shining light." He was naturally
   of a strong mind, and this he diligently improved by an assiduous
   application to reading and observation. After he became so debilitated
   that he was not able to devote himself exclusively to the traveling
   ministry, considering that his call to this work was from God, he did
   not dare desist from doing all he could, while he so applied himself to
   temporal business as not to be dependent on the church for a support.
   Systematic in all his movements, zealous in whatever he undertook to
   do, and uniform in his obedience to the commands of God, he
   accomplished much in a short time, and with comparatively slender
   means. In the various relations he sustained, whether as a son, a
   husband, a father, or a minister of Jesus Christ, he exemplified the
   duties originating from them, thus giving evidence that real religion
   has its appropriate duties, and that all could be discharged without
   interfering one with another.

   He commenced his ministry in 1779, and from that time forth filled some
   of the most important stations in the Church, in the states of South
   and North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New York, and in
   the new countries west of the Allegheny mountains; and he continued his
   exertions in the cause of God until 1795, when, being worn down with
   labor, he received a supernumerary relation, and was stationed in the
   city of Baltimore. This relation he held from this time until the day
   of his death, laboring, as before said, with his own hands, that he
   "might be chargeable to none," for the support of himself and family.
   He was everywhere received as a messenger of God, and was long
   remembered by those who sat under his ministry, with most affectionate
   veneration, as having been an instrument of lasting benefit to their
   souls. The record of his death, which states that he died with a
   triumphant faith in Jesus Christ, calls him a "great man of God," an
   appellation which shows the high estimation in which he was held by
   those best capable of appreciating his worth.

   He died early in the year 1808, in the full hope of "immortality and
   eternal life," leaving behind him, as the most valuable legacy which a
   father can bequeath to his children or a minister to the church, a
   "good name" -- the remembrance of which "is as precious ointment poured
   forth."

   Of Bennet Kendrick excellent things are said, as well as of Richard
   Swaim. They were both faithful and successful in their ministry, and
   died the peaceful death of the righteous.

   The following account of Captain Thomas Webb, which should have
   appeared under date of 1796, was inadvertently omitted until those
   pages were printed off. [24] But as he was one of the two first
   Methodist preachers who came to America, he deserves a respectful
   notice among the worthies of that chivalrous age of Methodism when the
   sword of the Lord and of Wesley was so successfully wielded in
   conquering souls to Jesus Christ.

   It has indeed been affirmed by some, that Capt. Webb was the founder of
   Methodism in New York but this, I am confident, is a mistake, as I took
   much pains to ascertain the facts in relation to the society in this
   city, and received them from the lips of persons who had a personal
   knowledge and perfect recollection of all the circumstances as they are
   related in the second chapter of the first volume of this work.

   Nevertheless, Capt. Webb contributed much by his prayers, preaching,
   and example, to build up the cause of God, to increase the number, and
   to strengthen the hearts and hands of the society in the city of New
   York.

   He was a soldier of the British army, and was with Gen. Wolfe at the
   conquest of Quebec in 1758, and during the engagement on the plains of
   Abraham, under the walls of the city, he received a wound in his arm
   and lost his right eye, on account of which he ever after wore a
   bandage over that part of his head, as may be seen by an inspection of
   the likeness which accompanies this volume [not included with this
   electronic edition -- DVM]. At this time, the fear of God was not
   before his eyes; but on his return to England, in the year 1764, he was
   brought to see himself a sinner through the preaching of Mr. Wesley in
   the city of Bristol. He then became acquainted with an evangelical
   minister of the establishment, and through him with the Methodists,
   with whom he soon after united himself, and found the "pearl of great
   price."

   Having his heart fired with love to God and his fellow-men, he began to
   entreat them to "flee the wrath to come," and to believe in Jesus
   Christ to the saving of their souls. In his first appearance in public
   as a preacher, which was in the city of Bath, in England, he dwelt
   chiefly on his own experience of divine things; but the people who
   heard him were edified and refreshed under his public exercises, which
   greatly encouraged him to persevere in this labor of love.

   Not long after this, in the year 1765 or 1766, he was appointed
   barrack-master of Albany, in the colony of New York. Here he set up
   family prayer in his own house, which some of his neighbors frequently
   attended, to whom he gave a word of exhortation and advice. The
   blessing of God attending these incipient efforts to do good, he was
   induced to extend his labors, and He began holding meetings among his
   fellow-soldiers and others who wished to attend.

   After the arrival of Mr. Embury and his associates in New York, Capt.
   Webb, hearing of their having begun to hold meetings, paid them a
   visit. His first appearance among them was in the public assembly, and
   as he wore the uniform of a British captain, the little society were
   fearful at first, that he had come to "spy out their liberties in
   Christ " but, as already related in the account given of the rise of
   this society, when they saw him kneel in prayer and devoutly
   participate with them in their acts of devotion, their fears were
   exchanged for joy, and they hailed "him as a brother beloved." He was
   therefore soon invited to preach, which he did with great energy and
   acceptance. His appearance in the pulpit in the costume of a military
   officer, with his sword either lying by his side or swinging in its
   scabbard, was a novelty that attracted much attention and excited no
   little surprise among the citizens who attended the meetings. His
   preaching, however, was in demonstration and power, and he generally
   related his own experience as an evidence of the truth of his doctrine
   respecting experimental religion. But his experience being very deep,
   as he had a severe struggle while passing from death to life, and also
   obtained an unclouded witness of his acceptance in the Beloved, it is
   stated by those who heard him in those days, that he always took care
   to guard weak believers against "casting away their confidence,"
   because they could not realize the same bright testimony of their
   justification by faith in Christ with which he had been so highly
   favored.

   He did not, however, confine his labors to New York and Albany. The
   records of those days represent him as visiting Philadelphia and Long
   island, where he preached with success, the Lord setting his seal to
   the words of his servant. He was, indeed, mighty in the Scriptures, and
   very pointed in his appeals to the consciences of unconverted sinners;
   and the result proved that the Spirit of God accompanied his energetic
   labors, to the awakening and conversion of souls.

   How long he remained in America I cannot tell; but in 1772 we find from
   a letter of Mr. Wesley, that he was in Dublin in Ireland, and Mr.
   Wesley says of him, "he is a man of fire, and the power of God
   constantly accompanies his word." In 1773 Mr. Wesley speaks of his
   preaching at the Foundry in London, and says, "I admire the wisdom of
   God in still raising up various preachers, according to the various
   tastes of men. The captain is all life and fire; therefore, although he
   is not deep or regular, yet many, who would not hear a better preacher,
   flock together to hear him. And many are convinced under his preaching;
   some justified; a few built up in love." Ten years after this he speaks
   of Capt. Webb, having "lately kindled a flame here," (in the
   neighborhood of Bath,) "and it is not yet gone out. Several persons
   were still rejoicing in God. I found his preaching in the street of
   Winchester had been blessed greatly. Many were more or less convinced
   of sin, and several had found peace with God. I never saw the house
   before so crowded with serious and attentive hearers." In 1785 he bears
   a similar testimony to his usefulness, in kindling up the fire of
   devotion among the people.

   From these testimonies it appears that Capt. Webb retained his piety
   and zeal in the cause of God, although Charles Wesley, whose charity
   was sometimes a little cramped by his high notions of Church order,
   said, in a letter to Joseph Benson, that the captain was "an
   inexperienced, honest, zealous, loving enthusiast." His enthusiasm was
   that of a warm-hearted, "zealous, honest, and loving" servant of God,
   whose powers were devoted to the highest interests of mankind, --
   although we may allow that he lacked that extensive knowledge which is
   acquired only by a laborious application to study.

   His death is said to have been sudden. Having a presentiment of his
   approaching dissolution, a few days before his death he expressed his
   wishes to a friend respecting the place and manner of his internment,
   adding, -- "I should prefer a triumphant death but I may be taken away
   suddenly. However, I know I am happy in the Lord, and shall be with
   him, and that is sufficient." A little after 10 o'clock, on the 20th of
   December, 1796, after taking his supper and praying with his family, he
   went to his bed in apparent good health; but shortly his breathing
   became difficult; he arose and sat at the foot of the bed; but while
   Mrs. Webb was standing by him, he fell back on the bed, and before any
   other person could be called, he sunk into the arms of death without
   any apparent pain, aged 72 years.

   It is matter of gratitude to God that Capt. Webb, as well as Mr.
   Embury, " held fast his confidence steadfast unto the end," and
   therefore "received the full reward" of his labors. Mr. Embury, after
   laboring successfully in the cause of Christ in New York, removed to
   Ashgrove, where he ended his days in the service of his God, and where
   he lies entombed, mingling his ashes with his relatives who have
   followed him to the grave, waiting for the "final doom," when the trump
   of God shall awaken him to life and immortality. Capt. Webb, after
   "sowing the good seed of the kingdom" in various places in this
   country, returned to Europe, and spent the remainder of us days in
   "kindling the fire" of divine love in the hearts of God's people, in
   warning sinners of their impending danger, and pointing penitent
   mourners to the "Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the world."
   While therefore the one shall arise at the voice of the Son of God"
   from his "dusty bed" in America, and receive the plaudits of those of
   her sons and daughters who were brought to God by his ministry, the
   other shall come forth in obedience to the same mandate from his
   resting-place in England, and hail each other blessed amid the shouts
   of the redeemed, while all, whether white or black, whether from the
   eastern or western continent, shall unitedly, and with one voice,
   ascribe the GLORY OF THEIR SALVATION To GOD AND HIS LAMB FOR EVER.

   In the meanwhile, were the happy spirits of these individuals, so
   obscure in their life time, and by some considered as merely "honest
   and loving enthusiasts," permitted to look down on this American
   continent, and behold the thousands which have been "taken out of the
   horrible pit and miry clay," and had "their robes washed and made white
   in the blood of the Lamb," since they commenced their humble efforts in
   the city of New York, would not their souls exult in praises to God and
   the Lamb for having redeemed them from the earth, and placed them among
   the princes of his people!

   Captain Webb was no doubt somewhat eccentric in his movements, limited
   in his knowledge, and of moderate talents as a preacher of the gospel;
   but, from the testimony of Mr. Wesley and others who knew him well, his
   soul was fired with an ardent zeal for God, and was drawn out with an
   unquenchable thirst for the salvation of his fellow-men, and the
   building up of the Redeemer's kingdom. As such, God honored him with
   his blessing -- and as such we honor his memory, and record this feeble
   tribute of respect to him, as one of the first Wesleyan preachers who
   published the gospel on these American shores.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 121,687; Last Year: 114,727;
   Increase: 6,890 -- Colored This Year: 30,308; Last Year: 29,863;
   Increase: 445 -- Total This Year: 151,995; Last Year: 144,590 --
   Increase: 7,405 -- Preachers This Year: 540; Last Year: 516; Increase:
   24.

  1809

   The same number of conferences was held this year as last, and they
   were attended by the two bishops in the usual manner.

   Several new circuits were added within the bounds of the Western
   conference, by which the work in that country was considerably
   enlarged. And, in addition to the sketches which have already been
   given of the commencement and progress of Methodism in Ohio, may be
   added the following, taken chiefly from the narrative of the Rev. Henry
   Smith, who was among the first who carried the gospel into some
   portions of the country bordering upon the Ohio, and lying between the
   Big and Little Miami rivers, and the Sciota river.

   It seems that as early as 1799 Mr. Smith visited the settlements along
   the banks of the Miami river, including the Miami and Sciota counties,
   and being assisted by Mr. Hunt, formed a six weeks' circuit, which they
   traveled with no small difficulty. He found the country thinly
   inhabited, but among those who had settled there, were a number who had
   been Methodists in the countries whence they came, some retaining their
   piety, and others in a backslidden state. On the Scioto Bush creek, and
   at the mouth of the Scioto river, he found several Methodist families,
   among the latter of whom was a local preacher by the name of William
   Jackson. Here he formed a class.

   Over this country, along the banks of the Miamis and their tributary
   streams, he traveled, often exposed to hardships and privations which
   few could well endure, but was abundantly compensated by a
   consciousness of the divine approbation, and by witnessing the blessing
   of God on his labors. Many sinners were brought to the knowledge of the
   truth by his agency, who afterward brought forth the fruits of
   righteousness to the glory of God.

   From this time, as we have already seen, the work continued to spread
   in various directions, until the time of which we now speak, when Miami
   was the district of a presiding elder, with six circuits, employing
   thirteen preachers, including the presiding elder; and in 1810 there
   were four thousand seven hundred and eighty-four members in the Church.

   Though we had no Missionary Society at that time, nor consequently any
   funds for the support of those who went into the new settlements, yet
   Bishop Asbury was in the habit, as he passed through the more wealthy
   portions of the work, of soliciting donations from benevolent
   individuals for the purpose of sustaining those who might volunteer
   their services to "break up new ground," as it was then not unaptly
   called. And this year we find Robert Cloud attached as a missionary to
   the Muskingum district, James H. Mellard to the Seleuda district, to
   labor between the Ashley and Savannah rivers, and James E. Glenn to the
   Camden district, to occupy the country between Santee and Cooper
   rivers. By this means, the gospel was sent to these destitute
   settlements, "without money and without price." William Case was also
   sent as a missionary to Detroit in the Michigan territory; and an
   attempt was made to introduce the gospel at the Three rivers in Lower
   Canada, a place about midway between Montreal and Quebec.

   A new circuit was formed this year in the bounds of the western
   conference, called Cold Water, Upper Louisiana, in the fork of the
   Mississippi, by the labors of John Crane, a young man of precocious
   genius, and remarkable for the early exhibitions of talent and piety,
   and those powers of pulpit oratory which attract the attention of the
   multitude. In this new country he had a full opportunity for the
   exercise of all his energies in contending with hardship; in combating
   the errors and prejudices of the people, and in striving to establish
   societies in the pure doctrines of Christ. He succeeded so far as to
   return the next year seventy-five members of the Church as the fruits
   of his ministry. He was reappointed in 1810 to the same field of labor,
   with the Missouri circuit added to Cold Water, which made his rides
   long, and the more difficult, for want of roads and bridges, as he was
   frequently obliged to swim his horse over the Missouri river in passing
   from one appointment to another -- a practice by no means uncommon in
   those days, when the forests were falling beneath the strokes of the
   woodsman's axe, and the traveler was wending his way by Indian tracks,
   or merely guided by marked trees.

   In addition to this enlargement of the field of labor in the exterior
   settlements, prosperity attended the efforts of God's servants in
   various portions of the work, in the older countries, and in several of
   the principal cities.

   The brethren in Boston had suffered much inconvenience on account of
   the smallness of their house of worship. To remedy this inconvenience,
   they had commenced a larger house in Bloomfield lane, some two or three
   years before; but as the members of the society were comparatively
   poor, they found themselves embarrassed with a heavy debt, which they
   were unable to pay. To relieve them from this pressure, the General
   Conference of 1808 had authorized a general subscription to be taken
   among the more wealthy societies, by which they were enabled to pay off
   a portion of their debt, and thus to accommodate the people who wished
   to attend the Methodist ministry. This gave a new impulse to the cause
   in that city, and it has steadily progressed from that time with more
   encouraging success than heretofore.

   The camp-meetings continued to be held more generally than ever, and
   were owned of God to the awakening and conversion of sinners, and
   tended much to quicken the people of God in their own souls, and to
   stimulate them to more vigorous exertions for the salvation of others.
   And as this history may be read by some who have never attended these
   meetings, it may not be out of place to give a description of the
   manner in which they are attended.

   We have already seen that they were introduced casually, or it may be
   more proper to say, providentially, in the western country, at a
   sacramental occasion, when such a number of people attended that no
   house could be found large enough to accommodate them. The good effects
   resulting from these meetings soon led to a regular method of holding
   them in different parts of the country by previous appointment and
   preparation. For this purpose, a grove is generally selected, in the
   neighborhood of good water, and, if possible, in such a place that the
   people may go by water, in sloops or steam-boats. The under brush is
   cleared away, seats of boards or plank and a stand for the preachers
   are prepared in convenient order. On the ground thus prepared tents are
   erected, from twenty to two hundred in number, of different sizes and
   material, some of cloth and some of boards, but more generally of the
   former. These temporary shelters are of various sizes, some for single
   families, and some sufficiently large to hold from twenty to fifty, and
   perhaps a hundred individuals, and others, for the accommodation of
   such as choose it, are for boarding-tents.

   On the day appointed, the people are seen assembling from various
   directions, some in carriages or wagons from the country, and a
   multitude of others from the cities and villages along the water
   course; in sloops or steamboats, with their bedding, cooking utensils
   and provisions; for the meeting generally continues four or five days,
   and in some instances eight or nine days. These all repair to their
   places, and, if not already done for them, erect their tents, and
   prepare for the solemn exercises of the meeting.

   The tents are generally arranged in a circular form in front of the
   stand, and in those held in the neighborhood of the city of New York,
   with which I am best acquainted, the rows of tents are from three to
   six deep, and arranged on several streets, numbered and labeled, so
   that they may be distinguished one from another, and passed between.
   The fires for cooking are in general behind the tents, so that the
   people may not be discommoded with the smoke, &c.

   Lamps are prepared, and suspended on the trunks of the trees, and on
   the preachers' stand, in sufficient number to illuminate the entire
   encampment, and each tent must have a light burning in it through the
   night, and the utmost pains are taken to see that no disorderly conduct
   be allowed on the ground by either night or day. The rules and orders
   of the meeting are generally as follows, varying so as to suit
   different circumstances: --
    1. he times of preaching are at 10 o'clock, A. M., and 3 and 7
       o'clock, P. M., notice of which is given by the sound of a trumpet
       or horn at the preachers' stand.
    2. The intermediate time between preaching is occupied in prayer
       meetings, singing, and exhortation.
    3. In time of worship persons are prohibited from walking to and fro,
       talking, smoking, or otherwise disturbing the solemnities of the
       meeting.
    4. All are required, except on the last night of the meeting; to be in
       their tents at to 10 o'clock, P. M., and to arise at 5, A. M.
    5. At 6 o'clock, A M., they are required to take their breakfast,
       before which family prayer is attended in each tent occupied by a
       family.
    6. In time of preaching all are required to attend, except one to take
       care of the tent.
    7. That these rules may be observed, they are published from the
       stand, and a committee appointed to enforce them.
    8. A watch is generally appointed to superintend the encampment at
       night, to keep order, to see that no strangers are on the ground,
       and to detect any disorderly conduct.
    9. In some places there are large tents provided, at the expense of
       the society to which they belong, for the purpose of holding prayer
       meetings, more particularly in the evening, or in rainy weather.
   10. In the city of New York the entire arrangement and preparation of
       the meeting, providing tents, putting them up and taking them down,
       is under the superintendence of a committee appointed for that
       purpose by the presiding elder of the district, who also procure
       the steamboat to take the people to and from the meeting; and each
       person who chooses to go pays a certain amount, commonly about one
       dollar, for passage, use of tent, fuel, straw, &c.

   This is a general description of a camp-meeting. The number attending
   varies from five hundred to ten thousand -- and, as we have before
   seen, when they were first introduced in the west, to twenty thousand
   in proportion to the paucity or density of the population. That good
   has resulted from these meetings must be evident to every impartial
   person who has either attended them or witnessed their effects --
   although it must be admitted that some accidental evils have flowed
   from them. But these have originated chiefly from the attendance of
   persons who have gone for other purposes than to worship God. Though
   most of the state legislatures have passed laws to protect the free
   exercise of religious meetings, and some to protect camp-meetings in
   particular, yet there are those in the community who, actuated by
   mercenary motives, will go and set up hucksters' shops, sell strong
   liquors and other things, and then invite the thoughtless rabble to
   convene for convivial purposes, to the annoyance of the peaceable
   worshipers of God. These have often created disturbance; and they
   always, when arranged along the road leading to the encampment, present
   a spectacle to the sober mind of a disgusting character. But they who
   provide those things and partake of them, are alone responsible for the
   evils which they create. Neither camp-meetings nor those who attend
   them for religious purposes are accountable for the disorderly conduct
   of those who, in defiance of law, of religion, and decency, violate the
   order of the meeting, and bring on themselves the disgrace of being
   disturbers of the peace. For such conduct the friends of camp-meetings
   are no more responsible than the builders of churches and those who
   peaceably worship God in them, are accountable for any disturbance
   which a wicked rabble may make within, or for the conduct of a riotous
   mob without these sacred temples.

   Were all who come within the encampment, or who go to the meeting, to
   observe the order prescribed, there need be no more disorder than there
   should be in a house of worship.

   It has been objected that professors of religion themselves often
   violate the rules of religious order by unseemly gesticulations and
   boisterous exclamations. It may, indeed, be so -- and we no more
   justify these things than we do the same exceptionable conduct in other
   places -- but there is nothing in the time, the place, or the object of
   coming together, which need excite these censurable manifestations,
   more than in any other place of worship. "Let all things be done
   decently and in order" at camp-meetings, and they shall still be
   rendered a blessing, as they have heretofore been, to the souls of the
   people. There is greater danger at present arising from their
   degenerating into seasons of idle recreation, that of their being
   abused by ranting fanaticism. In the neighborhood of large cities,
   where the meetings are easy of access by steamboats, which ply
   constantly to and from the encampment, there is an alluring temptation
   for the idle and the gay, as well as for the luke-warm professors of
   religion, to go to the meetings as mere matters of amusement, and thus
   to make the nominal service of God a pretext to gratify a roving and
   inquisitive disposition. Whenever these and similar evils shall
   threaten to counterbalance the good, the friends of pure religion will
   either apply the corrective or abandon camp-meetings as a nuisance or
   as a means susceptible of an incurable abuse. But while they are kept
   under the control of a sober judgment, and attended from a pure desire
   to advance the cause of Christ, they will be patronized by the pious as
   one of the prudential means of effecting the salvation of men.

   I know not that I can furnish the reader with a juster idea of a well
   conducted camp-meeting, than by inserting the following account of one
   held at Cowharbor, Long Island, in the state of New York, August 11,
   1818. It was written indeed under the impulse of those vivid sensations
   which were produced by a participation in the solemn exercises of the
   occasion, and by a glow of fervent feeling which may have betrayed the
   writer into a warmth of expression which none but those similarly
   situated know how to interpret and appreciate. If this, however, be a
   fault, it should be considered a pardonable one, as it arises
   principally from a strong and lively feeling of devotion which the
   writer felt at the time; and yet, I humbly trust, it was written under
   the dictates of a cool and reflecting judgment, chastened and hallowed
   by a grateful recollection of the goodness of God. The following is the
   account alluded to: --

   "An unusual number of people were assembled on Tuesday, when the
   exercises began under the most favorable auspices. The word of the Lord
   which was delivered, was received by the people with apparent eagerness
   and delight. Great peace and harmony prevailed; and the prayers of
   God's people were fervent and incessant. In the evening there were some
   conversions.

   There were between forty and fifty sloops in the harbor; and it was
   judged that there were from six to eight thousand people on the
   encampment; and, what was most desirable, great order and solemnity
   prevailed.

   According to the order of the meeting, the people this night retired to
   rest at ten o'clock. The next morning opened a delightful prospect to a
   contemplative mind. The rising sun in the east, darting his lucid beams
   through the grove, which was now rendered vocal by the voice of morning
   prayer in the several tents, announced the superintending care, and
   proclaimed the majesty of him who maketh the sun to rise on the evil
   and on the good. The gentle zephyrs softly whispering through the
   foliage of the beautiful grove, now consecrated to God, was an
   expressive emblem of that divine Spirit which so sweetly filled the
   soul and tranquilized all the passions of the human heart. Not a
   turbulent passion was permitted to interrupt the sacred peace and
   divine harmony which the heavenly Dove had imparted to God's beloved
   people. The exercises of this day were solemn, impressive, and divinely
   animating. The falling tear from many eyes witnessed the inward anguish
   which was produced in the hearts of sinners by the word of eternal
   truth. Whose trembling sinners, groaning under the weight of their
   sins, were encircled by God's people, and lifted to his throne in the
   arms of faith and prayer. Some were disburdened of their load; and
   their shouts of praise testified that Jesus had become their Friend.

   "The departure of the sun under the western horizon indicated the time
   to have arrived for the intelligent creation to lose themselves once
   more in

   Tired nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep.'

   But, while some obeyed the impulse of nature, and suffered the soft
   slumbers of the evening shades to lock up their external senses,
   others, animated by the love of God, and attracted by the sympathetic
   groans of wounded sinners whose piercing cries ascended to heaven,
   committing themselves to the protection of God, assembled in groups,
   and united their petitions and intercessions to almighty God in behalf
   of themselves and their mourning fellow-creatures. Neither did they
   labor in vain; for some of these mourning penitents entered into the
   liberties of the gospel. About midnight I was attracted by the shouts
   of an intimate friend, who had been sometime overwhelmed upon the stand
   with the power of God. In company with some of the young disciples of
   Christ, I drew near, while he proclaimed the wonders of redeeming love.
   I at first looked on with the criticizing eye of cool philosophy,
   determined not to be carried away with passionate exclamations. Bracing
   myself as much as possible, I was resolved my passions should not get
   the ascendancy over my judgment. But, in spite of all my philosophy, my
   prejudice, and my resistance, my heart suddenly melted like wax before
   the fire, and my nerves seemed in a moment relaxed. These devout
   exercises were finally interrupted by a shower of rain; but the showers
   of grace descended so plentifully that sleep could not be persuaded to
   visit many of our eyes. So we sang

   With thee all night I mean to stay, And wrestle till the break of day.'

   The next day was remarkable on account of the presence of "Him who
   dwelt in the bush." The sermons were pointed, lively, and solemn. The
   prayers were ardent, faithful, and persevering. The singing melodious,
   and calculated to elevate the mind to the third heaven. The shouts of
   redeeming love were solemnly delightful; and the cries of penitent
   sinners deep and piercing. Notwithstanding the almost incessant labors
   of the last twenty-four hours, when night came on many seemed
   determined not to intermit their religious exercises. Their souls being
   knit together by divine love, they persevered in their prayers and
   exhortations; some heavy-laden sinners, delivered from their sins, were
   enabled to praise God for his pardoning mercy.

   Friday was the day appointed to close our meeting. It had been
   unusually solemn, and profitable to many, very many souls; and the hour
   of separation was anticipated with reluctance. The exercises of this
   day were attended with an uncommon manifestation of the power and
   presence of God. The mournful cries of penitent sinners were many and
   strong; and the professors of religion were ardently engaged in praying
   for them; and not a few were groaning for full redemption in the blood
   of the Lamb. While engaged in this exercise, some of the preachers were
   baptized afresh with the holy Ghost and fire; and their cup ran over
   with love to God and to the souls of men.

   "After the meeting was closed, circumstances rendered it expedient for
   the people from New York, and some others, to remain on the ground
   another night. This news was received by most of the people with
   delightful sensations. Indeed, the place had become a sanctified Bethel
   to our souls.

   "At 6 o'clock, P. M., the people were summoned to the stand for
   preaching. The preacher who was to address them, after singing and
   prayer, read the following text: -- God, who at sundry times and in
   divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,
   hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son.' Not being able to
   proceed, a preacher standing near one of the tents, perceiving his
   situation, went on the stand, took the text which had been read, and
   made some observations upon it, which were attended with divine
   authority, and with the unction of the Holy One. Many fell to the
   ground under the mighty power of God, while the shouts of the redeemed
   seemed to rend the heavens, and to be carried on the waves of the
   undulating air to the distant hills, and in their rolling melody
   proclaimed the praises of Him who sits upon the throne and of the Lamb.

   This was one of the most awfully solemn scenes my eyes ever beheld.
   Such a sense of the ineffable Majesty rested upon my soul, that I was
   lost in astonishment, wonder, and profound adoration. Human language
   cannot express the solemn, the delighted, the deep and joyful sensation
   which pervaded my soul. Nor me alone. It was a general shower of divine
   love. It seemed as if the windows of heaven were opened, and such a
   blessing poured out that there was scarcely room to contain it. The
   glory of the God-man shone with divine luster all around, and filled
   every believing heart. Singing, prayer, and exhortation were continued
   more or less until 3 o'clock next morning, the hour appointed to
   prepare to leave the consecrated ground. Many were the subjects of
   converting grace; and great was the joy of the happy Christians.

   About 8 o'clock, A. M., Saturday, those of us from the city embarked in
   the steamboat "Connecticut," [commanded by] Captain Bunker, whose
   polite attention deserves our warmest thanks. It seemed like leaving
   the place of the divine Shekinah, and going into the world again -- but
   still the presence of our God rested upon us.

   "I trust the fruits of this camp-meeting will be extensively witnessed.
   Not only sinners were awakened and converted, but very many believers
   were quickened, and the work of grace was deepened in their heart's;
   and some who had been languid in their spiritual enjoyments formed
   resolutions to be entirely devoted to God. May they never violate their
   solemn vow, nor suffer their serious impressions to be effaced. Let no
   vain amusement, no trifling company, nor any worldly concern divert
   your attention, ye young professors of religion, or ever efface from
   your minds those solemn impressions of God, and of his goodness, which
   you have received.

   "The writer of this imperfect sketch feels as if he should praise God
   in eternity for this camp-meeting. What a sacred fire has been kindled
   at this holy altar. May many waters never extinguish it. It is not a
   transient blaze or a sudden ecstasy. No; my soul bows with submission
   to my God, and thankfully acknowledges the continuance of his loving
   kindness. The bare recollection of that solemn pause -- when Jesus
   spoke -- with a voice more melodious than all the harps of the muses --
   fills my soul with solemn delight.

   "Sometimes when I have indulged in the cool speculations which worldly
   prudence would suggest, so many objections have been raised in my mind
   against camp meetings, that I have been ready to proclaim war against
   them; but these objections have uniformly been obviated. By witnessing
   the beneficial effects of the meetings while attending them. My
   theories have all been torn in pieces while testing them by actual
   experiment -- but never more effectually than by the last. This is more
   convincing than all the arguments in the world. What I experience I
   know; and hundreds of others, equally competent to decide, would, were
   they called upon, bear a similar testimony. O ye happy souls that were
   bathed in the love of God at this meeting! May you ever evince to the
   world by the uniformity of your Christian conduct, that such meetings
   are highly useful.

   "An indescribable pleasure is even now felt from reviewing those
   moments of solemn delight, while our kindred spirits, attracted by the
   love of Jesus Christ, joyfully adored the God of our salvation. May
   such seasons of refreshing often return. O! the depth of redeeming
   love!

   Angel minds are lost to ponder Dying love's mysterious cause.'

   "One thing which contributed greatly to the promotion of the cause of
   God at this meeting was the order and regularity which prevailed. There
   was little or no disturbance from spectators; and but little confusion
   in any of the religious exercises. Sometimes, indeed, the ardor of the
   mind, when powerfully operated upon by the Spirit of God, would lead it
   to break over the bounds of moderation; but in general the exercises
   were conducted with much decorum and regularity. Hymns were selected
   which were solemn and impressive; and the prayers and exhortations, as
   well as the preaching, all indicated that the mind was under the
   direction of grace.

   "How many were brought to the experience of redeeming grace, cannot be
   correctly ascertained; but the number must have been very considerable.
   New York, as well as other places, will, trust, be greatly profited by
   means of this meeting. A general quickening is already witnessed, and
   some sinners have been awakened and converted since our return. May
   their numbers be continually multiplied."

   That the reader may see that similar effects attended camp-meetings in
   other parts of the country, I give the following, which was written by
   the Rev. William Beauchamp -- since gone to his reward -- who was
   remarkable for the coolness and soundness of his judgment, and freedom
   from every thing bordering upon enthusiasm. This account is as follows:
   --

   "A camp-meeting was lately held, about thirty-five miles from this
   place, in a southwesterly direction, under the superintendence of
   brother John Stewart, the traveling Methodist preacher having the
   charge of Mount Carmel circuit. It commenced on the afternoon of
   Friday, the 20th day of last month, and closed on the morning of the
   following Monday. The congregation was not large, usually about three
   hundred souls; on the Sabbath perhaps six hundred. This meeting was
   remarkable for seriousness, solemnity, and good order. Such a sense of
   the divine presence appeared to rest on the assembly, that those who
   might have been disposed to be rude were restrained, and awed into
   respectful deportment. It was obvious that the ministers who addressed
   the people were clothed, both in their sermons and exhortations, with
   power from on high; for their word fell upon the congregation in the
   demonstration of the Holy Ghost. Divine illumination seemed, at times,
   to flash like lightning upon the assembly, and produced the most
   powerful effects. The mild splendor of heavenly joy shone in the faces
   of the people of God; while the darkness of condemnation and the
   horrors of guilt hung, like the shadows of death, upon the countenances
   of the ungodly. The merciful power of God was manifested in a
   particular manner in the conviction of sinners and the justification of
   mourning penitents while believers were not destitute of its divine
   influence, by which they drank deeper into the spirit of holiness.

   "In the intervals of preaching, it was common to see a number of
   mourning souls prostrate near the stand, for whom supplications were
   offered unto a throne of grace. And they were not offered in vain.
   About twenty professed to be reconciled to God through faith in the
   blood of Christ. Several joined our Church.

   On Monday morning, under the last sermon preached at this meeting, we
   seemed to be in the very suburbs of heaven. The subject was, The
   inheritance of the saints in light.' The preacher, apparently swallowed
   up in the subject, bore the congregation away with him into the
   celestial regions, in the contemplation of the glories of the world to
   come. It was a very precious time to the religious part of the
   assembly; and the irreligious part, I doubt not, received some very
   strong and deep impressions of the eternal world. I know not that there
   was one dry eye in the whole assembly.

   "On the Friday following another camp-meeting commenced in the
   neighborhood of this place. In respect to numbers it was similar to the
   former one; nor was it less remarkable in regard to seriousness,
   solemnity, and good order. In this respect I can truly say, that,
   though I have been at many camp-meetings, I never saw such as these
   before. We had no guard; and at the last meeting no rules, for the
   regulations of it, were published. We needed none. God was our defense
   and salvation. He encamped with us in his gracious and glorious
   presence, to awe the wicked into respect for his worship, and to shed
   upon the children of faith the richest effusions of divine grace.

   "The latter of these meetings was different, in some respects, from the
   former. The preaching did not appear to be attended with so much power,
   and such displays of divine illumination. But the prayer-meetings in
   the intervals were more abundantly distinguished by the communication
   of justifying grace, in answer to the supplications of the people of
   God. About forty-five professed to receive the forgiveness of sins, and
   twenty-three offered themselves to become members of our Church.

   "One circumstance is worthy of particular notice, A Scotch family,
   remarkable for good breeding and propriety of deportment, attended this
   meeting. They were eight in number; the elderly gentleman, his lady,
   three daughters, two sons, and a nephew. The female head of this family
   was not destitute of the knowledge of salvation by the remission of
   sins. This treasure she had obtained in her native country. But the
   rest were not in possession of this pearl of great price. However, in
   the course of a few hours, at this meeting, they were all power fully
   convicted, and, I have reason to believe, truly converted to God.

   "This is a singular circumstance. Such a family as this was is rarely
   found; and the conversion of seven persons out of eight belonging to
   it, under such circumstances, within the compass of a few hours, is,
   perhaps, almost without a parallel. It will not escape the notice of
   the pious mind, accustomed to reflect n the workings of nature and the
   operations of grace, that the self-righteousness of such persons
   generally presents the strongest barrier against faith. But the power
   of divine grace broke down this barrier in them; then they sunk, in
   humble confidence, on the merits of the Redeemer.

   "The presiding elder who attended this meeting, informed me that many
   camp-meetings had been held in his district, and that they had been
   generally blessed with great displays of divine power. Since then I
   have received information through another medium, that a camp-meeting
   held not far from Shawneetown in this state was favored with an
   abundant outpouring of the grace of God. More than thirty persons
   professed to obtain the remission of their sins.

   "The writer of this communication has remarked for a number of years
   past, that a large proportion of those who are brought to the
   possession of the life and power of godliness, are found among the
   rising generation. This was particularly so at the meetings above
   mentioned. Does this not strongly portend that God is about to effect
   some great and glorious purpose in favor of his church, by the
   generation which is to succeed us? Thanks be unto his name for what he
   has done. But he has more in store for our world than we can readily
   conceive. May his goodness be manifested in such gracious displays of
   Almighty Power as will bear down all opposition. Amen.

   "Mount Carmel, Illinois, Aug. 15, 1821."

   These accounts, together with the preceding historical sketches and
   remarks, will enable the dispassionate reader to form an estimate of
   the character of camp-meetings, and of their effects upon the church
   and society generally.

   No less than fifty-three preachers located this year; eight were
   returned superannuated, and one was expelled.

   Three preachers, namely, Edmund Henly, Leonard Cassell, and Henry
   Martin, had ended their days in peace. They were all comparatively
   young in the ministry, but had discharged its duties with fidelity,
   giving evidence of fervent piety and improving talents.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 131,154; Last Year: 121,687;
   Increase: 9,467 -- Colored This Year: 31,884; Last Year: 30,308;
   Increase: 1,576 -- Total This Year: 163,038; Last Year: 151,995 --
   Increase: 11,043 -- Preachers This Year: 597; Last Year: 540; Increase:
   57.

  1810

   This year the Genesee Conference was formed, making eight in all. Such
   had been the increase of preachers and people in western New York and
   in the Canadas, particularly in the upper province, that the bishops
   thought it advisable, in the exercise of the authority invested in them
   by the last General Conference, to set off a new conference for the
   accommodation of that part of the work.

   This year the Western conference was held in Cincinnati, Ohio where
   Methodism had grown up with the growth of the place, and strengthened
   with its strength. And is this considered the "queen city" of the west,
   perhaps it may not be amiss to give some account of its location and
   first settlements, as well as the progress of the gospel among its
   inhabitants.

   Cincinnati was first laid out as a town in 1789, when the copulation
   could not have been more that between two and three hundred, for in
   1800 it was only seven hundred and fifty -- whereas now it numbers more
   than forty thousand.

   It is beautifully located on the western bank of the Ohio river, in
   Hamilton county, on a plain, the hills behind it rising like a spacious
   amphitheater, giving a commanding view of the city, the Ohio river, and
   the surrounding country, variegated as it is by hill and dale.

   By whom and at what time Methodism was introduced into Cincinnati, I
   have not been able to learn, but presume it must have been about the
   year 1800, under the labors of Henry Smith, as he formed what was
   called the Miami circuit about that time, to which Cincinnati was
   attached until the year 1809. In the year 1805 Bishops Asbury and
   Whatcoat visited the town, and put up at the house of William Lives. At
   that time there were few in the place who feared God, and but a small
   society of Methodists. Bishop Asbury, however, gave them a discourse on
   "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found." [25] In 1807 bishop Asbury
   was again in Cincinnati, and remarks that the brethren had succeeded in
   building a stone house of worship, forty feet by thirty, which, it is
   presumed, was the first built in that city. Here he preached on
   Sabbath, Sept. 26, to a crowded house, and then met the society and
   ordained W. McNeachan and William Whitiker to the office of deacon.
   [26]

   Before his arrival in Cincinnati the bishop had attended a camp-meeting
   at Hockhocking, and a conference at Chillicothie, of which he speaks as
   having a salutary effect upon the minds of the people.
   "Notwithstanding," he remarks, opposition from more than one quarter,
   our last camp-meeting was successful; the fruit is immediate; and where
   it is not it will yet be seen."

   In 1808, after traversing various parts of the country, attending camp
   and other meetings, we find him, in company with Henry Boehm, who
   preached to the people of Cincinnati in the German language, again in
   this place, where he preached on Sabbath morning to the people with
   much satisfaction, and again at 3 o'clock in the house of brother
   Lakin. He says in this connection, "I have advised the society here to
   invite the Western yearly conference to hold their session in
   Cincinnati."

   The next year, in company with Bishop McKendree, we find him once more
   in Cincinnati, when he remarks: -- "The house here is enlarged, and the
   society increased." Until the year 1809, the Miami circuit included
   Cincinnati, and contained one thousand two hundred and eighty church
   members. But at the conference for 1809 the name of the circuit was
   changed to Cincinnati, and Miami became the name of a new district.
   This year, 1810, there are returned on the minutes of conference for
   Cincinnati, eight hundred and twenty-one church members, under the
   charge of two preachers; but whether it included any other places than
   the city, I cannot tell.

   This year, as before said, in accordance with the advice of bishop
   Asbury, the Western conference was held in Cincinnati. He arrived there
   on Thursday, the 27th of September, and on Sunday preached morning and
   evening, met the society on Monday, and "I felt," says he, "an intimate
   communion with God, and great love to the people, saints and poor
   sinners;" and on Tuesday he "bid farewell to our loving and
   affectionate friends in Cincinnati," with a view to make an excursion
   into the country before the assembling of the conference, that no time
   might be lost in idleness or unnecessary recreation.

   The conference commenced on Thursday, Nov. 1, and it "progressed on
   well" during its sessions, and they found an increase of four thousand
   for the past year. Bishop McKendree was present at this time, and on
   Sabbath preached to the conference and the people who assembled.

   Last year a new district was formed in the Western conference, called
   Indiana, and this year two new circuits, Cape Girrideau and Vincennes,
   were added to it, making in all six circuits, under the charge of
   Samuel Parker; whose labors in that part of the country were rendered a
   blessing to many. By this it will be seen that the work was still
   spreading in the west, keeping pace with the growing population of the
   country, so that the ordinances of religion might be established
   simultaneously with their civil and domestic institutions.

   Vincennes is the oldest town in the state, and was settled, as its name
   indicates, by the French, as early as 1690, at the time when that
   enterprising nation, to secure their American colonies from the
   depredations of other nations, were stretching a line of military posts
   and small settlements from Quebec up the St. Lawrence, and along the
   shores of the lakes and rivers to New Orleans. But though thus early
   settled, its increase for a considerable time was exceedingly slow,
   exhibiting none of those marks of industry and rapid population which
   have more recently distinguished the rising counties and states of the
   west. It is stated indeed, that in 1800 the entire territory of Indiana
   contained only five thousand six hundred and forty one inhabitants; but
   in 1820, four years after it was admitted into the federal Union, it
   contained a population of one hundred and forty-seven thousand one
   hundred and seventy-eight; and in 1810, the time of which we are
   speaking, there were twenty-four thousand five hundred and twenty
   inhabitants -- quite a sufficient number to demand the exertions, of a
   gospel ministry.

   The district over which Mr. Parker presided, included a large tract of
   country comprehending portions of Illinois, Missouri, and Indiana; and
   the two circuits above named, namely, Cape Girrideau and Vincennes,
   were traveled, the first by Jesse Walker and the second by William
   Winans. They must have cultivated this rugged field with considerable
   success, for we find in the minutes of conference for the next year,
   for Cape Girrideau, one hundred, and Vincennes one hundred and
   twenty-five members, and for the entire district, one thousand and
   nine.

   We have mentioned that there was a great work of God in the city of New
   York in the two preceding years; and perhaps from the time the Society
   was formed in this city, there had not been so general a revival as
   this. In the two years the increase of members amounted to not less
   than five hundred and ninety-seven, making in all, including white and
   colored, two thousand; and a spirit of zeal seemed to characterize the
   entire body of Methodists in the city, so much so that in the year 1810
   two new churches were built, one in Allen, and the other in Bedford
   Street, known then as Greenwich village and the good work still
   progressed with encouraging success in most of the churches.

   In other portions of the church there were prosperous times, and
   generally great peace and harmony prevailed through all our borders.

   Locations, however, still continued to weaken the ministry, by
   depriving the Church of some of its more experienced ministers; for not
   less than fifty-one desisted from traveling this year in the several
   annual conferences; twelve were returned supernumerary; ten
   superannuated, and two, Reuben Hubbard and Clement Hickman, withdrew,
   the first of whom joined the Protestant Episcopal Church, and, it is to
   be hoped, retained his usefulness. Moses Black, Joseph Everett, and
   John Wilson had died in the Lord.

   Joseph Everett was, in many respects, a remarkable man. He was a native
   of Queen Anns county, Maryland, and was born June 17th, 1732. Educated
   in the English Church, he was early biased in favor of her forms and
   ceremonies, though, as to the fundamental doctrines of the Church, or
   experimental and practical religion, he was entirely indifferent, and
   so remained until the year 1763, when he was awakened and converted by
   the preaching of the "New Lights," the followers of Mr. Whitefield. He
   accordingly became a member of the Presbyterian Church; but having only
   few associates like-minded with himself, and drinking in the doctrine
   of unconditional predestination, he gradually lost his religious
   enjoyment, and finally became more vicious than ever. In this state he
   continued for many years, during which time he volunteered as a soldier
   in the militia of Maryland in defense of his country's rights in the
   time of the Revolutionary war; but in 1778, under the preaching of Mr.
   Asbury, he was aroused from his spiritual lethargy, and induced to seek
   again for redemption in the blood of Christ. After many hard struggles
   with unbelief and a rebellious heart, he was restored to the favor of
   God, and by consulting the able and luminous writings of Wesley and
   Fletcher, he was led to a new view of the plan of redemption and the
   way of salvation by faith in Christ, and more especially to, an
   enlarged and more comprehensive view of the divine goodness toward our
   fallen world.

   The result was, that he joined the Methodist Church, and in 1780
   entered the traveling ministry.

   Here was a new field for the exercise of his talents -- and it soon
   appeared that he was indeed anointed of God to preach the gospel. He
   was eminently distinguished for the boldness, the pointedness,
   plainness, and energy with which he rebuked sin, and warned the sinner
   of his danger. And these searching appeals to the consciences of his
   hearers, made them tremble under the fearful apprehension of the wrath
   of God, and their high responsibility to him for their conduct. Great
   was the success which attended his faithful admonitions; for wherever
   he went he was like a flame of fire darting conviction into the
   understanding and conscience of the ungodly, and at the same time
   pointing the penitent to the blood of the Lamb for pardon and
   salvation.

   In this work he continued with untiring industry and indefatigable
   perseverance until, worn down with labor and toil, in 1804, he received
   a superannuated relation, but still bearing his pointed testimony for
   God as long as he was able to speak in his name, and manifesting to the
   last an unshaken confidence in God, and an unabated attachment to the
   doctrines and discipline of the church of his choice.

   He died at Dr. White's, in Dorchester county, Maryland, it being the
   house whence he set out on his itinerant life, and on the circuit which
   he first traveled, on the 16th day of October, 1809, in the
   seventy-eighth year of his age, and thirtieth of his ministry. His last
   end "was peace and assurance for ever." At about twelve o'clock of the
   night on which he died, he awoke from a gentle slumber, and immediately
   broke forth in praise, shouting glory to God. In this exercise he
   continued for about twenty five minutes, to the joy and astonishment of
   his friends, and then ceased to speak and breathe at once.

   The name of Joseph Everett deserves to be enrolled among the early
   veterans of the cross of Christ. He joined the ranks of Methodism in
   its infancy in this country, and contributed largely to fix it on that
   broad basis on which it has since stood unshaken amid the storms and
   billows with which it had to contend.

   It would, indeed, seem that the Methodist preachers of those days were
   so imbued with the spirit of their Master, and so entirely absorbed in
   their peculiar work, that they thought of little else but saving souls
   from death. And so deeply penetrated were they with the "exceeding
   sinfulness of sin," that their rebukes to the sinner were sometimes
   tremendously awful, and fearfully pointed and solemn. This was
   peculiarly so with Mr. Everett. His whole soul seemed to be thrown into
   his subject whenever he preached, and his warnings and entreaties were
   enough to melt the stoutest heart, while he wound the cord of truth so
   tightly around the sinner's conscience as to make him writhe and
   tremble under the wounds it inflicted. But he left him not here to
   welter in his blood. He presented to his troubled mind the "sin-atoning
   Victim," as a "balm for every wound," and as now ready, to "appoint to
   him the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the
   spirit of heaviness." The rich promises of the gospel to penitent
   sinners dropped from his lips like honey descending from the
   honey-comb, and when believingly received by such, he rejoiced over
   them as a father rejoices over a returning prodigal, while with the
   happy believer he participated in all the fullness of perfect love.

   John Wilson was an Englishman by birth, born in Poulten, Feb. B, 1763,
   where he received, through the assiduity of his pious parents, a
   religious education, and in his youth became a member of the Methodist
   Society. In 1793 he emigrated to this country. After settling in the
   city of New York in 1795, he received a new baptism of the Holy Spirit,
   and was led on, step by step, from a class-leader to a local preacher,
   until in 1797 he entered the traveling ministry, for which he was
   eminently fitted both by gifts and grace. He traveled and preached in a
   number of circuits with much usefulness, greatly beloved by the people,
   until 1803, when his ministerial labors were much restricted by an
   attack of asthma, from which he never fully recovered. This laid the
   foundation for his dissolution, on January 28th, 1810, in the
   forty-seventh year of his age, and thirteenth of his ministry.

   In 1804 he was elected by the General Conference an assistant book
   agent, and in 1808 to the charge of the establishment. These offices he
   filled with great fidelity, for which he was well qualified by his
   previous habits and the course of his education. He was, indeed, a
   ready writer, an excellent accountant, of industrious and punctual
   habits, as well as of a sound judgment and courteous demeanor. He was
   also well skilled in his own, and in the Latin and Greek languages, and
   fully understood the various systems of theology with which the world
   abounds.

   In the midst, however, of the multifarious concerns of his agency, he
   never forgot his obligations as a minister of the sanctuary; and if he
   excelled in any one branch of Christian doctrine more than another, it
   was in explaining and enforcing sanctification, or holiness of heart
   and life. This formed the theme of all his discourses, to promote which
   he made all the other truths of the gospel and religious exercises
   subservient.

   And as this trait in the Christian system engaged much of his attention
   in his pulpit labors, so he was no less distinguished in his more
   private intercourse by the sweetness of his temper, the cheerfulness of
   his disposition, and the urbanity of his manners.

   Bishop Asbury once said to him, in the examination of characters in the
   conference, "Brother Wilson, I am afraid you are not as spiritual as
   you used to be." He replied, with a pleasant smile upon his
   countenance, and a little pertness of manner, "Indeed sir, if you had
   heard me preach to the Africans last Sabbath, you would alter your
   opinion." He then, in most respectful terms, thanked the bishop for the
   reproof, and promised to endeavor to profit by it.

   He was, indeed, an exceedingly pleasant companion buoyant in his
   spirits, and though apt at illustration by anecdotes, sometimes of a
   facetious character, he always took care to make them rebuke some
   folly, correct a foible, or exemplify the spirit of piety and Christian
   zeal.

   In the several relations he held to the Church, be maintained the
   dignity of the minister of Jesus Christ, the humility and meekness of
   the Christian, and the strict integrity of the sound moralist. Hence
   those who held intercourse with him were always pleased with their
   reception, from the gentleness of his deportment, the blandness of his
   manner, and his scrupulous regard to justice, goodness, and truth,
   which were manifested in all his conduct. Hence he was far removed from
   the hauteur [airs, conceit -- DVM] of the spiritual despot as from the
   effeminacy of the wily sycophant [apple-polisher -- DVM]. He was
   therefore at once beloved and respected by all who had the pleasure of
   his acquaintance.

   He died suddenly. Having prayed with his family in the evening of the
   28th of January, he retired to rest, but awoke about five o'clock in
   the morning and found himself suffocating from the phlegm rising in his
   throat, which he was unable to discharge, and in a few minutes he
   ceased to breathe. His previous life declares more emphatically than
   words could express it, that his end was peace.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 139,836; Last Year: 131,154;
   Increase: 8,682 -- Colored This Year: 34,724; Last Year: 31,884;
   Increase: 2,840 -- Total This Year: 174,560; Last Year: 163,038 --
   Increase: 11,522 -- Preachers This Year: 636; [27] Last Year: 597;
   Increase: 39.

  1811

   For several years past our country had been much agitated "with rumors
   of war," sometimes with France, at other times with Great Britain, and
   not infrequently both assumed a belligerent attitude toward the people
   of America. This state of things had an unfavorable bearing upon the
   minds of religious people, as it led to frequent collisions on
   political subjects, on which the country was nearly equally divided. In
   the latter part of this year the note of preparation for hostile
   movements was sounded through the country, and Great Britain was
   selected as the chief object of warlike feeling.

   It is not the design of this history to enter into any detail of the
   causes which led to this state of feeling, nor to discuss or give a
   judgment on the merits of the questions that were at issue, any further
   than they had a bearing upon the interests of pure religion. That
   strong political feeling, more especially of a partisan character,
   which involves heated discussions and personal recriminations, is
   unfriendly to the advancement of true and righteousness, must be
   evident to all acquainted with human passions and the biases arising
   from long-cherished prejudices. And in a country where freedom of
   speech and of the press is allowed to all, these discussions often
   terminate in a settled hostility destructive of that peace and
   brotherly love which characterize holy and devoted Christians.

   Notwithstanding these strong symptoms began to show themselves in the
   country about this time, attended with their usual concomitants, yet
   through the persevering efforts of God's servants the work in which
   they were engaged was generally prosperous, and many were gathered into
   the fold of Christ.

   In the latter part of this year and beginning of 1812, the southwestern
   part of our country, particularly Missouri and Louisiana, was terribly
   shaken by earthquakes, by which the minds of the people were much
   alarmed, and it seemed to give a temporary check to the flood of
   emigration, which had been setting in that direction with such
   astonishing rapidity. They soon recovered, however, from the shock, and
   the streams of emigrants resumed their wonted course, and the march of
   improvement went gradually on. It led, in the mean time, many to
   serious reflection, and thus the workings of divine Providence in the
   physical world were overruled for the good of its inhabitants. While
   the earth was trembling and quaking beneath their feet, many were
   induced to call on God for mercy and salvation.

   It will have been perceived from the preceding pages of this history,
   that in the early plantation of Methodism, especially in the new
   countries, the people were compelled to hold their meetings in private
   houses, in barns, and often in groves. As, however, the societies
   increased in number, it became necessary to erect houses of worship.
   This work, so essential to the prosperity of the cause, at first went
   on very slow, particularly in the country places, and often some
   obscure site was selected, remote from the center of population, where
   an indifferent building was erected, thus sacrificing convenience to a
   paltry economy. This unwise policy began to be injuriously felt in some
   places, and means were used to counteract it; but it was with much
   difficulty that the people could be generally brought to appreciate the
   importance of attending to this thing with that liberality and energy
   which its necessity demanded.

   It would seem, indeed, that many of the members of our Church in some
   places had been accustomed to contribute so little for the support of
   the institutions of Christianity, that they apparently cherished the
   erroneous idea that they could be sustained almost literally "without
   money and without price." Hence the tardiness with which they came
   forward to build houses of worship, and the stinted manner in which
   they contributed for the support of the ministry and ordinances of
   religion.

   These evils, perhaps unavoidable in some cases, in the circumstances in
   which they were placed, no doubt prevented a more steady and rapid
   growth of the societies in many places, and furnished a plausible
   excuse for the numerous locations we have been compelled to record.

   Another defect, and which arose, in some measure, out of the ones just
   mentioned, was the neglecting to occupy the young and thriving villages
   which were rising into being by the hand of industry, in the new
   countries. In these countries the Methodist preachers were the gospel
   pioneers, and for many years, in various places, the people had no
   other preachers who "cared for their souls." They were accustomed to go
   among them in their lonely retreats, preach in their log buts, hold
   their quarterly meetings in barns or in the woods, and they seemed to
   have been so long accustomed to this mode of preaching and living, that
   they almost forgot, in many instances, to provide themselves with
   better accommodations; and before they were aware of it, other
   denominations came, took possession of the villages, erected houses of
   worship, and thus drew the weightier part of population around them.
   How much has been lost to the Methodist Episcopal Church by this
   neglect, who can tell? Latterly, however, a remedy has been, in some
   measure at least, provided, though it has been, in too many instances,
   after the damage had been sustained, and we have profited more by our
   losses than by prudent foresight.

   Another inconvenience began to he sensibly felt; and that was the want
   of parsonages for the accommodation of preachers families. It is true
   that the General Conference of 1800, at the suggestion of Dr. Coke, had
   passed a resolution, recommending to the circuits to prepare convenient
   houses, and to have them furnished with heavy furniture. But, excepting
   some of the larger cities, this recommendation had been little heeded,
   and hence those preachers who had families were obliged either to
   locate or submit to the inconvenience of moving their families to
   circuits without having any place provided for them, or were compelled
   to purchase or hire a permanent residence for their families, and then
   go wherever they might be sent, however distant from their residences.
   These evils began to press heavily upon the connection, and it was
   plainly seen that, unless removed, must eventually very much impede, if
   not entirely stop, the wheels of the itinerancy.

   In the early days of Methodism, as most of the traveling preachers were
   unmarried, these embarrassments were not so sensibly realized; and in
   most instances the zeal for God's house would so entirely "eat up" the
   cares of this world, that those devoted men God seemed regardless of
   their fare, "counting all things but loss for the excellency of the
   knowledge of Christ Jesus;" for the sake of winning souls to him they
   were willing to forego, not only the riches and honors of the world,
   but also all the endearments of domestic life.

   At this time the case was somewhat altered. Many had families, some of
   them large and growing. To move these from place to place, without
   having a house prepared to shelter them, was an inconvenience, and more
   especially with the scanty allowance provided for their support, to
   which many thought themselves not called to submit. This, no doubt, was
   one cause of the numerous locations from one year to another. And
   though the embarrassments arising from this source are not yet wholly
   removed, yet the efforts which began to be put forth about this time,
   and which have been continued with various degrees of success, have
   supplied a partial remedy, and it is to be hoped that the efforts will
   not be slackened until every station and circuit shall have its
   parsonage, suitably furnished and comfortably supplied with the
   necessaries of life.

   But with all these disadvantages, many parts of the country were
   visited with outpourings of the Spirit of God, so that the work
   steadily advanced both in the Atlantic and in the northern and western
   states.

   This year bishop Asbury crossed the St. Lawrence into Upper Canada.
   After meeting the New England conference, which assembled this year in
   Barnard, in the state of Vermont, he took his departure on his intended
   tour into Upper Canada, a place he had long desired to visit. On
   Wednesday, June 26th, he crossed the Green Mountains, visited
   Middlebury, and preached in the court house, and afterward set forward
   a subscription paper for building a house of worship in that place,
   fully believing, as he said, that "the Lord would visit Middlebury." He
   then passed on through Vergennes, Charlotte, and Plattsburgh, in each
   of which places he stopped and preached, until he arrived, after a
   fatiguing journey through the woods and swampy roads, at the Indian
   village of St. Regis, situated at the mouth of the river of that name,
   which empties into the St. Lawrence river. At this place he was ferried
   across the St. Lawrence, which is here nearly three miles in width. The
   first place he stopped at was Evan Roy's in the town of Cornwall, where
   there was a flourishing Methodist society, one of the oldest in the
   province.

   On landing in Canada, he says, "My strong affection for the people of
   the United States came with strange power upon me when I was crossing
   the line," and he inquires, with much apparent feeling, "Why should I
   have such new feelings in Canada?" No doubt that associations were
   called up by this visit which he little expected to realize in this
   world. He had left his native land in his youth -- had struggled
   through the difficulties of the Revolutionary War -- a war which
   eventuated in the severance of the United States from the land of his
   birth -- had lived to see these states rising and flourishing, and the
   Church whose affairs he had been called to superintend, numbering
   within its bosom six hundred and thirty-six traveling preachers, and
   174,560 members -- and now, in the sixty-sixth year of his age, and
   fortieth of his ministry in this country, he found himself once more
   under the shadow of his paternal government, in a distant province of
   the empire, among a people who had been raised up by his sons in the
   gospel, professing the same faith and adopting the same modes of
   worship with those with whom he first united himself in the mother
   country. Amid such reflections, how could it be otherwise than that
   "strange feelings should come over" him? And more especially as he must
   then have anticipated the near approach of another war between the
   United States and that government from which he had expatriated himself
   for the sake of building up His kingdom whose government shall have no
   end.

   The bishop passed along up the banks of the St. Lawrence, stopping and
   preaching in the most considerable places, gathering information from
   his own observation and the communications of others respecting the
   state of things in Canada, until he arrived at Kingston, where he
   preached in a new chapel the people had erected in that place. He says:
   -- "Our ride has brought us through one of the finest countries I have
   ever seen. The timber is of a noble size; the cattle are well shaped
   and well looking; the crops are abundant, on a most fruitful soil.
   Surely, this is a land that God the Lord hath blessed." And of the
   people he says: -- "My soul is much united to them."

   On Monday July 15th, he left Kingston, and crossed the lake in an open
   boat, in which he says they "had a tremendous passage," to Sacketts
   Harbor. After his arrival, he remarks: -- "Well, I have been to Canada,
   and I find it like all other stations in the extremities -- there are
   difficulties to overcome, and prospects to cheer us. Some of our
   laborers have not been so faithful and diligent as we could wish." On
   meeting with his colleague in the episcopacy, He says: -- "My spirit
   rejoiced on meeting with dear Bishop McKendree" -- and they jointly
   attended the Conference, which assembled on the 20th of July at Paris,
   Oneida county, in the state of New York.

   From this conference the bishops shaped their course through the
   western parts of New York and Pennsylvania, to Ohio, Kentucky, and
   Tennessee, and thence through the southern states; preaching to the
   people and attending the conferences as usual. Speaking of the South
   Carolina Conference, bishop Asbury remarks: -- "Scarcely have I seen
   such harmony and love." -- I received letters from the extremities and
   the center of our vast continent, all pleasing, all encouraging."

   During this long and tedious journey, the bishop speaks of suffering
   much from bodily affliction, sometimes to that degree, from an
   obstinate inflammation in his foot, that he could scarcely walk, and at
   other times he was obliged to desist from active labor altogether, not
   being able either to ride or preach. In these seasons, however, he
   employed himself in reading, prayer, and meditation, and in answering
   the numerous letters he was almost daily receiving from the presiding
   elders and others; for it may be observed that it was one part of the
   duty of a presiding elder to give information to the bishops, once a
   year at least, of the state of religion in his district. this, together
   with other correspondence, imposed no small tax upon the time and labor
   of the bishop to answer, as he was in the habit of doing, all these
   letters. But in the midst of all these things, he says: -- "I limped
   about, sung, talked, and prayed. My consolations exceedingly abound,
   though my sufferings are great." -- "Dr. Coke says fifteen hundred
   miles in nine weeks -- I may say sixteen hundred miles in sixty days."
   Such were episcopal labors in those days!

   These extensive travels were less or more the practice of most of the
   preachers in the new countries, with only this difference, that these
   latter were performing their regular round of duties in a circuit from
   two to four hundred miles in circumference, once in four weeks. As late
   is 1810, according to the testimony of a writer in the Pittsburgh
   Conference Journal, in the Monongahela district, then under the charge
   of Rev. Joshua Monroe, there were eleven circuits, comprehending all
   the country from lake Erie southward, to the head of Tyger's Valley,
   and from the summit of the Allegheny mountains to the Ohio river,
   including a portion of western Virginia, the whole of western
   Pennsylvania, and a considerable portion of the northeast corner of the
   state of Ohio. At that time Pittsburgh was in a circuit which embraced
   Greenburgh, Somerset, and Connellsville, in which there were four
   hundred and twenty-eight members of the Church. In Pittsburgh itself,
   in which there are now two large churches, with a membership of about
   one thousand three hundred, the Methodists assembled at that time in a
   private room prepared for that purpose, and had only about forty church
   members, and some of even these were from the adjacent country. In
   Meadville, (where we now have a college and a stationed preacher,) in
   Erie, Mercer, and Franklin, all which were then included in Erie
   circuit, there were no societies.

   This year, 1811, Erie circuit employed two preachers, James Watts and
   James Ewen, and the number of church members had increased to five
   hundred and one, scattered over an extent of country which now includes
   several presiding elders districts.

   The Pittsburgh circuit, which was this year under the charge of James
   H. Hanson, numbered five hundred and twenty-four members, though the
   society in the city was still small. Within the limits of their two
   circuits, there is now a large portion of two annual conferences, five
   entire districts, besides parts of some others, and not less than
   twenty-two thousand members of the Church. So greatly has the work
   enlarged in that field which was brought under culture by those men of
   God. It has since been divided and subdivided into smaller and more
   compact enclosures, and put under the care of a proportionate number of
   husbandmen, that it might bring forth fruit more abundantly, and that
   its fruit may remain.

   Forty-five preachers located this year, nineteen were returned
   supernumerary, fifteen superannuated, and two expelled. Five, namely,
   Thomas Daughaday, Thomas Budd, William Keith, William Hunt, and Gideon
   A. Knowlton, ended their labors in peace, leaving behind them many
   testimonials to their fidelity and success in the "ministry of
   reconciliation."

   One trait in the character of William Keith, mentioned in the notice of
   his death, is worthy of remembrance and of imitation -- that is,
   clearness of conception, readiness of utterance, and comprehensiveness
   of argument. It has often been remarked that he possessed the happy art
   of expressing much useful matter in a few well-chosen words." It is
   added, "The happy, and sometimes astonishing effects of his ministry,
   demonstrated that he was sent by Jesus Christ to declare unto mankind
   the awful truths of Heaven, and to beseech sinners to be reconciled to
   God."

   There was indeed a sweetness of manner, a persuasiveness of argument,
   which accompanied the public administrations of William Keith, that
   wrought upon the heart of the auditor, attracted his attention, and won
   his affection, in a manner which he could hardly resist. His
   intelligent countenance, the melody of his voice, the harmony of his
   sentences, and above all, the apparent sincerity with which he spoke,
   commanded the respect and inspired the confidence of all who were not
   prejudiced against the truth; and even many of these, on hearing him,
   have been overcome by the charming and persuasive eloquence with which
   he addressed them. He was, as was most evident, deeply imbued with the
   spirit of his Master, and this gave an unction and a pungency to all he
   said.

   In the early part of his ministry he was employed chiefly in western
   New York; and for some cause, unknown to the writer, he was induced to
   leave the Methodist Church and connect himself with another communion.
   He very soon, however, repented of his error, published a recantation,
   and was most cordially readmitted into the bosom of the church of his
   first love. He could hardly ever forgive himself this step, but
   adverted to it upon his dying bed as a source of grief to his mind.

   The two last years of his ministry he spent in New York, and the people
   appreciated his labors highly as a faithful and useful minister of
   Jesus Christ. Here also he ended his days with a lingering consumption,
   beloved and respected by all who knew him, leaving a testimony behind
   him more satisfactory than all the gold of Ophir -- for he departed in
   the full hope of immortality and eternal life.

   Of William Hunt, it is said that he professed to enjoy, and exemplified
   the grace of "perfect love" -- that few excelled him in the branches of
   learning which he pursued -- that he was thoroughly versed in the
   sacred Scriptures -- sound in doctrine, and an accurate judge of gospel
   order and discipline, illustrating in his own life the purity and
   excellence of that religion which he recommended to others.

   In addition to his exhibiting the graces of a Christian minister, it is
   said of Gideon A. Knowlton that he was so remarkably distinguished for
   his punctuality in attending to his appointments, that it became
   proverbial among the people in stormy weather, "It is Knowlton's
   appointment; he will be there; we must attend." How worthy of
   imitation!

   Of Thomas Budd, it is said that he possessed strong natural abilities,
   had an improved mind, was remarkably frank in his manner, and of the
   strictest integrity in all his conduct.

   Thomas Daughaday was an acceptable and useful preacher, manifesting an
   ardent thirst for the salvation of souls, and was an example of
   meekness and patience in his life, and departed full of the hope of
   immortality.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 148,835; Last Year: 139,836;
   Increase: 8,999 -- Colored This Year: 35,732; Last Year: 34,724;
   Increase: 1,008 -- Total This Year: 184,567; Last Year: 174,560 --
   Increase: 10,007 -- Preachers This Year: 668; Last Year: 636; Increase:
   32.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [23] John Richards joined the Roman Catholics. When the writer of this
   history was stationed in Montreal in 1807 -- having been changed by the
   presiding elder from Niagara to Montreal -- Mr. Richards came there
   with a special recommendation from Bishop Asbury as a missionary. He
   was received with cordiality, and preached in our house with
   acceptance, and gave great satisfaction to the people. After being
   there about two weeks, at his request he was introduced to a Catholic
   priest in Montreal, and afterward visited him nearly every day, without
   any suspicion being entertained of an intention on his part to leave
   us. At length, from various conversations had with the writer and
   several other members of the Methodist Episcopal Church, in which Mr.
   Richards pleaded the cause of the Roman Church, suspicions became rife
   that he was a Catholic, and great anxiety in the little society was
   felt on his account. Within a few days after this became public, our
   doubts were all dissipated by receiving from him a written Protest
   against the Methodist Societies, as a "continuation of an ancient
   heresy which had long afflicted the church," declaring that he withdrew
   all connection with them, but that he should carry with him "into the
   bosom of the holy church a sincere regard for their welfare, and
   prayers for their salvation." After passing. Through the preliminary
   steps, he became, in a very short time, a priest in the Roman Catholic
   communion, and remains such to the present time. The reasons for this
   step remain unexplained, as Mr. R. declined giving any other than those
   contained in his written protest. It may, however, be proper to add,
   that Mr. R. was born and reared in the Romish Church, and received an
   education in Georgetown, D. C. Here, while a youth, he was professedly
   awakened and converted under the Methodist ministry, joined our church,
   and entered the traveling connection on trial in the Baltimore
   conference, in the year 1804. Whether it was from an early bias in
   favor of Roman Catholicism, from which he was never entirely delivered,
   or from a supposed conviction of the truth of its doctrine and usages,
   and a belief that he could, by entering that communion, become more
   extensively useful, are questions which are left to be solved in that
   day which shall disclose the secrets of all hearts. So far as is known
   to the writer, Mr. Richard has maintained a reputable standing in the
   church to which he attached himself.

   [24] [Transcriber Endnote: This Volume covers the years 1793 to 1816.
   Captain Webb died in 1796. The sketch of his life found here, properly
   placed, would be earlier in this very volume. Thus, users of this
   electronic edition could easily "cut" the Captain Webb text from its
   present location and "paste" it into the appropriate place in
   Part-10.tex covering the year 1796.]

   [25] See his Journal, vol. iii. P. 178.

   [26] See his Journal, vol. iii. P. 234.

   [27] This enumeration includes the supernumerary and superannuated
   preachers; and as they properly belong to the conferences, they will be
   hereafter included in the number of preachers.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

BOOK V
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 1

    The first Delegated General Conference of 1812

   We have traced the progress of Methodism from its origin to the present
   period. We have seen it beginning in a small class consisting of only
   five members in the city of New York, and under the auspices of divine
   providence and grace, growing up to a considerable society, and chiefly
   by the instrumentality of a local preacher who had little to recommend
   him to public favor but the sincerity of his zeal, the fervor of his
   piety, and the influence he derived from his connection with such a man
   as John Wesley; and thence breaking out, under the labors of Boardman
   and Pilmoor, and the more energetic exertions of Asbury, into circuits
   and quarterly meeting conferences; until, in imitation of the practice
   which had obtained in Europe, a regular conference was convened in
   Philadelphia under the superintendence of Rankin. As it continued to
   enlarge its dimensions by means of the labors of these men, their
   coadjutors, and successors, this conference became divided and
   subdivided into several others, until it was found expedient to
   concentrate the councils of the church in one General Conference,
   composed of all the traveling elders who might be disposed to attend.

   As, however, the work continued to expand in every direction until it
   became co-extensive with the settlements which were spread over this
   large country, comprehending the cities and villages, the denser
   population of the other and the sparser settlements of the new states
   and territories, to prevent a useless expenditure of time, labor, and
   money, as well as to secure greater harmony in counsel and dispatch of
   business, it was found necessary to lessen the number who should
   compose this General Conference, by selecting a specific number from
   among the elders of each annual conference. To bring all the traveling
   elders together, scattered as they were among the circuits and stations
   from Maine to Louisiana, and thence along the waters of the
   Mississippi, Missouri, and Ohio, and their tributary streams; the
   shores of lakes Erie and Ontario and the banks of the St. Lawrence to
   Montreal and Quebec, would be involving an expense of time and money
   which neither members the preachers nor people were able to bear, or if
   able, they could give no reasonable account for such a waste of
   expenditure. On the other hand, if those in the extreme parts of the
   work were deterred from attending the General Conference, on account of
   the difficulties arising from distance or poverty, or from the hazards
   to the souls of the people by such a long absence from their charge,
   then the affairs of the Church would be left in the hands of some of
   the most central of the annual conferences, who might not understand
   the circumstances and wants of their brethren in the exterior parts of
   the work. Every consideration, therefore, of justice and expediency
   dictated the policy of the measure which, in 1808, provided for a
   delegated General Conference.

   This conference assembled in the city of New York, on the first day of
   May, 1812. And as this is the first delegated General Conference, the
   reader will doubtless be pleased to have the names of the delegates,
   which are here given as they stand on the Journal of the conference.
   They are is follows: --

    New York Conference:

   William Anson, Nathan Bangs, Truman Bishop, Laban Clark, Seth Crowell,
   Freeborn Garrettson, Aaron Hunt, Samuel Merwin, Daniel Ostrander,
   William Phoebus, Eben Smith, Henry Stead.

    New England Conference:

   Oliver Beale, Elijah Hedding, Asa Kent, George Pickering, Solomon Sias,
   Joshua Soule, William Stephens, Daniel Webb, Joel Winch.

    Genesee Conference:

   Elijah Batchelor, James Kelsey, William B. Lacy, Timothy Lee, Anning
   Owen, William Snow.

    Western Conference:

   James Axley, Lawner Blackman, John Collins, William Houston, Benjamin
   Lakin, Samuel Parker, William Pattison, Isaac Quinn, James Quinn, John
   Sale, Frederick Stier, Thomas Stillwell, David Young,

    South Carolina Conference:

   Daniel Asbury, Samuel Dunwody, James Glenn, Hilliard Judge, William M.
   Kennedy, Lewis Myers, Lovick Pierce, Joseph Tarpley, Joseph Travis.

    Virginia Conference:

   John Ballew, James M. Boyd, Philip Bruce, John Buxton, Charles
   Callaway, Thomas L. Douglass, John Early, Cannnellum H. Hines, William
   Jean, Richard Lattimore, Jesse Lee.

    Baltimore Conference:

   Robert Burch, Christopher Frye, Enoch George, Jacob Gruber, Hamilton
   Jefferson, Nelson Reed, Robert R. Roberts, William Ryland, Asa Shin,
   Henry Smith, James Smith, Nicholas Snethen, Joseph Toy, Joshua Wells.

    Philadelphia Conference:

   David Bartine, James Bateman, Thomas Boring, Thomas Burch, Michael
   Coate, Ezekiel Cooper, John McClaskey, Stephen G. Roszel, Thomas F.
   Sargent, Asa Smith, Richard Sneath, John Walker, Thomas Ware, George
   Woolley.

   Bishops Asbury and McKendree were present, and the conference was
   opened by the former, by reading a portion of the Holy Scriptures and
   prayer; after which the names of the delegates were called by a
   temporary secretary, and they presented the certificates of their
   election by the several annual conferences. This being finished, Daniel
   Hitt, the book agent, not being one of the delegates, was elected
   secretary.

   This being a delegated conference, acting under the restrictions
   imposed upon it by the body by which it was constituted, it was found
   necessary to frame a set of new rules to guide the members in their
   deliberations and decisions. A committee was accordingly appointed for
   the purpose of preparing rules, and a long time was spent in discussing
   and adopting them, and after they were adopted, being an abridgment of
   the congressional rules found in Jefferson's Manual, they were to the
   conference something like Saul's armor to David: they did not like
   them; and they have long since been laid aside as not only useless but
   perplexing. Men of plain common sense, acting with a simple desire to
   accomplish the greatest good by the use of the best means, need but a
   few plain and simple rules, easily understood, to guide then in their
   action.

   After the adoption of the rules, and the transaction of some other
   preliminary business, a letter (a copy of which I have not been able to
   find) from Dr. Coke was read to the conference, expressive of his
   determination to visit the East Indies on a grand missionary
   enterprise, and of his unabated attachment to his American brethren
   [28] After this, Bishop McKendree presented the conference with the
   following address, which was the first time that either of the
   presidents submitted his views to the conference in writing: --

   "To the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, now
   assembled in the city of New York.

   "Dear Brethren: -- My relation to you, and the connection in general,
   seems, in my opinion, to make it necessary that I should address you in
   some way, by which you may get possession of some information, perhaps
   not otherwise to be obtained by many of you.

   "It is now four years since, by your appointment, it became my duty
   jointly to superintend our extensive and very important charge. With
   anxious solicitude, and good wishes, I have looked forward to this
   General Conference. The appointed time is come, and the Lord has
   graciously permitted us to meet according to appointment, for which I
   hope we are prepared jointly to praise and adore his goodness.

   "Upon examination, you will find the work of the Lord is prospering in
   our hands. Our important charge has greatly increased since the last
   General Conference: we have had an increase of nearly forty thousand
   members. At present, we have about one hundred and ninety thousand
   members, upward of two thousand local, and about even hundred traveling
   preachers, in our connection, and these widely scattered over seventeen
   states, besides the Canadas and several of the territorial settlements.

   Thus situated, it must be expected, in the present state of things,
   that the counsel and direction of your united wisdom will be necessary
   to preserve the harmony and peace of the body, as well as co-operation
   of the traveling and local ministry, in carrying on the blessed work of
   reformation which the Lord has been pleased to effect, through our
   instrumentality. To deserve the confidence of the local ministry and
   membership, as well as to retain confidence in ourselves, and in each
   other, is undoubtedly our duty; and if we consider that those who are
   to confide in us are a collection from all classes and descriptions
   from all countries of which the nation is composed, promiscuously
   scattered over this vast continent, men who were originally of
   different educations, manners, habits, and opinions, we shall see the
   difficulty as well as the importance of this part of our charge.

   "In order to enjoy the comforts of peace and union among us, we must
   love one another;' but this cannot abide where confidence does not
   exist and purity of intention, manifested by proper actions, is the
   very foundation and support of confidence; thus, united, we stand;'
   each member is a support to the body, and the body supports each
   member; but if confidence fails, love will grow cold, peace will be
   broken, and divided, we fall.' It therefore becomes this body, which,
   by its example, is to move the passions and direct the course of
   thousands of ministers, and tens of thousands of members, to pay strict
   attention to the simplicity of gospel manners, and to do every thing as
   in the immediate presence of God. If we consider the nature of our
   business, and the influence of civil governments, and political
   measures, it will hardly be expected that every individual in so large
   a body as you form will continually be sufficiently and strictly
   evangelical in all cases; it is therefore hoped in cases of failure,
   that the wisdom and firmness of your united prudence as a body will
   counteract evil effects by a well-ordered and prudent disapprobation
   and better example. Church and state should never be assimilated.

   "Connected as I am with you, and the connection in general, I feel it a
   part of my duty to submit to your consideration the appointment of the
   Genesee Conference; and perhaps it may be for the general good, if, in
   your wisdom you should think proper to take into consideration a
   division of the work in the western country, and a proper arrangement
   of the work in general and the magnitude and extent of the work which
   the Lord has graciously pleased to prosper in our hands, may make it
   proper for you to inquire if the work is sufficiently within the
   oversight of the superintendency, and to make such arrangements and
   provision as your wisdom may approve. I would also suggest the
   necessity of keeping in view, not only the traveling, but the relation
   and situation of our local brethren; and to pursue that plan which may
   render the whole the most useful; and it may also be proper to bring
   into view any unfinished business (if any) which we had under
   consideration at our last General Conference. Hitherto, as a body, we
   have been preserved, by our well-digested system of rules, which are as
   sinews to the body, and form the bonds of our union. But it is evident,
   both from Scripture and experience, that men, even good men, may depart
   from first principles and the best of rules; it may therefore be proper
   for you to pay some attention to the administration, to know the state
   both of the traveling and local ministry, as it relates to doctrine,
   discipline, and practice.

   Before I conclude, permit me, my dear brethren, to express a few
   thoughts concerning the view I have of the relation in which I stand
   connected with this body. It is only by virtue of a delegated power
   from the General Conference; that I hold the reins of government. I
   consider myself bound by virtue of the same authority to exercise
   discipline in perfect conformity to the rules of the Church, to the
   best of my ability and judgment. I consider my self justly accountable,
   not for the system of government, but for my administration, and ought
   therefore to be ready to answer in General Conference for past conduct,
   and be willing to receive information and advice, to perfect future
   operations and I wish my brethren to feel themselves perfectly easy and
   at liberty.

   "I shall take the liberty here to present my grateful acknowledgments
   for the high degree of confidence which my beloved brethren have placed
   in me, and especially for the able counsel and seasonable support
   afforded by many, which has, I believe, with the divine aid, preserved
   and supported me. Dear brethren, such are the effects of our high
   responsibility, connected with a consciousness of the insufficiency of
   my talents for so great a work, that I move with trembling. Your eyes
   and the eyes of the Lord are upon me for good. We shall rejoice
   together to see the armies of Israel wisely conducted in all their
   ranks, carrying the triumphs of the Redeemer's kingdom to the ends of
   the earth and the Lord will rejoice to make his ministers a flame of
   fire. In you I have confidence, and on you I depend for aid, and above
   all, I trust in divine aid. Influenced by these considerations, and
   with my situation in full view, I cannot entertain a thought of bearing
   such awful accountability longer than I am persuaded my services are
   useful to the Church of God, and feel a confidence of being aided by
   your counsel and support, which is with you to give in any way or form
   you judge proper. And while I join with you, my dear brethren, in pure
   gospel simplicity, to commit and recommend ourselves and our several
   charges to the special care of the great head of the Church, I remain,
   with sentiments of love and confidence, your servant in the gospel of
   Christ,

   "William. McKendree.

   "New York, May 5th, 1812."

   This address was referred to appropriate committees, after which Bishop
   Asbury, addressing himself extemporaneously to Bishop McKendree, and
   through him to the conference, gave a historical sketch of the rise and
   progress of Methodism in this country, its present state and prospects,
   and concluded by urging upon the General Conference the expediency of
   increasing the number of annual conferences for the convenience of the
   preachers, and as a measure of economy to the whole Church; and the
   committees were instructed to take these matters into consideration, in
   connection with the several portions of Bishop McKendree's address.

   After a full interchange of thoughts in reference to adding one more to
   the number of bishops, as recommended by Bishop McKendree, as it was
   understood he intended by the question "whether the work is
   sufficiently within the oversight of the superintendency," the
   committee reported that they "did not see their way clear to recommend
   any alteration or additions" which was concurred in by the conference.

   Bishop Asbury had, previous to the session of this conference,
   expressed a desire once more to visit his native land from which he had
   now been absent about forty-one years; and in his communication to the
   conference he requested them to give him their advice on the propriety
   of doing it soon after the adjournment of conference. The committee on
   the episcopacy, having reported against increasing the number of
   bishops, say in reference to this subject: "It is our sincere desire
   and request, that Bishop Asbury would relinquish his thoughts of
   visiting England, and confine his labors to the American connection so
   long as God may preserve his life." In this the conference fully
   concurred, and the bishop cheerfully relinquished his design.

   In regard to creating the Genesee conference, respecting which some had
   demurred on account of the illegality of the measure, as they alleged,
   the conference voted in its favor, and this justified the bishops in
   what they had done in the premises.

   In respect to the division of the work in the western country, which
   was earnestly recommended by both the bishops, the conference consented
   to divide the Western conference into two, to be called the Ohio and
   Tennessee conferences; the former to comprehend the Salt river,
   Kentucky, Miami, and Muskingum districts; the latter, the Holston,
   Nashville, Cumberland, Wabash, and Illinois districts; and then gave
   authority to the bishops, in the interval of the General Conference, if
   they should find it necessary, to establish another conference down the
   Mississippi, provided that no circuit or district shall be incorporated
   in such conference, without its consent -- a precaution that marks the
   jealousy with which the General Conference guarded the rights of annual
   conferences, against what they considered the encroachments of
   episcopal prerogative -- and also a disposition, frequently exemplified
   before, to comprehend as large a territory as possible within the
   bounds of each annual conference, however inconvenient it might be to
   preachers and people -- mistaken policy, it is believed, which has been
   since gradually rectified.

   The most important act of this General Conference was the making local
   deacons eligible to the office of elders. This measure elicited a very
   strong debate, in which the talent of the most able members was brought
   into requisition, both for and against it. Those who were in favor of
   the measure, contended that the services of such were needed in the
   various parts of the work, where the number of traveling elders was
   few, to administer the ordinances of baptism and the Lord's Supper, and
   to perform the ceremony of marriage and burial of the dead; -- that
   being recognized by our church as ministers of the gospel, they were
   also entitled, equally with their traveling brethren, to full powers as
   elders in the Church of God; -- and as conferring them would add
   dignity and importance the their character, it would also increase
   their usefulness, and consequently attach then more strongly to their
   traveling brethren.

   To this it was answered that the ordination service implied a covenant
   transaction, in which the person receiving orders took upon himself the
   charge of the flock of Christ, which a local elder in our Church could
   not do, and therefore could not fulfill his covenant obligations,
   inasmuch as he did not, nor could he as a mere local minister, devote
   himself exclusively to the work of the ministry; -- that as to the
   right he had to full orders, we must distinguish between original,
   unalienable, and acquired rights, between civil, political, and
   ecclesiastical rights. As to original or natural right, no one
   pretended that a local preacher had it; -- as to acquired, according to
   the economy of our Church he could not acquire it, because no such
   provision had been made as the reward of services, however meritorious,
   this being reserved for traveling preachers alone, who sacrificed their
   all of temporal emolument and devoted themselves entirely to the
   service of the Church; as to civil or political right, he could claim
   none, as the civil polity of our country did not interfere in religious
   matters at all; -- and therefore it only remained to inquire whether
   our local deacons had an ecclesiastical right to the order of elders;
   and this was the very question at issue, and therefore they could have
   none until it be given to them by the Church to which they belong. The
   question then must be decided, it was contended, on the principles of
   expediency and the probable utility of the measure; and the majority
   finally decided that the privilege ought to be granted them on this
   ground -- they might be needed, and might therefore be useful.

   Having thus decided in favor of granting them elders' orders, the
   following regulations were adopted as the conditions on which the
   bishops were permitted to confer them, which show plainly that this
   privilege was granted solely on the presumption that in every case
   where ordinations of this character were allowed, there was an
   imperious call for the services of such elders, and not because they
   could claim them as a right originating from their relation to the
   Church. The regulations were as follows: --

   A local deacon shall be eligible to the office of an elder, and on the
   following regulations and restrictions, viz., he shall have preached
   four years from the time be was ordained a deacon; and shall obtain a
   recommendation of two-thirds from the quarterly conference of which he
   is a member, signed by the president and countersigned by the
   secretary, certifying his qualifications in doctrine, discipline,
   talents, and usefulness; and the necessity of the official services of
   such local elder in the circuit where he resides. He shall, if he
   cannot be present, send to the annual conference a note certifying his
   belief in the doctrine and discipline of our Church: the whole being
   examined and approved by the annual conference, he shall be ordained --
   provided that no slaveholder shall be eligible to the office of local
   elder, in any state or territory where the civil laws will admit
   emancipation, and suffer the liberated slave to enjoy his freedom."

   The following item was added to the section inspecting the settlement
   of disputes which might arise among brethren in the Church: --

   "Whenever a complaint is made against any member of our church for the
   nonpayment of debt: when the accounts are adjusted, and the amount
   properly ascertained, the preacher having the charge shall call the
   debtor before a committee of at least three, to say why he does not
   make payment; and if further time is requested, the committee shall
   determine whether it ought to be granted, and what security, or if any,
   should be given, to secure the payment and in case the debtor should
   refuse to comply, he shall be expelled: but in such case shall have the
   privilege of appealing to the quarterly meeting conference, who shall
   decide on the case, and their decision shall be final. And in case the
   creditor shall complain that justice is not done him, he shall have the
   privilege of laying his grievance before the quarterly-meeting
   conference, who shall decide on the case, and the decision shall be
   final; and in case the creditor refuse to comply, he shall be
   expelled."

   The necessity of publishing a periodical work was strongly urged upon
   this conference by some of its leading members, and strenuously opposed
   by others. The subject was referred to the consideration of the
   committee on the Book Concern, and they finally recommended, and the
   conference concurred, "That the book agents be directed to resume the
   publication of the Methodist Magazine, two volumes having been
   published" (namely, in 1789 and 1790) "to commence publishing the third
   volume at farthest by January next." And with a view to secure this
   object, an additional agent was appointed, and Daniel Hitt being,
   re-elected the principal, and Thomas Ware the assistant agent. The
   mandate of the conference, however, was never obeyed, and unhappily for
   the literature and character of the Methodist Episcopal Church, we had
   no Magazine, nor scarcely any publication of American growth, until
   1818, when the Methodist Magazine was recommenced.

   This is the more to be regretted, because it occasions the dearth of
   materials for such a history of this period as is most desirable, and
   which is now most painfully felt. For though some members of the
   Magazine abound in rich material for history, especially those sketches
   furnished by Theophilus Arminius and some others, to which I have been
   much indebted for many facts and graphic descriptions of Methodism in
   the west, yet these and others of a similar character generally
   terminate about the year 1812, and we in vain look for anything
   satisfactory out of the ordinary records of the Church, from that time
   to about the year 1820. This period, therefore, quite contrary to my
   expectations when I commenced writing, seems to be the most barren of
   interesting incidents and those historical details which are essential
   to render history engaging and edifying, of any period of our Church.

   During a number of years, it appears that education of all sorts, as
   well as writing for the public eye, was laid aside as useless, and we
   seem to have come to the strange conclusion that we had naught else to
   do but simply to preach the gospel, and attend to those other duties
   connected with the pastoral office, in order to assure the blessing of
   God on our labors; hence the Magazine had been discontinued for more
   than twenty years, and scarcely anything issued from our press except
   what was imported from Europe, and much of this, even, was brought
   before the public through other mediums. [29] Here and there a small
   pamphlet made its appearance, but only to disappear generally before it
   had time to breathe the breath of life; for it seemed to be taken for
   granted that American Methodists were doomed to that state of nonage
   which unfitted them to instruct one another through the medium of the
   press.

   It is true that a few sighed over this state of things in secret, and
   sometimes vented their feelings to each other, in accents of sorrow and
   regret, but they almost despaired of obtaining redress. It was this
   feeling which prompted them to bring this subject before the General
   Conference in 1812; but though they succeeded in getting a bare
   majority so far to second their views as to order the resumption of the
   Methodist Magazine, yet such was the general apathy on this subject,
   that the agents either refused to obey the order of the conference, or
   could not obtain sufficient encouragement to justify them in the
   enterprise; and either alternative proves a lamentable state of things
   in regard to literature and science among us at that time.

   One consequence resulting from this inertness is reference to
   periodical literature and other branches of mental improvement, was,
   that when assailed by our adversaries -- and this was not infrequently
   the case -- we had no adequate means of defense; and hence the reading
   public were left to draw their inferences respecting Methodist doctrine
   and economy from the distorted representations of those who felt it a
   duty to caricature or present us in a false position. These things were
   irksome, yet they were unavoidable under the circumstances.

   From these humiliating facts it became proverbial that the "Methodists
   were enemies to learning," and it must be confessed that there was too
   much reason for the taunting remark; and it was not without much labor
   that the reproach has been, in some measure at least, rolled away from
   us.

   The fact is, that the destruction of Cokesbury College, and the failure
   in attempting to establish district schools and academies, seemed to
   throw a damper upon the spirits of those who had abetted learning, and
   to furnish those who were either inimical or indifferent to its
   interests with arguments against it while the bungling attempts of
   some, who prematurely sent their ill-digested effusions into the world,
   disgusted all men of correct taste and wise discernment with their
   puerile productions. These causes operated conjointly to frustrate all
   attempts to revive the spirits of those who felt the necessity of
   furnishing our brethren and friends with that character of literature
   which the state of the Church and of society generally imperiously
   demanded.

   Add to this, as an apology for the neglect, that many of our preachers
   were most assiduously engaged in the frontier settlements, preaching
   the gospel of the kingdom to the poor in log huts, and had therefore
   neither the time nor the means to devote to literary pursuits; and it
   seemed to others, that the pecuniary means at command were needed to
   supply the immediate wants of those who were this engaged in winning
   souls to Jesus Christ from among the outcasts of men. In this most
   praiseworthy work they were eminently blessed.

   But whatever may have been the cause, or how reasonable soever may have
   been the excuse, for suffering ourselves to be for so long a time
   destitute of medium of instruction and information, and of mutual
   edification, such are the facts in the case, and such are their
   consequences upon this portion of the Church's history. That a brighter
   day has dawned upon us in this respect is matter of congratulation
   among all the friends of the Church, of religion, science, and morals.

   In 1810 Mr. Lee's History of the Methodists made its appearance; but it
   by no means satisfied the friends of the cause, and the General
   Conference of 1808, to which the manuscript was submitted, had reported
   adverse to its merits. To secure, therefore, a more perfect history of
   the Church was the anxious desire of Bishop Asbury and many others. To
   effect this object the subject had been submitted to the annual
   conferences, and they had appointed some members of their own body to
   collect facts and historical incidents for a future history, and to
   bring or forward them to this General Conference. Some few were
   presented, and they were referred to a committee to examine and report
   thereon. On examination it was found that though some of the facts
   collected were valuable, yet, on the whole, they were considered meager
   and unsatisfactory. This appears evident from the following remark of
   the committee: --

   "We are of opinion that the letters submitted to us for examination
   contain some valuable information; and good materials for a history of
   Methodism, as far as they go; but we think they are not sufficiently
   full on different points."

   After this the committee go on to state their views of the sort of
   materials which they considered essential to form a complete history,
   such as accounts of the state of the country and the time when
   Methodism was introduced; its difficulties and success biographical
   sketches of eminent preachers and others, &c., &c.; and then they
   recommend that each annual conference should appoint a committee of
   three to collect the needful information, directing that the presiding
   elders and preachers be instructed to aid in this work; and then the
   New York conference was authorized to engage a historian to digest and
   arrange the materials thus furnished, and prepare them for the press.
   In this report the conference fully concurred.

   All this was very well. But like many other good schemes which are
   never executed, merely because left to many hands, without any
   individual who should be responsible for its execution, this proved an
   abortion. Nothing effectual was ever done in the premises. Yet the
   adoption of this report by the General Conference had its use. It no
   doubt served to direct the attention of individuals to this subject,
   and to call forth the talents of those brethren who have at different
   times since written those sketches of Methodism to which the present
   history is much indebted.

   The following clause was added to the section on the legal settlement
   of church property: --

   "But each annual conference is authorized to make such modification in
   the deeds as they may find the different usages and customs of law
   require in the different states or territories, so as to secure the
   premises firmly, by deed, and permanently, to the Methodist Episcopal
   Church, according to the true intent and meaning of the following form
   of a deed of settlement, any thing in the said form to the contrary
   notwithstanding."

   The conference ordered that every "local elder, deacon, and preacher
   shall have his name recorded on the journal of the quarterly meeting
   conference of which he is a member."

   Hitherto the stewards of the circuits had been appointed by the
   preacher in charge; but this conference resolved that the nomination of
   the preacher should be submitted to the quarterly-meeting conference,
   for its concurrence or rejection, and likewise made the stewards
   amenable to said conference for their official conduct.

   A memorial having been presented from the quarterly meeting conference
   in the city of New York, praying the General Conference to adopt some
   means to raise a fund for the relief of the members of conference, it
   was resolved, after considerable discussion,

   "That each annual conference shall be authorized to raise, if they
   think proper, a fund, as in their wisdom they shall see fit, to be
   considered a fund for the relief of the wives, widows, and children of
   traveling preachers, and also for the relief of supernumerary and
   superannuated preachers, and affording supplies for missionary
   purposes."

   This is the first action which I have found on the records of the
   conference especially regarding missions; and the reason is, not
   because the conference was at any time indifferent to the situation of
   those portions of the country which were destitute of the gospel, but
   because the whole system of Methodism had been very justly considered
   missionary in its character from its beginning; but now so many
   inconveniences, not to say suffering embarrassments, had been realized
   from the poverty of the preachers, and also of the people in the new
   settlements, that the attention of some had become awakened to the
   importance of affording pecuniary relief, more effectually than it
   could be in the ordinary way, to those who were thus destitute, and to
   those who were willing and desirous to supply them with the ordinances
   of religion. And though this was but an incipient step, it led finally
   to more important results, which will be noticed at the proper time.

   In respect to the fund which the annual conferences were authorized to
   raise for the relief of worn-out preachers, widows, and children,
   several of the conferences have availed themselves of it at different
   times, under such regulations as they deemed expedient, some under the
   control of conference, and others by forming a society exclusively of
   such members as chose to become subscribers to the institution. But
   with all these helps, nothing like an adequate supply has ever been
   furnished those most needy and deserving members of the Methodist
   community. Most assuredly the widows and orphans, and those preachers
   who have worn themselves out in the service of the Church, ought not to
   be "neglected in the daily ministrations."

   The conference closed its labors on the 22d day of May, 1812, and sent
   out the following address as expressive of their feelings and views at
   this important period of our history: --

   "The Address of the General Conference to the members of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church in the United States of America.

   "Dearly Beloved Brethren: -- When we retrospect the divine goodness
   toward us as a people, our hearts are animated with sentiments of
   praise and thanksgiving. We have been favored with repeated
   manifestations of the power and grace of God. The Redeemer has planted
   his standard in the midst of us, and given astonishing success to our
   labors, and annually made accessions of thousands to our number. From
   the cold provinces of Canada to the sultry regions of Georgia -- from
   the shores of the Atlantic to the waters of the Mississippi -- in
   populous cities, improved countries, and dreary deserts, God has
   extended the triumphs of his grace. Infidelity trembles in the presence
   of the cross, superstition yields to the mild influence of the gospel,
   and ignorance vanishes before the auspicious beams of truth. In the
   revolution of a few years our number has almost amounted to two hundred
   thousand, exclusive of expulsions, withdrawings, and the many happy
   souls who have departed in the faith and gone to their reward in
   heaven. We have mutually participated in our prosperity.

   "The blessings you have received from God should humble you to the
   dust. A recollection of his mercies should inspire you with gratitude
   and love. All the divine benedictions conferred upon you have been
   unmerited and free. Undeserved blessings have been strewed in your
   paths, and distinguished compassion manifested in all your ways. Whilst
   myriads of your fellow-creatures grope in pagan darkness and Mohammedan
   delusion, you enjoy the light and truth of the gospel of Christ. In the
   midst of civil and ecclesiastical convulsions, you have enjoyed repose
   and tranquillity. You are therefore under peculiar obligations to
   grace. By grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves;
   it is the gift of God.' To Him, therefore, ascribe the glory of your
   past and present prosperity.

   "Frequently in our solemn assemblies we have witnessed the effusions of
   grace, and joyfully experienced the overwhelming showers of redeeming
   love. We are bound to you by ties, which death itself cannot dissolve.
   With you again we renew our covenant, to live and die your servants in
   Jesus Christ. You will, therefore, we hope, receive from us the word of
   exhortation.

   "The pursuit of internal religion in all its branches, we most ardently
   insist on. The religion of the Bible does not consist in rites and
   ceremonies; in subscribing creeds and becoming violent partisans; in
   the reveries or a heated imagination, nor the paroxysms of agitated
   passions but in the mind which was in Jesus Christ; in a victory over
   sin, and a conformity to the will of God; in love, joy, peace,
   long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness and temperance;'
   in all the amiable virtues which center in the moral character of God.
   Without this holiness, we shall never enter into the kingdom of glory.
   Be ye holy, for I am holy,' said the almighty God. And no unclean thing
   shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, said Jesus Christ. Therefore
   pursue this holiness with all the ardor of faith and hope. Never give
   sleep to your eyes, nor slumber to your eyelids, until you awake with
   the lovely likeness of Christ.

   "Whilst we insist on internal, we do not forget external religion. You
   are commanded to let your light shine before men, that they may see
   your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven;' to walk
   worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called, and to be careful to
   maintain good works. The duties which God has enjoined on us should be
   discharged with inviolate fidelity. The eyes of God are upon us; the
   enemies of religion behold us, and our conscience will accuse or excuse
   us. O let us be holy in all our outgoings and incomings.

   "Search the Scriptures,' said Jesus Christ, for in them ye think ye
   have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me.' God has not
   left us to learn his nature and will merely from his works and
   providence; he has revealed himself in the pages of inspiration, with
   all the perspicuity necessary to make us wise unto salvation. This holy
   revelation should be studied with industry, attention, and candor. We
   beseech you, read it in your families and in your closets. A proper
   knowledge of it will render you happy in all the calamities of life,
   support you in the pangs of death, and prepare you for an endless
   enjoyment of heaven.

   "A strict attention to the Christian ordinances we deem indispensably
   necessary. Christ himself instituted the holy ordinances of baptism and
   the sacrament of his supper. We trust his professed followers will
   never neglect them. They should be precious in our memory, and dear to
   our heart. Go ye,' said Jesus Christ, and teach all nations, baptizing
   them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.'
   And in reference to his supper he said, This do in remembrance of me.'

   The Sabbath of the Lord deserves your serious consideration and
   attention. It should be wholly consecrated to his service. All labor,
   vain conversation, worldly-mindedness, and visiting, should be
   carefully avoided. Prayer, praise, searching the Scriptures,
   meditation, and waiting on God, should be our only employment. Remember
   the Sabbath day to keep it holy,' is the language of God.

   "It is with regret that we have seen the use of ardent spirits,
   dram-drinking, &c., so common among the Methodists. We have endeavored
   to suppress the practice by our example, that it is necessary that we
   add precept to example; and we really think it not consistent with the
   character of a Christian, to be immersed in the practice of distilling
   or retailing an article so destructive to the morals of society, and we
   do most earnestly recommend the annual conferences and our people to
   join with us in making a firm and constant stand against an evil which
   has ruined thousands, both in time and eternity.

   "Be not conformed to this world,' said the Apostle St. Paul, but be ye
   transformed by the renewing of your mind.' We should unanimously arise,
   and oppose the fashions and maxims of this ungodly world; particularly
   in the article of dress. We are creatures of a moment, hastening to the
   grave, and soon shall stand before God in judgment; therefore let us
   not copy the fashions of the gay and thoughtless, especially by putting
   on gold, and costly apparel; but dress with simplicity, gravity, and
   neatness.

   "The important duty of fasting has almost become obsolete. This we are
   afraid will be productive of melancholy effects. We yet have abundant
   cause for deep humiliation before God and one another. Our country is
   threatened, calamities stare us in the face, iniquity abounds, and the
   love of many waxes cold. O let us again resort to fasting and
   humiliation.

   "The propriety of religiously educating your children, we wish
   seriously to impress upon your minds. To instruct them in the arts and
   sciences may be useful, but to teach the knowledge of God and their own
   hearts is absolutely necessary. It is only religion which can render
   them useful in society, happy in life, and triumphant in death. The
   effects of indifference to the education of children, must be seen and
   lamented by every friend to religion. Children who grow up in iniquity
   become obdurate in sin, and prepared for almost every species of
   vileness. They transgress the laws of God, violate the principles of
   humanity, and frequently terminate their unhappy career covered with
   iniquity and disgrace. Instruct your children, therefore, in the
   principle and excellence of religion. Whilst young, take them by the
   hand and lead them into the salutary paths of wisdom and virtue. And
   rest assured, your labor shall not be in vain. For, said Solomon, train
   up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
   depart from it.'

   "Now, unto Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that
   we can ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, unto
   him be glory in the Church by Jesus Christ throughout all ages, world
   without end. Amen."

   The Presiding Elder Question -- Council for stationing the Preachers

   As this question was largely discussed at the above conference, as well
   as before and since, and has, at times, occasioned considerable
   uneasiness in some minds, this seems as suitable a place as any to
   redeem my pledge to present the question fully and fairly before the
   reader.

   That it may be rightly understood, it is necessary to advert to the
   circumstances under which the practice of fixing the stations of the
   preachers originated. When Mr. Wesley commenced his evangelical labors,
   and helpers were raised up to him from among his sons in the gospel, he
   was naturally led to appoint them to their particular fields of labor,
   and to change them as often as he judged it expedient; and thus, from
   usage introduced in this way, it became an established law, so long as
   Mr. Wesley lived, to appoint each preacher to his circuit, to change
   him as often as he might think the state of the work required; and I
   believe he never allowed any preacher to remain longer than two, or at
   most three years in one place. But after Mr. Wesley's death, this power
   devolved upon the conference, who appoint a stationing committee every
   year, whose duty it is to fix the stations of the preachers, subject to
   an appeal to the conference, if any one thinks himself aggrieved.

   As this power was lodged in the hands of Mr. Wesley, and as his
   assistant in America acted as his representative, doing that which he
   would have done if present; this assistant was in the habit of
   stationing the preachers, of removing or changing them as often and to
   whatever place it was judged the state of the work and the talents of
   the preachers might render it expedient. According to this usage, which
   had grown up with the growth of the societies in America, at the
   General Conference in 1784, when the societies were organized into a
   church, it was made the duty of the bishop "to fix the appointments of
   the preachers for the several circuits and in the intervals of the
   conference to change, receive, or suspend preachers, as necessity may
   require."

   In the account given of the secession of O'Kelly and its causes, we
   have seen that he moved for an appeal to the conference from the
   appointment of the bishop, with the privilege, if any preacher thought
   himself injured by his appointment, to state his objections, and if
   they were considered by the conference valid, the bishop should appoint
   him to another circuit. This motion was, as heretofore related, after a
   full discussion of its merit, decided in the negative by a very large
   majority.

   This decision put the question so completely at rest, that we find
   nothing more in relation to it until the General Conference of 1800,
   when Dr. Coke, after it had been determined to elect an additional
   bishop, presented the following resolution for the consideration of the
   conference: --

   "That the new bishop, whenever he presides in an annual conference, in
   the absence of Bishop Asbury, shall bring the stations of the preachers
   into the conference, and read" (them) "that he may hear what the
   conference has to say upon each station."

   This motion was withdrawn by the mover; and another, that the "new
   bishop, in stationing the preachers, be aided by a committee of not
   less than three, nor more than four preachers, to be chosen by the
   conference," was, after an exchange of opinions in reference to it,
   rejected by the conference; as well as several other attempts which
   were made by different members to restrict the power of the new bishop.

   From these movements it would appear that even those who were in favor
   of abridging the prerogative of the episcopacy in the work of
   stationing the preachers, were so fully convinced of the wisdom and
   strict integrity of Bishop Asbury, that they had no desire to curtail
   his conceded rights in this respect -- a conviction highly creditable
   to him as the superintendent of the Church -- and the majority
   determined that the new bishop should go into office clothed with the
   same powers which had been ceded to the senior bishop.

   I find nothing more on the records of the General Conference in
   reference to this question until 1808, when a motion was made to make
   the office of presiding elder elective by the votes of the annual
   conferences. This motion was largely, and by many of the speakers very
   ably and eloquently discussed, but was finally decided in the negative
   by a majority of twenty-one, fifty-two voting in favor and
   seventy-three against it.

   As this motion was, at the special request of the mover, disposed of
   before the resolutions providing for a delegated general conference
   were passed, it has been strongly urged by some that it should be
   considered unconstitutional either to elect the presiding elders or to
   associate a committee with the bishops in stationing the preachers;
   while others contend that as there is nothing in the restrictive
   regulations bearing specifically on these points, it is still left
   optional with the conference to modify or change the manner of
   appointing those officers as may be judged expedient, and also to elect
   a committee to assist the bishop in stationing the preachers.

   Whether this be so or not, the subject was agitated from one General
   Conference to another, until the year 1823, since which time it has
   been allowed to sleep in peace. At the conference of 1812 the same
   question was introduced by a motion from a member of the New York
   conference, and fully discussed, but was lost by a majority of three,
   forty-two voting in favor and forty-five against it. It may be proper
   to observe here that the delegates in the Philadelphia, New York, and
   Genesee conferences were all in favor of this measure, the majority in
   each being for it, and accordingly sent delegates who coincided with
   them in opinion; but they were seconded by a few only from the southern
   and western delegates.

   The same fate attended a similar motion in 1816, although one of the
   bishops elected at that conference was known to be favorable to the
   proposed change in the mode of selecting the presiding elders. The
   resolution of this conference was, as finally acted on, in the
   following words: --

   "The bishop, at an early period of the annual conference, shall
   nominate an elder for each district, and the conference shall, without
   debate, either confirm or reject such nomination. If the person or
   persons so nominated be not elected by the conference, the bishop shall
   nominate two others for each vacant district, one of whom shall be
   chosen. And the presiding elder so elected and appointed shall remain
   in office four years, unless dismissed by the mutual consent of the
   bishop and conference but no presiding elder shall be removed from
   office during the term of four years, unless the reasons for such
   removal be stated to him in presence of the conference, which shall
   decide without debate on his case."

   It was then provided, in another paragraph, that the presiding elders
   thus selected, should form a council to assist the bishop in stationing
   the preachers.

   Perhaps a greater amount of talent was never brought to bear on any
   question ever brought before the General Conference, than was elicited
   from both sides of the house in the discussion of this resolution. Some
   of the speeches were deep, pungent, and highly argumentative, the
   speakers throwing their whole souls into the subject, and winding
   themselves up to the highest pitch of impassioned eloquence, often
   concluding with a tremendous appeal to the understandings and
   consciences of their antagonists, both sides invoking the future
   prosperity of the Church as an auxiliary to their arguments. The vote
   ultimately declared the voice of the conference to be against the
   measure, thirty-eight voting in favor and sixty-three against it.

   The same question was brought forward in the General Conference of
   1820, and after debate had thereon was again decided in the negative.
   As however, considerable uneasiness was manifested, particularly by the
   advocates of the measure, it was moved by Nathan Bangs, and seconded by
   William Capers, the former friendly and the latter adverse to the
   measure,

   "That three of the members who desire an election of the presiding
   elders, and an equal number of those who are opposed to any change of
   our present plan, be a committee to confer with the bishops upon that
   subject, and that they report to us whether any, and if any, what
   alterations might be made to conciliate the wishes of the brethren upon
   this subject, and that they report tomorrow."

   This resolution having passed the conference, the following were
   appointed members of the committee: Ezekiel Cooper, Stephen G. Roszel,
   Nathan Bangs, Joshua Wells, John Emory, William Capers.

   After a conference with the bishops, agreeably to their instructions,
   the committee unanimously concurred in the following report: --

   "The committee appointed to confer with the bishops on a plan to
   conciliate the wishes of the brethren on the subject of choosing
   presiding elders, recommend to the conference the adoption of the
   following resolutions, to be inserted in their proper place in the
   Discipline, namely: --

   "1. That whenever in any annual conference there shall be a vacancy or
   vacancies in the office of presiding elder, in consequence of his
   period of service of four years having expired, or the Bishop wishing
   to remove any presiding elder, or by death, resignation or otherwise,
   the bishop or president of the conference having ascertained the number
   wanted from any of these causes, shall nominate three times the number
   wanted; -- provided, when there is more than one wanted, not more than
   three at a time shall be nominated, nor more than one at a time
   elected; -- Provided also, that in case of any vacancy or vacancies in
   the office of presiding elder in the interval of any annual conference,
   the bishop shall have authority to fill the said vacancy or vacancies,
   until the ensuing annual conference.

   "2. That the presiding elders be and hereby are made the advisory
   council of the bishop or president of the conference in stationing the
   preachers."

   This report was signed by all the members of the committee above named,
   and submitted to the conference in the afternoon session of May 20th,
   and, after some little conversation in respect to its merits, was
   passed by a majority of thirty-six votes, sixty-one in favor and
   twenty-five against it. As this was presented and adopted in the spirit
   of compromise, it was hoped by many on both sides of the house, that
   this long agitated question would be allowed to rest in quiet.

   In this expectation they were, however, disappointed; for the Rev.
   Joshua Soule, who had been elected on the 13th to the episcopal office,
   after a prayerful and mature consideration of the subject, signified to
   the conference that if consecrated a bishop, inasmuch as these
   resolutions were adopted after his election, and were, in his judgment,
   unconstitutional, he could not consistently with his views of duty, be
   controlled by them and Bishop McKendree, whose health would not permit
   him to participate much in the doings of the conference, on the 23d,
   three days after their passage, came into the conference, and, after
   assigning sundry reasons, entered his objections against them as
   unconstitutional, and, as he apprehended, subversive of the grand
   system of an efficient and general superintendency and itinerancy.

   The judgment of these two men, both justly respected, -- the one on
   account of his office, long and laborious services, his age and
   experience, the other for having the confidence of a majority of his
   brethren for one of the superintendents of the Church, -- had great
   influence upon the minds of many, and led to a serious suspense in
   respect to the expediency of the measure.

   These movements, indeed, created quite a sensation in the minds of
   those who were the most deeply interested in the stability and
   prosperity of our institutions on both sides of the question, and the
   more so, as the bishop elect had tendered his resignation, which was
   finally accepted by the conference. Hence, after an ineffectual attempt
   to get the above resolutions reconsidered, a motion was at length made
   and carried, that they be suspended for four years, and that in the
   mean time the government should be administered as heretofore.

   In 1824, their suspension was continued, and at the General Conference
   in Pittsburgh, in 1828, they were called up, and with but a feeble
   opposition were rescinded, and the subject has not been since agitated.

   I have this endeavored to furnish the reader with a true and impartial
   narration of the facts in relation to a question which has caused more
   agitation in our Church, and sometimes seemed to threaten more
   disastrous consequences, than any other which, up to that time, had
   been canvassed on the floor of the General Conference. It only remains
   now, that the prominence and importance given to it may be duly
   appreciated, to state the outlines of the arguments which were used for
   and against the proposed alteration, by those who entered most deeply
   into the discussion:

   Those in favor of the change, alleged,
    1. That it is more in conformity to the genius of the American people
       to have a voice in the election of those who are to rule over them;
       and as the presiding elders were, by the usages of the Church,
       entrusted with a controlling influence over the preachers, they
       ought to have a choice in their selection.
    2. It was contended that so long as they were appointed by the bishop,
       it necessarily augmented the power of the episcopacy, as, by virtue
       of this appointment, the presiding elders were amenable to the
       bishop alone for their official conduct, and not to their brethren
       in the conference.
    3. Hence, the preacher, let him be oppressed ever so much in his
       appointment, has no medium of redress within his reach, as his case
       is represented to the appointing power through an ecclesiastical
       officer over whom he has no control, and who is completely in the
       bishop's confidence and at his disposal.
    4. These things, it was contended, were incompatible with the natural
       and civil rights of freemen, and especially with that equality
       among brethren of the same ministerial order, as are the presiding
       elders and all the other elders in the Methodist Episcopal Church.
    5. As to a council to advise with the bishops in stationing the
       preachers, it was pleaded that however wise and good the bishop
       might be, it was impossible for him to have that knowledge of the
       local state of the people and peculiar circumstances of the
       preachers, which is essential to enable him to make the most
       judicious appointments; and hence he assumed a responsibility for
       which he could not rationally account.
    6. And then to give one man the complete control over five hundred
       others, many of whom may be equal to him in age and experience, and
       perhaps also in wisdom, learning, and goodness, and as likely to be
       as disinterested in their views and feelings, was an anomaly in
       legislation and an absurdity in practice for which no arguments
       could be adduced, derived from either Scripture or the fitness of
       things.
    7. That however safely this prerogative might he exercised by Bishop
       Asbury, especially in the infancy of the Church, when the number of
       preachers was few, it had now become impossible, on the increase of
       preachers and people, for a bishop to exercise such a tremendous
       power intelligibly and safely to all concerned. Bishop Asbury, it
       was argued, was the father of the connection, and felt for the
       entire family in a way that no one else could, and therefore no one
       else ought to be entrusted with the same power which he had
       exercised.
    8. The example of our British brethren was cited, who, after the death
       of Mr. Wesley, had given the power of stationing the preachers to a
       committee, and then they were allowed an appeal to the conference.

   To these arguments, it was answered,
    1. That the Church of Christ was founded, in some respects, upon very
       different principles from those on which civil governments rested,
       and therefore, though analogous in some particulars, yet in others
       the contrast was so obvious as to neutralize all analogical
       arguments. That though the people elected their legislators,
       president, and governors, yet most of the executive officers were
       appointed by the president; and as presiding elders were executive
       officers, their appointment by the bishop might be justified even
       from analogy.
    2. Though it was admitted that they strengthened the hands of the
       episcopacy, yet being appointed by him saved the Church from an
       evil more to be dreaded than mere episcopal power, and that was an
       electioneering spirit, which must keep the conferences in perpetual
       agitations -- engendering a strife incompatible with the spirit of
       harmony and brotherly love.
    3. Hence, though a preacher might, either from inadvertence or design,
       be injured in his appointment, yet to make the presiding elder
       dependent on the choice of an annual conference might make him fear
       to do his duty, in respect to enforcing discipline, and in exacting
       vigilance from those under him in the discharge of duty; moreover
       his redress was always with the bishop and the annual conference,
       to whom conjointly the presiding elder is responsible for his
       official conduct.
    4. As to natural and civil rights, it was retorted, that though a
       Methodist preacher retained them as a citizen, yet the moment he
       entered the itinerancy, he became subject to ecclesiastical
       restraints which, though not incompatible with his rights as a
       freeman, were nevertheless essential to the preservation and
       efficient operation of the itinerancy.
    5. In respect to the necessity, arising from the limited information
       and want of local knowledge of a bishop, of associating others with
       him in stationing the preachers, this was remedied in practice by
       his receiving all the information he could from presiding elders
       and others, and then acting according to the dictates of an
       unbiased judgment, which was less likely to be influenced by local
       prejudices than those who, from their more limited sphere of
       information, were liable to be biased by partial interests and
       local feelings.
    6. As to an unlimited control over five hundred men, more or less,
       while it was admitted that many of them might be equal to the
       bishop in general wisdom and experience, yet they could not, from
       their position, have that comprehensive knowledge of the whole
       work, and that experience arising from extensive travel and
       information which belonged to an itinerating episcopacy; and,
       moreover, this control had a check in annual conferences, who might
       ultimately determine whether a preacher was justified or not in
       refusing to go to his appointment, and also by the General
       Conference, under the inspection of which the bishop's conduct
       passed every fourth year.
    7. Though it be admitted that Bishop Asbury sustained a fatherly
       relation to the Church which none of his successors could, and had
       a more intimate knowledge of preachers and people, both from his
       having grown up with them, and the comparative smallness of their
       number, yet it was contended, that the having an increased number
       of bishops, together with those restraints constantly thrown around
       them by the watchful vigilance of their brethren in the annual and
       general conferences, would prevent a wanton exercise of power, and
       render it still safe in their hands.

   As to our British brethren, they had no other visible head than their
   conference. But we have, and therefore can act more efficiently through
   this medium, than we could do by a stationing committee. It was still
   further contended, and with great force of argument, that if this power
   were taken from the bishops, it would be extremely difficult to keep up
   an interchange of preachers from one annual conference to another, a
   difficulty not felt in England, where they were all united in one
   conference, in which all their business was transacted.

   In the course of this discussion two opposite views were taken of the
   doctrine of responsibility. Some of those who contended for reserving
   this power in the hands of the bishop, insisted that the episcopacy was
   responsible for the entire executive administration, in all its
   ramifications, and therefore, in order that it might exercise it
   safely, it must have the control of the appointments, not indeed to
   office, but to the several stations, so that if those acting under its
   appointment did not discharge their trusts with fidelity, they might be
   removed or changed at pleasure; and as a strong and commanding motive
   for a wise and faithful execution of this high trust, the episcopacy
   was held responsible to the General Conference, which had entrusted to
   the bishops the preservation of our itinerancy in all its parts; and
   this they could not do if the power of appointment were taken from
   them.

   To this it was replied, that though this seemed very plausible in
   theory, it was not possible to exemplify it in practice -- that it was
   loading the episcopacy with a weight of responsibility too heavy for
   any mortal and fallible man to bear, and therefore must ultimately
   crush the episcopacy beneath its pressure. To prevent this it would be
   most judicious to divide the responsibility among the several annual
   conferences, and hold the presiding elders especially strictly
   responsible to them for their official as well as their moral and
   Christian conduct -- as it was admitted on all hands that the preachers
   were held accountable to their respective conferences for their
   ministerial and Christian conduct, it was in vain to contend that the
   episcopacy should be made liable to censure for their malversation. The
   former traced responsibility from the General Conference, who made the
   regulations and judged of episcopal acts, to the episcopacy, and thence
   down through the several grades of Church officers: the latter traced
   it up through the societies, to quarterly and annual conferences, to
   the General Conference; while others contended, with more truth than
   either, it is believed, that each body and officer was accountable for
   its and his own conduct, and the latter to the tribunal from which he
   received his authority, and held the right to call him to an account
   for his acts and deeds.

   These several topics, with others of a collateral character, were
   enlarged upon and amplified at the several stages of this discussion,
   according to the peculiar views and feelings of the several speakers
   who distinguished themselves on each side of the question, until the
   subject seemed to be exhausted; when finally, other matters of
   weightier importance and more seriously affecting the vital principles
   of Methodism, called off the attention of all from this question, and
   led them to a union of effort to preserve our institutions from
   deterioration and this union served to convince both that if they had
   at any time indulged suspicions of each other's attachment to the
   essential principles of our economy, they had labored under erroneous
   impressions.

   That such suspicions were indulged to some extent, there is reason to
   believe; and it was this which sometimes gave an irritating poignancy
   to some of the remarks and arguments, and led to momentary
   interruptions of brotherly affection. But I think I may now venture to
   say without the fear of contradiction, that among those who advocated
   this modification in a feature of our government, there have been found
   those who have manifested an unabated attachment to the episcopacy, to
   the itinerancy, and the entire economy of our Church, and have done as
   much effectually to support it as any of their brethren; and I am
   equally well convinced that those who withstood all such alterations
   were actuated by the same hallowed motives, and that it was an honest
   fear that if admitted, they would impair the integrity and weaken the
   force and energy of the general system, and thus impede its progress in
   its career of usefulness; but now, having for the present buried all
   differences of opinion, both may rejoice together in working unitedly
   in carrying forward the grand cause in which we are mutually engaged,
   and in striving to hand down the Methodism, which we all love,
   unimpaired to the generations that may come after us.

   It will be perceived by the attentive reader, that it was admitted on
   all hands that a power to station the ministry must exist somewhere, or
   the itinerancy would stop. For the moment it is admitted that a
   minister may choose his own station, or that the people may control it,
   the itinerancy falls to pieces. The only controversy therefore was,
   where can the stationing power be the most usefully, safely, and
   energetically lodged, and the majority have hitherto decided with the
   bishops -- and there let it rest, unless future events shall reveal
   such an abuse of the power as will render it necessary either to
   dissolve the itinerancy or to commit its destinies to other hands --
   neither of which, it is hoped, will ever be realized.

   I know it has been contended by some that the people are hereby
   deprived of all their rights in the choice of their minister. This,
   however, is, I think, a great mistake. They choose and recommend them
   all, in the first instance, in their primary assemblies for no man can
   receive a license, either to exhort or preach, unless he be first
   recommended by the class or leaders' meeting to which he belongs. He
   then passes up through the quarterly-meeting conference, composed of
   his peers, and thence to the annual conference, in the meantime
   exercising his gifts among the brethren who are the ultimate judges of
   his qualifications and usefulness.

   In the next place the people have access to the stationing power, and
   are respectfully heard; for Bishop Asbury used to say, we must never
   deny our people the right of being heard by petition or remonstrance;
   as this is all the choice they either have or demand in respect to whom
   they will have to rule over and to preach to them; and therefore were
   this denied them, they might well complain of a spiritual despotism.
   Except the Congregationalists -- and I do not know that we ought to
   except [30] even these -- the Methodists have as much of a voice in the
   choice of their ministers, as any other denomination; for the
   Presbyterians can neither settle nor dismiss a minister without the
   consent of the presbytery, nor the Protestant Episcopalians, or other
   Episcopal Churches, without the consent of their bishop. There must, in
   the nature of things, be an umpire somewhere, to decide this question;
   and the Methodist Episcopal Church has seen fit, for the reasons
   already assigned, to commit it to the episcopacy; and if it require a
   greater sacrifice on the part of the ministry to bow to its exercise
   than some others are willing to make, it must be admitted, I think, on
   all hands, that it is a mode of procedure which has so far worked
   energetically and most beneficially for the best interests of the
   people generally; for all classes have more or less either seen or felt
   its benign effects in bringing sinners from darkness to light, and
   preserving the Church in peace and purity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [28] As I speak from memory only, I may have mistaken the contents or
   this letter, but think I am correct. The letter, I believe, was
   addressed to Bishop Asbury, which, doubtless, is the reason why it is
   not found among the documents or the conference.

   [29] It is true we had a book-room, and the books which had been issued
   from it from time to time had done much good; but to show the meager
   state of this concern about this time, I will append a list of all the
   variety of all the variety of books which were on sale or issued from
   our press, as I find it in Crowther's Portraiture of Methodism in 1813,
   together with the price of each volume: -- " Coke's Commentary on New
   Testament, $20.00 (This was imported from Europe, though afterward
   republished in this country); Wesley's Notes on New Testament, $3.00;
   Wesley's Sermons, 9 vols, $6.50; Wood's Dictionary, 2 vols, $5.00;
   Fletcher's Checks, 6 vols., $5.00; Benson's Life of Fletcher, $1.00;
   Portraiture of Methodism, $1.00; Experience of several eminent
   Methodist preachers, 2 vols., $1. 00 each; The Saints' Everlasting
   Rest, $1.00; Methodist Hymns, 2 vols. bound together, 87>; Law's
   Serious Call to a Holy Life, 75>; Experience and Letters of Hester A.
   Rogers, 75>; Fletcher's Appeal, 75>; Abbott's Life, 75>; Alleine's
   Alarm and Baxter's Call, 50>; Family Adviser and Primitive Physic, 50>;
   Methodist Discipline, 37>; Watters' Life, 37>; Confessions of James
   Lackington, 25>; Truth Vindicated, 31>; Thomas aKempis, 31>; Rowe's
   Devout Exercises, abridged, 25>; A Scriptural Catechism, 6?. And in
   this list, the whole of which -- that is, a copy of each volume --
   independently of Coke's Commentary, which was imported -- might be
   purchased for $29.75, there are but three American publications,
   namely, Abbott's and Watters' Life, and the Scriptural Catechism. Nor
   was it possible, under the circumstances -- for to our certain
   knowledge several attempts were made -- to increase the variety; such
   was the low state of feeling in the heads of the department, and the
   apathy in general on the subject of literature in our Church at that
   period. And be it remembered that the above books had been issued so
   repeatedly without adding anything to the variety, that it is believed
   if the Concern had gone on at this rate much longer, it would have run
   down for want of pecuniary support. The improvement, however, so much
   needed in this department, begun soon after, and has been gradually
   increasing ever since, as may be seen in the account given of this
   establishment in a subsequent chapter.

   [30] That the reader may perceive the reason why it is doubted whether
   or no any exception should be made, let him recollect that the
   Congregationalists claim to exercise the right of choosing their own
   ministers, and of dismissing them at pleasure. Now let us suppose in a
   certain district of country there are one hundred congregations and as
   many ministers to supply them; that among these one hundred ministers
   there are say twenty of eminent talents, thirty of middling, and the
   other fifty ranking among those of the more ordinary class. It may be
   supposed that each of the one hundred congregations will choose one of
   the twenty, but eighty of them must be disappointed; and then, allowing
   them to make choice of the other thirty, fifty of these must yet be
   disappointed, and must, therefore, either do without any, or take the
   man they do not want; for these congregations can no more be certain of
   the man if their choice, than they would if the ultimate decision were
   left with a third person. Even in this respect, therefore, they are no
   more likely to be gratified in their choice than a Methodist
   congregation. In another respect the Methodists have greatly the
   advantage, both ministers and people. If the Methodist people get a
   minister who does not suit them, they may, by remonstrance to the
   appointing power, rid themselves of him at the end of one year, or at
   the end of two years he must be removed to another place. Not so with
   the Congregationalists, nor any of the other denominations we have
   mentioned. Some settle for life, and some for a term of years. In such
   cases they must, however disagreeable he may be, either keep him to the
   end of the term, or hire him to depart. Or if he be engaged from year
   to year, what fluctuations in uncertainty may agitate both minister and
   people; and if the former be dismissed, the latter are not sure of a
   better, while the minister himself is thrown out upon the world
   penniless, until he can ingratiate himself unto the favor of some other
   people less particular than those he left, in respect to ministerial
   qualifications. Now these evils are, in a great measure at least,
   remedied by the system adopted by the Methodist plan of stationing the
   preachers. It has another immense advantage over the other -- it
   diffuses ministerial gifts, by a yearly or biennial interchange, over
   the whole surface of the Church; and thus, "if one suffer all suffer
   with it," and all are equally partakers of the gifts and graces of the
   entire ministry.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 2

    From the close of the General Conference of 1812 to the death of Bishop
    Asbury, in 1816

   Soon after the adjournment of the conference, namely, on the 18th of
   June, the United States declared war against Great Britain. Though this
   event had been expected for some time, yet it created a great sensation
   throughout the country, and particularly among those who regarded
   religion as breathing naught but peace and good will to man. The note
   of preparation, however, was soon sounded through all our borders; and
   as it was expected that the war would rage principally along our
   western and northwestern frontiers, where the inhabitants of the United
   States and of the Canadas approximated each other, it was foreseen that
   the Methodists in these two countries must necessarily come into
   unhappy collisions with each other, and perhaps be obliged, however
   reluctantly, to spill each other's blood. [31]

   Only one preacher, therefore, Thomas Burch, who volunteered for Canada
   from the United States, arrived there; the other, Nathan Bangs, who was
   appointed presiding elder in the lower province, but was to have charge
   also of Montreal, by the consent of the bishops, relinquished his
   journey, after removing from New York as far as Lansingburgh, and
   remained in the United States.

   In consequence of this state of things the brethren in Upper Canada
   were prevented from attending the Genesee conference, to which they
   were now attached; and as all friendly intercourse between the two
   countries was suspended, they were necessarily left to take care of
   themselves in the best way they could. This laid the foundation of that
   uneasiness in the Canadas which eventuated in the separation of the
   work in those provinces from the Methodist Episcopal Church, and led to
   their connection finally with the Wesleyan Methodist Conference. [32]

   The great success which accompanied the labors of the Methodist
   itinerants in the western states and territories, and the growing
   importance in a national point of view, of those parts of the federal
   union, began to attract the attention and to call forth the energies of
   other denominations. Hitherto these had, on many occasions, affected to
   treat the Methodists with silent contempt, as unworthy of notice. But
   their growing prosperity in almost every direction, seemed at length to
   awaken others to activity in striving to imitate them but their zealous
   efforts to extend the gospel by means of missionary labors in the new
   countries and elsewhere.

   In 1810 the American Board of Commissioners commenced its operations,
   and not long after, with a view to furnish them with suitable agents,
   who might be willing to endure the fatigues and privations incident to
   a missionary life in the new countries, "The Charitable Society for the
   Education of Pious Young Men for the Ministry of the Gospel" was
   instituted. And in order to ascertain the true state of things in the
   western country, a commission was sent about this time on an exploring
   expedition through the new states and territories, and Schermerhorn and
   Mills were intrusted with its execution. The report of their travels
   was published; and as they animadverted quite freely upon the economy
   of the Methodist Church, upon the conduct of its ministers, and general
   plan of operations, it roused the indignation of many, and more
   especially of those who had spent their life and sacrificed their all
   of mere earthly enjoyments to plant the standard of the cross in those
   new countries.

   One thing seemed to astonish these gentlemen very much, and shows their
   want of information in regard to the economy of our Church, and that
   was in almost every settlement they visited they found not only
   Methodists and Methodist preachers, but also Methodist books, and the
   query was, whence they came when, lo and behold! they were informed
   that these were sold, and the proceeds forwarded to New York to furnish
   means to print and circulate more! And thus the imagination of those
   gentlemen and their honest readers was filled with the alarming
   apprehension that the country was in danger of being flooded with
   Methodist publications.

   Another danger to be apprehended was the pernicious consequences
   resulting to the population of the west from the prevalence of
   Methodist doctrine and usages; and, in order to give effect to the note
   of alarm, and the danger to be apprehended from the rapid increase of
   the societies, they told their readers that persons were received into
   the Church with only the "expression of desire," thus mutilating the
   language of the "General Rules of the United Societies," for the
   purpose, as it would seem, of lowering the character of Methodism in
   the public estimation; for the readers of this report would not know
   whether the condition of membership was a "desire" for riches, for
   honor, or a desire merely to become Methodists -- whereas the "rules"
   specify. The character of the desire, and likewise state the evidence
   of its real existence -- "a desire to flee the wrath to come, and to be
   saved from their sins," affirming that evidence of such a desire is
   manifested "by avoiding evil of every kind, and doing good of every
   possible sort, according to their power and opportunity."

   Those who read this pamphlet, and who were acquainted with the state of
   things in the west, were somewhat surprised that while the people there
   were growing up into settlements, towns, and villages, destitute of the
   ordinances of religion, those who sustained the present commission
   manifested no concern at all for their spiritual welfare; but that now,
   since the towns were built, the "wilderness turned into a fruitful
   field," and Methodist circuits, societies, districts, and even annual
   conferences established there, they should all at once awake as from a
   profound sleep, and casting a hasty glance over the land, should
   discover that the people were going fast to destruction, and that
   Methodism was poisoning the fountains of knowledge and religion with
   its pestiferous breath!

   These things are mentioned because they form, in some respects, a new
   era in the history of the Methodist Episcopal Church, particularly in
   the west, and led to a new sort of warfare which we have been called
   upon to sustain in order to rescue our institutions from reproach, and
   to preserve our plans of procedure from being frustrated by new modes
   of attack. The sequel of our history will develop all these things, and
   place them in a true point of light.

   Bishop Asbury, though he continued his annual tour of the continent,
   and attended the conferences in company with his colleague, Bishop
   McKendree, began to totter under the infirmities of age, and frequent
   attacks of disease. He was in New England when the proclamation of the
   president of the United States announced to the people that war was
   declared against Great Britain. He who had passed unscathed through a
   bloody contest of seven years' duration, suffering numerous hardships
   in striving to preserve a pure conscience while propagating a religion
   of peace and good-will, could not behold the approach of another
   struggle of a similar character, without feelings of anxiety and alarm.
   These he expressed in a very emphatic manner to the writer of these
   pages, remarking, in reference to our intercourse with our Canadian
   brethren, "there is no mercy in war, and hence we must expect much
   suffering on our frontier settlements," and concluded by saying, that
   "doubtless our sins as a nation had provoked the divine indignation
   against us, and therefore we must expect to suffer."

   He, however, kept on his way, exclaiming with pious resignation, "I
   live in God from moment to moment." Beholding the demoralizing tendency
   of strong drink, in a certain neighborhood, he observes, "They are
   decent in their behavior, and would be more so, were it not for vile
   whiskey. This is the prime curse of the United States, and will be, I
   fear much, the ruin of all that is excellent in morals and government
   in them. Lord, interpose thine arm!" How would his soul have expanded
   with gratitude and delight to have beheld the temperance reformation
   which began its salutary operations since his day! And would he not
   have deprecated any effort to weaken its force, especially by those who
   claim to be his sons in the gospel?

   After traversing various parts of the country, often trembling under
   the infirmities of a sickly body, crossing the Allegheny mountains, and
   descending into the valley of the Ohio, attending several camp-meetings
   in his route, he says, "I shall have traveled six thousand miles in
   eight months, met in nine conferences, and have been present in ten
   camp-meetings." But then he adds soon after, in reference to his labors
   and physical sufferings, for such was his debility that his friends
   sometimes had to lift him into his carriage, "O let us not complain,
   when we think of the suffering, wounded, and dying of the hostile
   armies! If we suffer, what shall comfort us? Let as see -- Ohio will
   give us six thousand for her increase of members in our new district."
   This indeed was his reward; all he asked or sought of his labors and
   sufferings. And it shows also, that notwithstanding hostile armies were
   already measuring swords, the God of Israel was still at work for the
   salvation of the people.

   It appears, indeed, that in the midst of the agitations occasioned by
   the war which began to rage on the frontier, and in some places upon
   the sea-board, God wrought in a powerful manner in various parts of the
   country, particularly on the James River district, where not less than
   six hundred were brought into the Church, chiefly through the agency of
   camp-meetings. In the New London district also there was a gracious
   work of God, including some towns in Rhode Island, in which upward of
   one hundred souls were brought into gospel fellowship, some of whom
   connected themselves with other denominations.

   Forty-eight were located this year, ten returned supernumerary,
   eighteen superannuated, one was expelled, and six had died. These last
   were Samuel Mills, Nathan Weedon, Jesse Pinnell, Lansford Whiting,
   Samuel Thomas, and Greenleaf N. Norris. Some of these had labored long
   and faithfully, and they all died witnessing a good confession, and
   are, no doubt, gathered to their fathers in a better world.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 156,852; Last Year: 148,835;
   Increase: 8,017 -- Colored This Year: 38,505; Last Year: 35,732;
   Increase: 2,773 -- Total This Year: 195,357; Last Year: 184,567 --
   Increase: 10,790 -- Preachers This Year: 678; Last Year: 668; Increase:
   10.

  1813

   There were nine annual conferences this year, the Mississippi
   Conference which was authorized to be formed, if the bishops saw it
   needful, not having been established.

   These times were distressing along the lines between the United States
   and the Canadas, as those places were the principal scenes of the war
   which was now raging with increasing violence between the two
   countries. This not only broke off all friendly intercourse with each
   other, but kept the inhabitants in a continual state of alarm and
   irritation, quite unfriendly to the progress of pure religion. But
   notwithstanding this state of things, there were very extensive
   revivals of religion in other places, so that the increase of members
   was considerably more than it had been for several years previously, as
   may be seen below. Probably many were led to pray more fervently and to
   labor more faithfully in consequence of the afflictions which were felt
   in the country, while others were induced to think more seriously on
   their latter end.

   Among those who located in the New England Conference this year, was
   Pliny Brett, whose admission into the conference had been deferred for
   one year at the time he was eligible to be received into full
   connection. Soon after his location he withdrew from the Church, put
   himself at the head of a party under the denomination of "Reformed
   Methodists." He lured from the Church several local preachers, and a
   considerable number of members, almost entirely breaking up some small
   societies, and thereby occasioned much uneasiness where he commenced
   his operations, which was in Cape Cod, in Massachusetts. From thence
   his influence extended into Vermont, where he was seconded in his
   endeavors to draw away disciples after him by a local preacher by the
   name of Baily. They succeeded in raising a considerable party, which,
   for a short season, made some inroads upon our Church; and though Mr.
   Baily succeeded in establishing some congregations, and still lives to
   enjoy the fruit of his labors, yet the influence of the party is very
   limited, and furnishes another evidence that it requires a union of
   deep piety and much talent to found a distinct denomination of
   sufficient magnitude to command public confidence, and to exert an
   extensive influence on the community.

   While these things were testing the faith and patience of some, and
   "garments rolled in blood" were frightening others with fearful
   apprehensions for the stability of our political institutions, the
   faithful servants of God, keeping aloof as much as possible from the
   strife of party and the war of words, steadily pursued their way in
   search of "the lost sheep of the house of Israel." It is due to truth,
   however, to remark, that while ministers of the gospel, biased perhaps
   too much by some influential members of their congregations, refused
   even to pray for their rulers and country, [33] Bishop Asbury, who had
   long since adopted this country as his own, and most cordially loved
   its institutions, declared most plainly and pointedly, on the floor of
   an annual conference, that he who refused, at this time especially, to
   pray for his country, deserved not the name of a Christian or a
   Christian minister, inasmuch as it was specifically enjoined on all
   such, not only to honor magistrates, but to pray for all that are in
   authority, that we may lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness
   and honesty."

   It was very manifest to all who saw him, that Bishop Asbury was sinking
   under the infirmities of a sickly body, weakened from time to time by
   exposures to inclement seasons, continual labors, and oppressed with a
   multitude of cares, known only to those who feel the weight of such a
   responsible station. Nevertheless, although his friends sometimes
   remonstrated against it, he still performed his annual tour of the
   continent, shunning no danger, deferring no duty which might be
   performed today, from a fear that he should not have strength for the
   morrow, but both publicly and privately admonishing all who came in his
   way of the danger of sin, and encouraging the good to persevere in
   their work. To aid him in scattering the good seed of the kingdom, he
   furnished himself with religious tracts, sometimes getting them printed
   at his own expense -- for as yet we had no tract society -- Bibles, and
   Testaments, which he distributed among the poor; and to assist in
   extending the work in the poorer settlements, the handed his "mite
   subscription" to all whom he considered able to give, allowing no
   individual to subscribe over one dollar, though, if they chose, each
   member of the family might become a donor.

   Apprehensive, as it seems from notices in his journals, that he had not
   many years to live, he dictated a valedictory address to his colleague,
   Bishop McKendree, on the order and institutions of the primitive
   Church; and on Friday, October 29th, he says: -- "On the peaceful banks
   of the Saluda I wrote my valedictory address to the presiding elders."
   In another place he speaks of having made his will, in which he says
   that, through the benevolence of some kind friends who had died
   childless, about two thousand dollars had been bequeathed to him, which
   he should leave to the Book Concern. "Let it return," he remarks, and
   continue to aid the cause of piety."

   In the labors of the conferences he often speaks in terms of eulogy
   upon the help afforded him by Bishop McKendree, who, if he did not
   always travel by his side, generally met him at the annual conferences,
   and discharged most of the active duties of president, and assisted in
   the ordinations and other services of the sanctuary. He needed not
   indeed any other stimulant to active exertions than his own burning
   zeal for God, and the example constantly set him by his senior in
   office. Mutual affection and respect bound them together, and made them
   "true yoke-fellows" in the laborious exercise of their joint
   superintendency. By this means they threw around the general
   itinerancy, and the entire work, a weight of influence not easily
   resisted, but it was felt from the center to the circumference of the
   connection.

   Thus by the example of their superintendents, whose joint labors
   produced a most happy effect, the presiding elders upon their
   districts, the elders, deacons, and preachers upon their several
   circuits and stations, were stimulated to active diligence, and the
   members of the Church generally participated in the spirit which
   actuated their leaders. By this united and harmonious action, as before
   said, notwithstanding the noise of battle was heard along the
   frontiers, heightened as it sometimes was by the war-whoop of hostile
   Indians who were invading some of the defenseless settlements, the
   Church was generally prosperous, sinners were converted, and saints
   "built up on their most holy faith."

   Yet sixty-three preachers were located! eleven became supernumerary,
   twenty superannuated, three were expelled, and one; William B. Lacy,
   withdrew, and afterward connected himself with the Protestant Episcopal
   Church.

   Thomas Branch, John Crane, Jacob Rumph, Jesse Brown, William Young,
   Lasley Matthews, John Smith, Robert Hebard, John Russell, and Ebenezer
   White, having fulfilled their ministry with fidelity, had taken their
   departure to another world during the past year.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 171,448; Last Year: 156,852;
   Increase: 14,596 -- Colored This Year: 42,859; Last Year: 38,505;
   Increase: 4,354 -- Total This Year: 214,307; Last Year: 195,357 --
   Increase: 18,950 -- Preachers This Year: 700; Last Year: 716; Decrease:
   16. [34]

  1814

   The more than usual increase during the past year, in the midst of the
   agitation of war and its attendant evils, shows that religion had a
   strong hold upon the affections of the people, and that while the
   clarion of war sounded along our frontiers and echoed over the waters
   of the lakes, as well as upon the waves of the ocean, men were not
   unmindful of their duty to God and to one another. Indeed, those who
   viewed war among the sorest of God's judgments, and whose hearts were
   panting for the return of peace, were led to humble themselves by
   fasting and prayer, that the God of peace and love might visit his
   heritage more plentifully with the showers of his grace. And how much
   these faithful prayers might have contributed to hasten a termination
   of the bloody conflict, and to bring about the blessings of peace, who
   but the Omniscient can tell? If in answer to the prayer of faith in his
   Son, "He lets his lifted thunder drop" -- if "God's hands or bound or
   open are, as Moses or Elijah prays" -- and if God would spare the
   devoted "cities of the plain". For the sake of ten righteous persons
   may we not believe that he might have inclined the hearts of the rulers
   of Great Britain and America to pacific measures in answer to the
   prayers of his people on both sides of the Atlantic? That there were
   many such we know. That they deprecated this war as unnatural, and as
   tending to desolate the earth in vain, is equally certain. And hence
   the united prayers of many went up before the throne, that the
   olive-branch of peace might supplant the bloody flag of war.

   But the time was not yet. The war still raged this year with more
   violence than ever. And perhaps party politics, particularly in the
   eastern section of our country, never ran higher than they did about
   this time. Indeed, many feared that a severance of our happy union
   would result from this feverish excitement. Yet the God of our fathers
   would not have it so. Just as this storm was ready to burst upon our
   heads, He who "rides upon the stormy sky, and calms the roaring seas,"
   appeared to hush the contending elements, and to bid the hostile forces
   cease their bloody strife.

   In the mean time, the disastrous effects of these things began to be
   more sensibly felt on the interests of true religion. Although those
   who were deeply devoted to God held on their way, and poured out their
   desires to God for the return of peace and the prosperity of the cause
   of Christ, yet many, lured by the glare of military glory, or seized
   with a spirit of revenge for the merciless warfare waged by the hostile
   Indians on defenseless women and children, or fired with a zeal to
   vindicate their country's rights against the invasions of their foes,
   in many instances, having lost the fervor of their piety, entered into
   the war with renewed ardor. The enemy indeed pushed more closely upon
   us now on every side. The burning of Washington, the attack upon
   Baltimore, and the threatening attitude assumed toward the cities of
   New York, Boston, and other places, and the invasions on our frontiers,
   roused a warlike feeling throughout the nation, and excited such a
   general spirit of resistance to these aggressions, that for a season
   the spirit of religion seemed to be absorbed in the feeling of
   patriotism, and the war-whoop took the place of thanksgiving and prayer
   to God. Add to this the domestic disputes arising from various opinions
   respecting the policy of the war, which pervaded all ranks of society,
   from the halls of legislature to the circles around the fireside, and
   we shall see reasons enough why religion did not prosper in the hearts
   of the people as it had done heretofore.

   In the midst of these "shakings and tremblings," on the earth, while
   some were rejoicing over victories won by our fleets upon the ocean and
   the lakes, or boasting of the prowess exhibited by our armies upon the
   land, and others affecting to lament the superior skill and bravery of
   our enemies, there were not wanting those who sighed in secret and in
   public for "the abominations which make desolate," and who exerted
   their energies for the "salvation of Israel." These, keeping aloof as
   much as possible from political strife, were still crying aloud to
   sinners to "repent and give glory to God," and exhorting His people to
   steadfastness in the faith. And though they did not always find the
   "Son of peace" in every house into which they entered, yet the peace of
   God rested upon them, as the reward of their endeavors to promote
   "peace on earth and good will to men."

   A heavy affliction this year came upon Bishop Asbury, and for some time
   his life was held in suspense. Though suffering under great bodily
   weakness, by the kind and unremitting attention of his traveling
   companion, John Wesley Bond, of whom the Bishop speaks in terms of the
   warmest affection and approbation, he was enabled to perform his usual
   tour from one annual conference to another, until he arrived, in the
   latter part of April, at Bethel, in the state of New Jersey. Here he
   was seized with an inflammatory fever, with which he suffered severely,
   and for some time his valuable life was despaired of by his physicians
   and friends. Dr. T. F. Sargent, of Philadelphia, attended him as his
   medical friend, with unremitting attention; and the New York
   Conference, then in session in the city, dispatched a special
   messenger, the Rev. Daniel Hitt, to present to him their affectionate
   respects, and to inquire after his health; they were rejoiced to hear
   on his return, that the bishop was likely to recover. Referring to this
   event in his journal, he says: --

   "We should have failed in our march through New Jersey, but we have
   received great kindness and attentions, and have had great
   accommodations. I return to my journal after an interval of twelve
   weeks. I have been ill indeed, but medicine, nursing, and kindness,
   under God, have been so far effectual, that I have recovered strength
   enough to sit in my little covered wagon, in which they left me." -- "I
   would not be loved to death, and so came down from my sick room, and
   took to the road, weak enough. Attentions constant, and kindness
   unceasing, have pursued me to this place. I look back upon a martyr's
   life of toil, and privation and pain; and I am ready for a martyr's
   death. The purity of my intentions -- my diligence in the labors to
   which God has been pleased to call me -- the unknown sufferings I have
   endured -- what are all these? The merit, atonement, and righteousness
   of Christ alone make my plea. My friends in Philadelphia gave me a
   light, four-wheeled carriage; but God and the Baltimore Conference made
   me a richer present -- they gave me John Wesley Bond as a traveling
   companion. Has he his equal on earth for excellence of every kind as an
   aid? I groan one minute with pain, and shout glory the next!"

   And where would the reader expect to find this sick, limping, skeleton
   of a man next? Under the hands of a nurse, beneath the roof of some
   hospitable mansion, surrounded by kind-hearted and sympathizing
   friends? He will be disappointed. For although after he so far
   recovered as to be lifted into his "light, four-wheeled carriage," the
   gift of his Philadelphia friends, he appeared more like a walking
   skeleton than a living man; yet on the 23d of July, four days only
   after penning the above paragraph, we find him in Pittsburgh, west of
   the Allegheny mountains, "bending his way," to use his own words, "down
   the west side of the Ohio to Swickley," where he was detained two days;
   and thence, in company with his faithful companion, John Wesley Bond,
   he urged his way through rough roads, swamps, and dismal causeways, to
   Steubenville, where he remarks: -- "My health is better:" -- "I live in
   patience, in purity, and the perfect love of God." And thus he
   performed his western tour, sometimes preaching, though unable to
   preside in the conferences, and finally returned to the Atlantic
   states, somewhat improved in health, borne up by the conscious smiles
   of his heavenly Father, the sympathy and affectionate attentions of his
   numerous friends.

   But Bishop Asbury never after recovered his wonted vigor. His
   countenance was fallen and pale -- his limbs trembled, and his whole
   frame bore marks of decay. Indeed, there was a something in his
   appearance which, while it indicated a "soul full of glory and of God,"
   struck the beholder with an awe which may be better felt than
   described. Not being able to stand while he addressed an assembly, he
   sat upon a seat prepared for that purpose, and while thus sitting --
   his whitened locks speaking the honors of age, his pallid countenance
   testifying his general debility, his head involuntarily dropping
   forward until the chin apparently rested upon his beast -- no sooner
   did he begin to speak than his deep sonorous voice, uttering words in
   the name of his God, would arouse the attention of the auditory to such
   thoughts of eternity as overwhelmed them with breathless awe and silent
   astonishment. Though I can remember, I cannot describe, his appearance
   on those occasions. Something, indeed, more than merely human seemed to
   lighten up his countenance when his subject inspired him with those
   "thoughts which breathe" and "words which burn;" and he appeared to
   soar above the infirmities that pressed him down on ordinary occasions;
   at the same time an unearthly appearance, full of dignity, majesty, and
   yet softened with the graces of meekness and patience, sat upon his
   visage and played through the wrinkles of his cheeks.

   Yet in the midst of all these weaknesses he journeyed from place to
   place, saying, "God is with me in all my feebleness" -- "My spiritual
   consolations flow from God in great abundance -- my soul rejoices
   exceedingly in God." Happy he who can thus testify to the goodness of
   God to him personally, while trembling under the infirmities of age,
   disease, care, and labor.

   Among those who had taken their departure to another world this year,
   was the Rev. Philip V. Otterbein, the German minister who had assisted
   in the consecration of Mr. Asbury to the office of a bishop, and with
   whom he ever after held an intimate, Christian, and ministerial
   fellowship. Though not formally attached to the Methodists, yet as he
   always favored their cause, invited them to his pulpit, and
   reciprocated with them in acts of brotherly love, it seems proper that
   some notice should be taken of him in this place.

   The following, though it includes an account of several others besides
   Mr. Otterbein, yet as it contains interesting information, and would
   suffer from an abridgment, is given as I find it in the Methodist
   Magazine, vol. vi., pp. 210, 249. It was furnished at the special
   request of Bishop Asbury, some time before his death, by his friend, F.
   Hollingsworth, who transcribed the bishop's journal, and prepared it
   for the press. It is as follows: --

   "Jacob Boehm, the great grandfather of one of the distinguished
   subjects of the following notices, was of a respectable family in
   Switzerland; and, as is presumed, a member of the German Presbyterian
   Church. His son Jacob was put to a trade; and after faithfully serving
   out his time, he, according to the custom of his country, set out upon
   his three years' travels. In his wanderings through Germany he fell in
   with the Pietists; a people in their faith, discipline, and worship,
   resembling, in a good degree, the Methodists, but more closely the
   societies and congregations formed by William Otterbein and Martin
   Boehm. Upon our traveler's return to the parental roof he talked in a
   style that neither his father nor the parson could comprehend; they
   were natural men, and understood not the things of God. His evangelical
   conversation mingled, most probably, with reproof of the vices and
   Pharisaism of the day, brought, by necessary consequence, persecution
   upon him; and he was sent, guarded by an elder brother, to prison. He
   escaped, however, from his confinement, and sought a refuge in Germany,
   where he remained, having settled near the Rhine. He shortly after
   attached himself to the Menonists, became an honored elder in that
   church, and, we trust, died in the Lord. His son Jacob, the third, was
   also a member in the Menonist church. He gave an example of sobriety,
   temperance, and industry to his children and neighborhood before and
   after his emigration to Pennsylvania, in 1716 or '17; and was honored
   in both countries. As a professor of religion he lived up to the light
   he had; but it was under the ministry of his better instructed son,
   Martin Boehm, that he was blest with superior illumination. He died in
   peace at the family plantation on Pecaway, Conestoga town ship,
   Lancaster county, Pennsylvania, aged eighty-seven years. The son of
   Jacob Boehm the third, Martin Boehm, of whom we desire to speak more
   particularly, was born in November, 1725. The labors and experience of
   his life, as a professor of religion and minister of Christ, may be
   pretty justly estimated by what we learn from himself, communicated in
   answers to certain questions propounded to him by his son Jacob, which
   we here transcribe: --

   Question Father, when were you put into the ministry?'

   Answer My ministerial labors began about the year 1756. Three years
   afterward, by nomination of the lot, I received full pastoral orders.'

   Question What had been your religious experience at that time?'

   Answer I was sincere and strict in the religious duties of prayer in my
   family, in the congregation, and in the closet. I lived and preached
   according to the light had. I was a servant, and not a son; nor did I
   know any one at that time who could claim the birthright by adoption
   but Nancy Keagy, my mother's sister; she was a woman of great piety and
   singular devotion to God.'

   Question By what means did you discover the nature and necessity of a
   real change of heart?'

   Answer By deep meditation upon the doctrines which I myself preached of
   the fall of man, his sinful state, and utter helplessness, I discovered
   and felt the want of Christ within. About the year 1761, hearing of a
   great work of God in New Virginia among the New Lights, as they were
   called, I resolved to find the truth more fully. I accordingly visited
   those parts, and saw many gracious souls who could give a rational and
   Scriptural account of their experience and acceptance with God; these
   assurances roused me to greater efforts to obtain the blessing. On my
   return, very large congregations assembled to hear the word, not only
   on the Sabbaths, but on week-days also. My zeal displeased some of my
   brethren in the ministry; but my heart was enlarged, and I had an
   earnest travail of soul to extend the knowledge of salvation to Jew and
   Gentile. I enlarged the sphere of my labors as much as my situation in
   life would permit.'

   Question Were your labors owned of the Lord in the awakening and
   conversion of souls?'

   Answer Yes many were brought to the knowledge of the truth. But it was
   a strange work; and some of the Menonist meeting-houses were closed
   against me. Nevertheless, I was received in other places. I now
   preached the gospel spiritually and powerfully. Some years afterward I
   was excommunicated from the Menonist Church on a charge, truly enough
   advanced, of holding fellowship with other societies of a different
   language. I had invited the Menonites to my house, and they soon formed
   the society in the neighborhood which exists to this day: my beloved
   wife Eve, my children, and my cousin Keagy's family, were among the
   first of its members. For myself, I felt my heart more greatly enlarged
   toward all religious persons and to all denominations of Christians.
   Upward of thirty years ago I became acquainted with my greatly beloved
   brother, William Otterbein, and several other ministers, who about this
   time had been ejected from their churches, as I had been from mine,
   because of their zeal, which was looked upon as an irregularity. We
   held many and large meetings in Pennsylvania, Maryland, and New
   Virginia, which generally lasted three days: at these meetings hundreds
   were made the subjects of penitence and pardon. Being convinced of the
   necessity of order and discipline in the church of God, and having no
   wish to be at the head of a separate body, I advised serious persons to
   join the Methodists, whose doctrine, discipline, and zeal suited, as I
   thought, an unlearned, sincere, and simple hearted people. Several of
   the ministers with whom I labored, continued to meet in a conference of
   the German United Brethren; but we felt the difficulties arising from
   the want of that which the Methodists possessed. Age having overtaken
   me, with some of its accompanying infirmities, I could not travel as I
   had formerly done. In 1802 I enrolled my name on a Methodist
   class-book, and I have found great comfort in meeting with my brethren.
   I can truly say my last days are my best days. My beloved Eve is
   traveling with me the same road Zionward my children, and most of my
   grandchildren, are made the happy partakers of the same grace. I am,
   this 12th of April, 1811, in my eighty-sixth year. Through the
   boundless goodness of my God, I am still able to visit the sick, and
   occasionally, to preach in the neighborhood: to his name be all the
   glory in Christ Jesus!'

   Martin Boehm died on the 23d of March, 1812. His death was thought to
   have been hastened by an imprudent change of dress. Bishop Asbury, in a
   sermon preached upon the occasion of the death of his long-known and
   long-loved friend, improved the opportunity by mentioning some further
   particulars of him, of his friends, and of the work of God in which he
   and they had labored. His observations are, with the alteration and
   substitution of a few sentences and words, as follow: -- Martin Boehm
   had frequent and severe conflicts in his own mind, produced by the
   necessity he felt himself under of offending his Menonist brethren by
   the zeal and doctrines of his ministry: some he gained; but most of
   them opposed him. He had difficulties also with his United Brethren. It
   was late in life that he joined the Methodists, to whom, long before,
   his wife and children had attached themselves: the head of the house
   had two societies to pass through to arrive at the Methodists, and his
   meek and quiet spirit kept him back. Honest and unsuspecting, he had
   not a strange face for strange people. He did not make the gospel a
   charge to any one; his reward was souls and glory. His conversation was
   in heaven. Plain in dress and manners, when age had stamped its impress
   of reverence upon him, he filled the mind with the noble idea of a
   patriarch. At the head of a family, a father, a neighbor, a friend, a
   companion, there was one prominent feature of his character which
   distinguished him from most men; -- it was goodness; you felt that he
   was good. His mind was strong and well stored with the learning
   necessary for one whose aim is to preach Christ with apostolic zeal and
   simplicity. The virtue of hospitality was practiced by his family as a
   matter of course; and in following the impulse of their own generous
   natures, the members of his household obeyed the oft-repeated charge of
   their head to open his doors to the houseless, that the weary might be
   solaced and the hungry fed. And what a family was here presented to an
   observant visitor! Here was order, quiet, occupation. The father, if
   not absent on a journey of five hundred miles in cold, hunger,
   privations, and labor, proclaiming the glad tidings of salvation to his
   dispersed German brethren, might, by his conduct under his own roof,
   explain to a careful looker-on the secret of a parent's success in
   rearing a family to the duties of piety, to the diligent and useful
   occupation of time, and to the uninterrupted exhibition of reflected
   and reciprocated love, esteem, and kindness in word and deed. If it is
   true, as is generally believed, that the mother does much toward
   forming the character of their children, it will be readily allowed
   that Martin Boehm had an able help-mate in his pious wife. The
   offspring of this noble pair have done them honor -- the son Jacob,
   immediately upon his marriage, took on himself the management of the
   farm, that his excellent father might, without carefulness,' extend his
   labors more far and wide. A younger son, Henry, is a useful minister in
   the Methodist connection, having the advantage of being able to preach
   in English and German. We are willing to hope that the children of
   Martin Boehm, and his children's children to the third and fourth and
   latest generations, will have cause to thank God that his house, for
   fifty years, has been a house for the welcome reception of gospel
   ministers, and one in which the worship of God has been uninterruptedly
   preserved and practiced! O ye children and grandchildren! O, rising
   generation, who have so often heard the prayers of this man of God in
   the houses of your fathers! O, ye Germans, to whom he has long preached
   the word of truth, Martin Boehm being dead yet speaketh! -- O hear his
   voice from the grave, exhorting you to repent, to believe, and to
   obey.'

   "But our beloved brother, who has gone to his high reward, was not the
   only laborer in the vineyard. Will it be hazarding too much to say that
   in Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, there were one hundred
   preachers and twenty thousand people in the communion of the United
   Brethren? Many of these faithful men have gone to glory; and many are
   yet alive to preach to congregated thousands. Pre-eminent among these
   is William Otterbein, who assisted in the ordination which set apart
   your speaker to the superintendency of the Methodist Episcopal Church.
   William Otterbein was regularly ordained to the ministry in the German
   Presbyterian Church. He is one of the best scholars and the greatest
   divines in America. Why then is he not where he began? He was
   irregular. Alas, for us; the zealous are necessarily so to those whose
   cry has been, put me into the priests' office, that I may eat a morsel
   of tread. Ostervald has observed, Hell is paved with the skulls of
   unfaithful ministers.' Such was not Boehm. Such is not Otterbein; and
   now, his sun of life is setting in brightness: behold the saint of God
   leaning upon his staff, waiting for the chariots of Israel!

   "I pause here to indulge in reflections upon the past. Why was the
   German reformation in the middle states, that sprang up with Boehm,
   Otterbein, and their helpers, not more perfect? Was money, was labor
   made a consideration with these primitive men? No; they wanted not the
   one, and heeded not the other. They all had had church membership, as
   Presbyterians, Lutherans, Moravians, Dunkers, Menonists. The spiritual
   men of these societies generally united with the reformers; but they
   brought along with them the formalities, superstitions, and peculiar
   opinions of religious education. There was no master-spirit to rise up
   and organize and lead them. Some of the ministers located, and only
   added to their charge partial traveling labors; and all were
   independent. It remains to be proved whether a reformation, in any
   country, or under any circumstances, can be perpetuated without a
   well-directed itinerancy. But those faithful men of God were not the
   less zealous in declaring the truth because they failed to erect a
   church government. This was wished for by many; and among the first,
   perhaps, to discover the necessity of discipline and order, was
   Benedict Swoape of Pipe-creek, Frederick county: he became Otterbein's
   prompter as early as 1772, and called upon him to translate the general
   rules of the Methodists, and explain to their German brethren,
   wandering as sheep without a shepherd, their nature, design, and
   efficacy. Otterbein, one of the wisest and best of men, could only
   approve: when urged to put himself forward as a leader, his great
   modesty and diffidence of himself forbade his acceptance of so high a
   trust. His journeys, nevertheless, were long, his visits frequent, and
   his labors constant; so that, after he came to Baltimore, he might be
   called a traveling preacher, until age and infirmities compelled him to
   be still. Surely I should not forget his helpers. I may mention once
   more Benedict Swoape: he removed to Kentucky, and preached until near
   his death at eighty years of age. There was the brother-in-law of
   Otterbein, and his great friend, Doctor Hendel, a man of talents,
   lettered and pious, and a great preacher. Hendel was first stationed,
   as a German Presbyterian minister, in Tulpahocking and Lancaster, and
   his last labors were in Philadelphia, where, late in life, he fell a
   victim the yellow fever of 1798. Wagner, a pupil of Otterbein's, was
   stationed in Little York, Pennsylvania, and permanently, thereafter, in
   Fredericktown, Maryland: he was, we have reason to hope, a good and
   useful servant of his Lord. Henry Widener, first a great sinner, and
   afterward a great saint, was a native of Switzerland; as is usual with
   his educated countrymen, he spoke in German and French with equal
   fluency. His preaching was acceptable and useful; he had for the
   companion of his itinerant labors, John Hagerty; and the gospel of our
   Lord was preached by these men in German and English to thousands
   between the north and south branches of the Potomac. Widener died in
   peace near Baltimore; Hagerty is still with us. George Adam Gedding, a
   native of Germany, has been a most acceptable man in the work: he still
   lives near Sharpesburg, in Maryland. Christian Newcomer, near
   Hagerstown in Maryland, has labored and traveled many years. His
   heart's desire has always been to effect a union between his German
   brethren and the Methodists. Are there many that fear God who have
   passed by his house and have not heard of or witnessed the piety and
   hospitality of these Newcomers? Worthy people!

   I will not forget Abraham Traxall, now in the west of Pennsylvania: a
   most acceptable preacher of method and energy. Henry and Christian
   Crumb, twin-brothers born, and twin-souls in zeal and experience: these
   were holy, good men, and members of both societies. John Hersay,
   formerly a Menonist; an Israelite: he is gone to rest. Abraham and
   Christian Hersay; occasional itinerants, good men; busy and zealous.
   David Snyder possessing gifts to make himself useful. Neisch Wanger, a
   good man and good preacher. Most of these men were natives of
   Pennsylvania. May I name Leonard Harburgh, once famous, gifted,
   laborious, useful? He is now only a great mechanic, alas! The flame of
   German zeal has moved westward with emigration. In Ohio we have Andrew
   Teller, and Benedem, men of God, intrusted with a weighty charge,
   subjecting them to great labors. But our German fathers have lost many
   of their spiritual children. Some have led away disciples after them,
   and established independent churches; some have returned whence they or
   their fathers came; and some have joined the Dutch Baptists. Our German
   reformers have left no journal or record, that I have seen or heard of
   by which we might learn the extent of their labors; but from Tennessee,
   where the excellent Baker labored and died, through Virginia and
   Maryland into Pennsylvania, as far eastward as Buck's and Berk's
   counties, the effects of their ministry were happily seen and felt. We
   feel ourselves at liberty to believe that these German heralds of grace
   congregated one hundred thousand souls; that they have had twenty
   thousand in fellowship and communion, and one hundred zealous and
   acceptable preachers.

   "The following paper was found in the handwriting of Bishop Asbury,
   and, as it is believed, of the Rev. Wm. Otterbein: --

   To the Rev. William Otterbein. Sir, -- Where were you born?'

   Answer In Nassau, Dillenburg, in Germany.

   Question How many years had you lived in your native land?

   Answer Twenty-six years.

   Question How many years have you resided in America?

   Answer Sixty years, come next August.

   Question Where were you educated?

   Answer In Herborn; in an academy.

   Question What languages and sciences were you taught?

   Answer Latin, Greek, Hebrew, philosophy, and divinity.

   Question In what order were you set apart for the ministry?

   Answer The Presbyterian form and order.

   Question What ministers assisted in your ordination?

   Answer Shrim and Klinghoaffer.

   Question Where have you had charge of congregations in America?

   Answer First in Lancaster; in Tulpahocking, in Fredericktown in
   Maryland, in Little York in Pennsylvania, and in Baltimore.

   Question In what parts of the United States have you frequently
   traveled through, in the prosecution of your ministerial labors?

   Answer In Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania.

   Question How many years of your life, since you came to this country,
   were you in a great measure an itinerant?

   Answer The chief of the time since my coming to this continent, but
   more largely since coming to Baltimore.

   Question By what means were you brought to the gospel knowledge of God
   and our Saviour?

   Answer By degrees was I brought to the knowledge of the truth while in
   Lancaster.

   Question Have you an unshaken confidence in God through Christ of your
   justification, sanctification, and sure hope of glorification?

   Answer The Lord has been good to me; and no doubt remains in my mind
   but he will be good; and I can now praise him for the hope of a better
   life.

   Question Have you ever kept any account of the seals to your ministry?

   Answer None.

   Question Have you ever taken an account of the members in the societies
   of the United German Brethren?

   Answer Only what are in Baltimore.

   Question Have you taken any account of the brethren introduced into the
   ministry immediately by yourself, and sent out by you? Can you give the
   names of the living and the dead?

   Answer Henry Widener, Henry Becker, Simon Herre, in Virginia; these are
   gone to their reward. Newcomer can give the names of the living.

   Question What ministerial brethren who have been your helpers, can you
   speak of with pleasure, and whose names are precious?

   Answer Guedick, Widener, Herre, Newcomer, and others.

   Question What is your mind concerning John Wesley, and the order of
   Methodists in America?

   Answer I think highly of John Wesley. I think well of the Methodists in
   America.

   Question What are your views of the present state of the church of
   Christ in Europe and America, and of prophecy?

   Answer In continental Europe the church has lost, in a great degree,
   the light of truth. In England and America the light still shines.
   Prophecy is hastening to its accomplishment.

   Question Will you give any commandment concerning your bones, and the
   memoirs of your life? your children in Christ will not suffer you to
   die unnoticed.'

   No answer to this last question."

   In his journal the bishop makes the following remarks respecting Mr.
   Otterbein: --

   By request I discoursed on the character of the angel of the Church of
   Philadelphia, in allusion to P. W. Otterbein -- the holy, the great
   Otterbein -- whose funeral discourse it was intended to be. Solemnity
   marked the silent meeting in the German Church, where were assembled
   the members of our conference and many of the clergy of the city. Forty
   years have I known the retiring modesty of this man of God -- towering
   majestic above his fellows in learning, wisdom, and grace, yet seeking
   to be known only of God and the people of God. He had been sixty years
   a minister, fifty years a converted one."

   This year also, the Church, in both hemispheres, was called to mourn
   over the death of Dr. Coke. Having been released in 1808, from his
   obligations to the American conference, he devoted himself
   thenceforward to the cause of God in Europe, with his accustomed zeal
   and fervor, but more especially to the cause of missions. While engaged
   in this work his attention was directed to the deplorable state of
   things in British India. The researches of Buchanan, and the accounts
   of others who had traveled in that country, had awakened a zeal in the
   hearts of British Christians for the salvation of the idolaters of Asa,
   which now burned with intense ardor in the breast of Dr. Coke, and he
   determined, if Providence favored his design, to establish a mission
   for their benefit. Having made the necessary preparations, in company
   with seven others whom he had selected to accompany him as assistant
   missionaries, on the 30th of December, 1813, he took an affectionate
   leave of his friends at Portsmouth, and on the 1st of January, 1814,
   they all proceeded down the English Channel, and slowly entered upon
   that voyage which for ever separated Dr. Coke from the land of his
   nativity and the scene of his active labors.

   On the morning of the 3d day of May, 1814, in latitude two degrees
   twenty minutes south, and longitude fifty-nine twenty-nine minutes east
   from London, when the servant went, according to his orders, to call
   Dr. Coke from his slumbers, on opening the door of his cabin, he found,
   to his utter amazement, the body of the doctor stretched lifeless upon
   the floor! The intelligence of this mournful event being communicated
   first to the captain of the ship, and then, at his request, to the
   missionaries, produced, as might be expected, a sensation of sorrow not
   easily described. It was supposed by the medical gentlemen who, at the
   request of the missionaries, made a post mortem examination, that he
   died of a fit of apoplexy. As his body was stiff and cold when it was
   discovered, at about half past five o'clock in the morning, and was
   found stretched upon the floor, it was concluded that, feeling unwell
   in the night, he had arisen from his bed to obtain some medicine, when
   he fell at about midnight to rise no more until the resurrection of the
   just and unjust.

   Finding it impracticable to preserve the corpse in that hot climate to
   be brought back to England, according to his request in his will, to be
   deposited by the side of his two wives whom he had buried in Brecon,
   his native town in Wales, at about half past five o'clock, P. M., of
   the same day, the dead body was committed to the deep with suitable
   religious ceremonies, the performance of which, under these solemn
   circumstances, produced very serious impressions on all present.

   Thus ended the life and labors of Thomas Coke, LL.D., and first bishop
   of the Methodist Episcopal Church, in the sixty-seventh year of his
   age. And while we record his death, we cannot well forget the many
   obligations we, as a Church, are under to him for his most zealous and
   disinterested labors among us in the infancy of our Church, and the
   consequent feebleness in which we were when he first visited our Zion.

   It is not, however, my intention to attempt a portraiture of his
   character, nor to enumerate the instances of his labors and sacrifices.
   This has been amply and ably done by his biographer, to whom the reader
   is referred for a full account of the life, education, conversion, and
   ministerial labors, both as a preacher and writer, of Dr. Coke. And the
   proceeding pages will show the high estimation in which he was held on
   both sides of the Atlantic, the relation he sustained to us, the labors
   he performed and the lively interest he manifested in the welfare of
   American Methodism. It is due, nevertheless, to him and to the cause he
   contributed so maternally to and in this country, to say, that he
   crossed the Atlantic no less than eighteen times, at his own expense,
   to serve his American brethren -- that while here he exerted a powerful
   and salutary influence in favor of pure religion, by his preaching and
   the weight of his character -- and that, though he might, on one or two
   occasions, have incautiously committed himself and his brethren to
   those who watched his movements not with the most friendly eye, yet he
   deserves and receives the thankful and affectionate remembrance of
   those who have been benefited by his labors, and know how to appreciate
   his excellences.

   And if at any time he was not treated, in his intercourse with his
   American brethren, with that respectful attention which was due to his
   character -- as was doubtless the case -- he manifested the spirit of
   his Master and Saviour, in throwing over all such instances of human
   frailty the mantle of forgiveness and oblivion, neither abating the
   ardor of his love nor slackening the speed of his diligence to do them
   good, by serving them so long as his services were required. And if his
   spirit, disenthralled from its cumbersome house of clay, is now
   permitted to look from its mansion above, over the wide space covered
   by the ministry and Church he helped to organize and set in motion, he
   no doubt derives one source of his joy from the recollection of what he
   suffered and did in maturing and executing the plan which have resulted
   in the redemption and salvation of so many souls, and looking up to the
   holy throne, he unites with all the redeemed from among men, in
   ascribing the honor of all this to God and the Lamb.

   At the session of the New York conference in 1815, which assembled that
   year in the city of Albany on the 12th day of May, the melancholy news
   of Dr. Coke's sudden death had just reached our shores through the
   public papers, and, at the request of the conference, Bishop Asbury
   preached his funeral discourse. In this discourse the bishop bore ample
   testimony to the exalted character, the Christian and ministerial
   virtues, of his deceased friend and colleague. The following are some
   of his remarks, as I find them recorded in his journal: --

   "He was of the third branch of the Oxonian Methodists -- of blessed
   mind and soul -- a gentleman, a scholar, and a bishop to us -- as a
   minister of Christ, in zeal, in labors, and in services, the greatest
   man of the last century."

   Locations still continued to weaken the ranks of the itinerancy by
   forcing us to supply the circuits with young and inexperienced men,
   who, though they were zealous and active, were necessarily deficient in
   that sound practical wisdom which is desirable in the ministry, more
   especially for the judicious administration of discipline. No less than
   sixty-five were located this year, namely, in the Ohio conference nine,
   The Tennessee five, the South Carolina twelve, the Virginia fifteen,
   the Baltimore five, the Philadelphia seven, New York one, [35] New
   England eight, and Genesee three. There were twenty returned on the
   supernumerary list, and twenty-two on the superannuated, and one was
   expelled. Ralph Lotspeich, Leroy Merritt, William Mills, Peter
   Moriarty, Francis Ward, Abner Clark, and Anning Owen, having fulfilled
   their ministry with fidelity, had taken their departure from the field
   of labor to the land of rest.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 168,698; Last Year: 171,448;
   Decrease: 2,750 -- Colored This Year: 42,431; Last Year: 42,859;
   Decrease: 428 -- Total This Year: 211,129; Last Year: 214,307 --
   Decrease: 3,178 -- Preachers This Year: 687; Last Year: 678; Increase:
   9.

   This unusual decrease shows that the effects of the war, as has been
   remarked above, had been unfriendly to the interests of religion.

  1815

   At this the time principal labor of the superintendency devolved on
   Bishop McKendree, the wisdom of whose administration was generally
   appreciated by both the ministry and membership; for Bishop Asbury,
   though still moving around among the churches, was too feeble to render
   much assistance in the active business of the conferences. He, however,
   met his colleague at the conferences, fixed the stations of the
   preachers, preached occasionally, and for a short season at a time took
   his seat in the conferences. Here he was uniformly greeted with a
   hearty welcome, and venerated as the patriarch of the American
   Methodist Episcopal Church.

   After recording the incidents of his travels through the several
   states, preaching often, distributing Testaments to the poor, visiting
   families and praying with them, as well as soliciting pecuniary aid for
   the poorer preachers by presenting to his friends his "mite
   subscription," he gives the following account of his interview with
   Bishop McKendree: --

   "We had a long and earnest talk about the affairs of our Church, and my
   future prospects. I told him my opinion was, that the western part of
   the empire would be the glory of America for the poor and the pious --
   that it ought to be marked out for five conferences, to wit, Ohio,
   Kentucky, Holston, Mississippi, and Missouri -- in doing which, as well
   as I was able, I traced outlines and boundaries. I told my colleague,
   that having passed the first allotted period, (seventy years,) and
   being, as he knew, out of health, it could not be expected that I could
   visit the extremities every year, sitting in eight, it might be twelve
   conferences, and traveling six thousand miles in eight months. If I was
   able still to keep up with the conferences, I could not be expected
   preside in more than every other one. As to the stations, I should
   never exhibit a plan unfinished, but still get all the information in
   my power, so as to enable me to make it perfect, like the painter who
   touches and retouches until all parts of the picture are pleasing. The
   plan I might be laboring on would always be submitted to such eyes as
   ought to see it; and the measure I meted to others I should expect to
   receive."

   How fallacious often is hope! This conversation, though it exhibits a
   mind ever intent on the best in interests of the Church, in thus
   maturing plans for its future prosperity, was like the flickering light
   of an expiring lamp, which, before it is entirely extinguished, flares
   up suddenly and then goes out for ever. Such indeed was the general
   debility of Bishop Asbury that he had to be lifted in and out of his
   carriage, and if he visited the conference room at all, it was only to
   astonish his friends with the sudden coruscations of light which beamed
   from a mind pent up in a body trembling under the ravages of disease
   and the infirmities of age. But he had been so long accustomed to
   constant traveling and preaching, that this habitual exercise seemed
   essential to life and comfort, and no doubt contributed to lengthen his
   days, which were now nevertheless speedily drawing to their close.

   The war, which had now raged with various degrees of violence and
   success, for about three years, was near its termination. Though the
   battle of New Orleans was fought on the 8th of January, 1815, and
   several naval victories were won upon the ocean after that event, yet
   the articles of peace were signed by the British and American
   commissioners at Ghent on the 24th of December, by which an end was
   soon put to this bloody struggle, greatly to the joy of the friends of
   human happiness on both sides of the Atlantic, and much more to those
   along the lines of Canada and the United States, where so much human
   suffering had been realized.

   But though such places had severely felt the deleterious effects of
   this scourge of humanity, especially on the interests of true religion,
   yet in places not so much exposed to the ravages of war the work of God
   had prospered during the past year. Since, however, the commencement of
   hostilities, there had been a check put upon the extension of the work
   among the people on the frontiers, as well is upon the advancement of
   the settlements themselves. The Indian tribes had been generally
   enlisted on one side or the other of the belligerents, had invaded each
   other's territories, and thus kept the exterior settlements in a
   continual state of fear and alarm, of excitement and irritation -- a
   state of things exceedingly unfriendly to religious enjoyment and
   effort. It will therefore be seen that, after deducting for
   withdrawings, extensions, and deaths, which is always done in taking
   the number of Church members, the increase this year was very small,
   and hence it may be presumed that the spirit of piety was rather low
   throughout our borders generally.

   Sixty-seven were located, thirteen were returned supernumerary,
   twenty-two superannuated, one expelled, and four had died. Two of the
   last, namely, John McClaskey and Michael Coate, had been long and
   favorably known to the Church, highly distinguished for their deep
   piety, indefatigable and useful labors; and in their death they gave a
   lively testimony to the power of religion to sustain them in their
   passage to immortality and eternal life. Though the race of the others,
   Lewis Hobbs and William S. Fisher, was comparatively short, yet it was
   brilliant, and ended as it began, in the grace of God, and in the hope
   of an eternal reward.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 167,978; Last Year: 168,698;
   Decrease: 720 -- Colored This Year: 43,187; Last Year: 42,431;
   Increase: 756 -- Total This Year: 211,165; Last Year: 211,129 --
   Increase: 36 -- Preachers This Year: 704; Last Year: 687; Increase: 17.

  1816

   Peace being restored to the country, business began to resume its usual
   channel, and the people to attend to their concerns with their wonted
   cheerfulness and diligence, and we find this year Upper and Lower
   Canada, which had been insulated [we would now say, "isolated" -- DVM]
   during the war, was included among the districts of the Genesee
   conference, though Quebec was supplied, at the request of the people in
   that place, by the mission committee in London. But though this calm
   appeared in the civil atmosphere, the effects of the late storms of war
   and bloodshed were still visible along the highways and fields in which
   God's servants were called to labor. The southwestern frontiers were in
   some places disturbed by Indian depredations, and in other parts of the
   country the exasperations of spirit which had been excited by
   conflicting opinions respecting the policy of the late war, and the
   manner in which it was waged, were not yet wholly allayed, and hence
   the spirit of piety had not yet recovered its wonted healthy tone and
   vigorous action; and the manner in which the rejoicings and
   thanksgivings for the return of peace were held, in many instances,
   served rather to feed than to extinguish the flame of political strife
   and animosity, as well as to call forth and strengthen the warlike
   propensities of the human heart. In some places, however, a spirit of
   devout gratitude to the Author of all good was cherished in the
   sanctuary, where the people of God prostrated themselves before His
   throne, and after lifting their hearts to Him in fervent
   acknowledgments of praise and thanksgiving for the restoration of peace
   and its attendant blessings, were entertained from the pulpit with a
   rehearsal of his loving-kindness to the nation and to the Church. These
   were seasons of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, and tended to
   enlarge the soul with enlightened views of the divine character and
   goodness, to revive and nourish the spirit of piety, and to unite the
   feeling of true patriotism with a sense of pious gratitude.

   But, though the superintendents, as far as they were able, attended to
   their duties in the general work, and the preachers watched over their
   respective flocks with their wonted diligence and zeal, there were no
   special revivals of the work of God, and hence the increase of numbers
   was small, notwithstanding the members in Canada were this year
   included in the enumeration.

   We have already seen that Bishop Asbury's declining health prevented
   him from performing much active service, and that consequently the
   duties of the superintendency devolved chiefly on Bishop McKendree. He
   accordingly moved around among the churches, attended the northern
   conferences alone, and by his example of diligence, and his advice in
   the councils of the Church, endeavored to diffuse the spirit of piety
   and active zeal throughout our borders. And all things considered, we
   had reason for thankfulness to God that he had not forsaken his Church
   in the wilderness.

   Sixty-three were located this year, eight returned supernumerary,
   thirty-two superannuated, two were expelled, and one had withdrawn.

   The following had exchanged the field of labor for the land of rest: --

   Learner Blackman, who embraced religion in his youth, and in 1800
   entered the traveling ministry. After making full proof of his ministry
   in various circuits in the older conferences, in 1805, at the request
   of the bishops, he followed in the track of Tobias Gibson into the
   Mississippi Territory, and was stationed on the Natchez circuit. In
   performing this journey through the wilderness, in which he was
   compelled to encamp in the woods ten or eleven nights, he was called to
   endure hardships which the Methodist preachers of those days felt more
   sensibly than it is easy adequately to describe. But neither the
   savages of the wilderness, the lonely deserts through which they were
   obliged to pass to reach their destined post, nor the labors to be
   performed or privations to be endured, could prevent such souls as that
   which actuated Blackman from pressing forward in the path of duty.

   On his arrival in Natchez, though he found a few who had been brought
   to God by the instrumentality of his eminent predecessor, Tobias
   Gibson, yet Methodism was in its infancy, and he had to contend with a
   variety of hindrances which were thrown in his way by the lukewarmness
   of some, the entire indifference of others, and the open hostility of
   not a few.

   He continued west of the mountains, laboring with pious zeal and
   indefatigable industry, filling, for a number of years, the office of
   presiding elder, until the day of his death. This mournful event
   heightened the sorrow of his friends by the manner in which it
   occurred. He and his consort were returning from a visit on the west
   side of the Ohio river, and while recrossing that river in a
   ferry-boat, their horses became frightened, and leaping out threw him
   into the river and he was drowned.

   His eulogy is written in the affections of the people who had been
   blessed under his ministry. And though his death was sudden, and
   brought about in circumstances which forbade his friends from catching
   his dying words, yet the purity of his life, the faithfulness of his
   preaching, and the diligence with which he pursued his calling as an
   overseer of the flock of Christ, speak more emphatically than mere
   words could do, in favor of his preparedness to meet his Judge, in the
   hope of acceptance through the blood and righteousness of Jesus Christ.

   Richmond Nolley was another of those soldiers of Jesus Christ who won
   laurels of celestial glory in the western wilds. He entered the ranks
   of the itinerancy in 1808, and after traveling some circuits in the
   south, by which he gave evidence of his willingness to "endure hardness
   as a good soldier of Christ," he went on a mission to Tombigbee, in the
   territory of Alabama. Here he devoted two years of hard labor, filling
   his appointments with fidelity, though often walking on foot with his
   saddlebags upon his shoulders, besides instructing the people, black as
   well as white, from house to house.

   Being in this country at the commencement of the hostilities between
   the United States and Great Britain, he had to contended with
   difficulties that arose from the movements of hostile Indians, which
   compelled the people in that new country to screen themselves from
   their fury in temporary forts. He, however, would not relax his labors,
   but went fearlessly from fort to fort, warning and instructing the
   people, often hazarding his life, and wearing out a constitution
   naturally weak, for the sake of communicating spiritual benefit to
   immortal beings.

   From this place he was removed, in 1814, to Attakapas circuit, in
   Louisiana. Here he was exposed to all the perils and hardships which
   are incident to such a new country, with bad roads, deep waters to
   cross, often scanty fare, flies and mosquitoes in the midst of the
   wilderness, together with the intense heat of the summer, and the mud
   and mire of the winter months. None of these things, however,
   disheartened him. He went forward with firmness and patience, seeking
   for the "lost sheep of the house of Israel."

   But his race was short, and his death sudden and sorrowful to his
   surviving friends. On the 24th of November, the weather being wet and
   cold, after having passed the previous day through a vast and dreary
   swamp, and over the Mississippi, he set off to visit some distant
   appointments. On the evening of that day he lodged with a friendly
   family; the next morning he pushed forward in a direction uninhabited
   by any white person, and employed an Indian to assist him in passing a
   creek, which he was apprehensive would be so swollen as to be difficult
   to ford. On arriving here, his expectations were realized; but he
   concluded to make the experiment to ford the stream. Leaving his
   saddle-bags, valise, and some books with his Indian guide, he mounted
   his horse and attempted to ride through the creek. The current bore his
   horse down below the usual place of landing, so that when they arrived
   on the other side, the bank was so precipitous that the horse could not
   ascend it, and in the struggle he and his horse were separated, the
   horse swimming back to the shore he had left, and brother Nolley
   landing on the opposite bank. He then walked on with a view to reach
   the first house, which was about two miles distant. The wet and cold,
   however, so prostrated his physical strength that he was able to
   proceed only about one mile, where he was found next morning a lifeless
   corpse. It seems, from appearances, that, becoming conscious of his
   inability to proceed farther, he kneeled down and commended his spirit
   to God; and here in the wood. He was found with his eyes neatly closed,
   his left hand on his breast, his right hand fallen off a little, while
   his immortal spirit had, beyond all doubt, ascended to its mansion
   above.

   The name of Richmond Nolley lives in the recollection of the people in
   Alabama and Louisiana, and his ministerial and Christian virtues are
   embalmed in their affections. He fell a martyr to his work in the
   eighth year of his ministry, and has left behind him a testimony of his
   fidelity in the fruit of his sacrifices and labors.

   Zachariah Witten, Joel Arrington, Edwin Johnson, George Askin, Nathan
   Lodge, and James Quail, had also taken their departure to another
   world, honored and beloved in their life as ministers of Christ, and
   lamented in their death by those who had been benefited by their
   labors, and by their more intimate relations.

   But a greater than either had fallen. The death-knell had sounded over
   the coffin of our American patriarch, and assured us that our Asbury
   was no more!

   And as this was the year in which Bishop Asbury closed his life and
   labors, I shall, as seems most fit, close the present volume with a
   brief account of the closing days of that great and good man, together
   with some remarks on his general character and manner of life.

   We have already seen that disease was making fearful inroads upon a
   constitution which had been shattered by frequent attacks of sickness,
   often induced from exposure to wind and weather, to hardships,
   privations, constant labor and care, and that he consequently exhibited
   symptoms of approaching dissolution. After the interview with Bishop
   McKendree, before mentioned, he still journeyed on, attended by his
   ever faithful companion, John Wesley Bond, passing through the state of
   Ohio to Kentucky, where, after preaching in Lexington, he says: --

   "My soul is blest with continued consolation and peace in all my great
   weakness of body and crowds of company. I am a debtor to the whole
   continent, but more especially to the northeast and southwest; it is
   there I usually gain health, and generally lose it in the south and
   center. I have visited the south thirty times in thirty-nine years. I
   wish to visit Mississippi, but am resigned."

   It would appear then that even the bounds of the ten conferences were
   not a sufficiently large range to fill his capacious desires -- he
   wished still to visit Mississippi! But here again he found that his
   wishes must yield to the pressure of a body tottering on the confines
   of another world. Mississippi must be left to his sons in the gospel,
   while the father is forced to "withdraw his feet" even from the
   ordinary business of a conference, for on the 21st of this same month
   of October, after remarking that he had preached to the Tennessee
   conference, and ordained the deacons, he says, --

   "My eyes fail. I will resign the stations to Bishop McKendree. I will
   take away my feet. It is my fifty-fifth year of ministry, and
   forty-fifth of labor in America. My mind enjoys great peace and divine
   consolation. My health is better, which may be in part because of my
   being less deeply interested in the business of the conference. But
   whether health, life, or death, good is the will of the Lord. I will
   trust him; yea, I will praise him. He is the strength of my heart and
   my portion for ever. Glory! glory! glory!" Fit language for a veteran
   of the cross of Christ, just ready to receive his crown.

   In this frame of mind he passed on from place to place, stretching
   across the country from Tennessee into South Carolina, until, under
   date of Dec. 2, he says, "My consolations are great. I live in God from
   moment to moment;" and then Dec. 7, which is the last entry in his
   journal, and probably the last line he ever wrote, he says, --

   "We met a storm and stopped at William Baker's Granby."

   It appears, however, from the published notice of his death, that he
   persevered in his customary way, in his close carriage, to journey on
   through the country, until March 24, 1816, when he came to Richmond,
   Virginia, where he preached his last sermon. His text was Rom. ix, 28,
   "For he will finish his work, and cut it short in righteousness:
   because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth." This closed
   his pulpit work.

   So feeble was he that his friends endeavored to dissuade him from
   making this effort. He, however, resisted their importunities by
   remarking that he must once more deliver his testimony in that place.
   They therefore assisted him from his carriage -- for he was unable
   either to walk or stand -- to the pulpit, and seated him on a table
   which had been prepared for that purpose: and though his debility was
   such that he was obliged to make frequent pauses in the course of the
   sermon, yet the audience were much affected by the manner in which he
   delivered his last solemn message, but much more with his appearance,
   venerable with age, standing on the borders of eternity, pale and
   tremulous with debility, while the deep intonations of his commanding
   voice, rising with the grandeur of his subject, gave a solemnity to the
   whole scene of a most impressive character.

   Having thus delivered his last testimony for God, he was assisted from
   the sanctuary to his carriage, in which he returned to his lodgings.

   On Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday, he moved on his way, and finally came
   to the house of his old friend, Mr. George Arnold, in Spottsylvania,
   Virginia. Here the unfavorable state of the weather and his increasing
   debility obliged him to stop. He had, indeed, flattered himself with
   living to meet the General Conference which was to assemble in
   Baltimore on the second day of the ensuing May; but he had approached
   the termination of his journeying in this world, and he humbly bowed to
   the decree of his heavenly Father in this as well as in all other
   things.

   Here he passed a very restless night. In the morning, his friends,
   perceiving his great distress and increasing weakness, urged the
   propriety of calling in the aid of a physician. He gave them to
   understand that it would be of no use, saying, that before the
   physician could come to him his breath would be gone, and the doctor
   would only pronounce him dead. Being then asked if he had any thing to
   communicate, he replied, that as he had fully expressed his mind to
   Bishop McKendree in relation to the Church, he had nothing more to add.

   About eleven o'clock on Sabbath morning he inquired if it were not time
   for meeting; but soon recollecting himself, he requested the family to
   be called together. This being done, brother Bond sung, prayed, and
   expounded the twenty-first chapter of the Apocalypse, during which the
   bishop appeared calm and much engaged in devotion. After these
   exercises were closed, they offered him a little barley wafer, but such
   was his weakness that he could not swallow it, and his power of
   utterance began to fail. On observing the anxiety of his beloved
   companion, who had attended him with such commendable assiduity for so
   long a time, he raised his dying hand, and at the same time looked at
   him joyfully. On being asked by brother Bond if he felt the Lord Jesus
   precious, exerting all his remaining strength in token of a complete
   victory, he raised both his hands.

   In a few minutes after this, as he sat on his chair with his head
   reclining upon the hand of brother Bond, without a struggle, and with
   great composure, he breathed his last on Sabbath the 31st of March,
   1816, in the seventy-first year of his age.

   His remains were deposited in Spottsylvania, in the family burying
   ground of Mr. Arnold, at whose house he died. But on the assembling of
   the General Conference in Baltimore, by its order, and at the request
   of the brethren in that city, the mortal remains of Bishop Asbury were
   removed to Baltimore, and deposited under the recess of the pulpit of
   the Eutaw Street church, in a vault which had been prepared for that
   purpose.

   The corpse was followed from the conference room in Light Street, by
   the members of the General Conference, several clergymen of other
   denominations, and by a vast concourse of the citizens of Baltimore,
   being preceded by Bishop McKendree as the officiating minister,
   attended by Mr. Black, a representative from the British to the
   American conference, to the Eutaw Street church, where a funeral
   oration was delivered by Bishop McKendree. After this the body of this
   great man of God was committed to its tomb, to await the hour when "all
   that are in their graves shall come forth, they that have done good to
   the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the
   resurrection of damnation."

   The following inscription reminds the visitor to this sacred spot of
   the man to whose memory the polished marble was erected

   SACRED To The Memory Of THE REVEREND FRANCIS ASBURY, Bishop Of The
   Methodist Episcopal Church.

   He was born in England, August 20th, 1745; Entered the ministry at the
   age of 17; Came a missionary to America, 1771; Was ordained Bishop in
   this city, December 27th, 1784; Annually visited the conferences in the
   United States; With much zeal continued to "preach the word," For More
   Than Half A Century. And literally ended his labors with his life, near
   Fredericksburg, Virginia, in the full triumphs of faith, on the 31st of
   March, 1816. Aged 70 years, 7 months, and 11 days. His remains were
   deposited in this vault, May 10th, 1816, by the General Conference then
   sitting in this city. His journals will exhibit to posterity his
   labors, his difficulties, his sufferings, his patience, his
   perseverance, his love to God and man.

   A number of funeral sermons were preached in different places for our
   departed superintendent, some of which were afterward published; and
   the Baltimore conference engaged a gentleman of competent talents to
   write his life, which, however, was never completed; and after waiting
   until 1824 for its appearance the General Conference selected the Rev.
   William Beauchamp to complete the task, but he was called home before
   he had time to enter upon his work; and thus a life of Bishop Asbury
   has never been furnished the world. This defect I have endeavored, so
   far as my general plan would admit, to supply, by giving some of the
   most important items in his experience, travels, labors, and shall
   conclude by a few general remarks on some prominent features of his
   character. But even these must necessarily be imperfect, not only from
   my want of ability to do justice to a character so exalted, seen
   through such a variety of mediums, and presenting so many varying
   points, but also for want of room to say all that truth and justice
   would seem to require.

   1. The first thing we notice is the depth of the experience as a
   Christian. This infused a new principle of action, constituted the
   purity of his motives, and sanctified all his conduct. This experience
   of divine grace penetrates into the depths of the soul, and brings up,
   having changed the heart and sanctified the affections, new desires,
   excites new emotions, and gives new views of God, of man, of human
   destiny, and the end of all human actions.

   Let those who have been accustomed to estimate human conduct from
   motives of self-interest, ambition, or worldly policy, recollect that
   when the heart is renewed by grace, there springs up new motive of
   action, and new hopes of reward, which exalt the individual as far
   above the mere man of the world as the heavens are high above the
   earth. That young Asbury was blessed with this new creation, by that
   Holy Spirit which ever after wrought mightily in him to the subduing of
   all unholy propensities, must be manifest to all who have consulted the
   preceding pages.

   2. His call to the work of the ministry was evidently of a divine
   character. Born in humble life, destined by his parents and his own
   choice for a mechanical pursuit, neither he nor they had any thought of
   his becoming a minister of the sanctuary, until it was made manifest to
   him and to others competent to judge, that a dispensation of the gospel
   was committed to him. He was then not disobedient to the heavenly
   vision, but entered upon his work with all his soul and strength, and
   continued with unabated ardor and diligence until he ceased "at once to
   work and live."

   3. His talents as a preacher must be estimated in connection with those
   other duties which devolved upon him as the superintendent of the
   Church. It is said by those who had the privilege of hearing him in the
   vigor of manhood, before time and care had wrinkled his forehead, that
   he was deep and systematical in his discourses, ably and "rightly
   dividing the word of truth," fluent and powerful in his delivery, as
   well as remarkably pointed in his appeals to the consciences of his
   hearers. His attitude in the pulpit was graceful, dignified, and
   solemn; his voice full and commanding; his enunciation clear and
   distinct; and sometimes a sudden burst of eloquence would break forth
   in a manner which spoke a soul full of God, and like a mountain torrent
   swept all before it.

   I remember an instance of this in the city of Baltimore in 1808, while
   he was preaching on a Sabbath morning in the Eutaw Street church, in
   the presence of many members of the General Conference, and among
   others, the Rev. Mr. Otterbein sat by his side in the pulpit. The
   bishop was discoursing upon the duty of parents to their children.
   Having uttered a severe reproof to those who neglect this duty and
   indulge their children in the frivolities of the world, he suddenly
   paused, and then said, "But you will say this is hard. Alas," he added
   -- letting his voice which had been raised into that high commanding
   tone which gave such a majesty to what he uttered, suddenly fall to a
   low and soft key, -- "It is harder to be damned!" These words, dropping
   from his lips in a manner which indicated the deep sensations of his
   heart, fell upon the audience, now wrought up to the highest pitch of
   intensity by what had preceded them, like the sudden bursting of a
   cloud upon the mown grass, and they were in a moment melted into tears
   -- sobs and groans were heard al over the house. The venerable
   Otterbein, noble and dignified in his appearance, was turned into a
   little child -- the tears furrowing his cheeks -- bespeaking the deep
   feelings of his heart.

   But though Bishop Asbury was thus able and systematic in his preaching
   in the earlier days of his ministry, as other duties accumulated, the
   cares of the superintendency multiplied, and his travels necessarily
   enlarged, it seemed impossible for him to give that attention to
   reading and study which is essential for a full development and
   vigorous exercise of the mental powers. Hence in his latter days his
   manner of preaching changed -- he was often quite unmethodical in his
   arrangement -- sometimes abruptly jumping, if I may so express it, from
   one subject to another, intermingling anecdotes of an instructive
   character, and suddenly breaking forth in most tremendous rebukes of
   some prevalent vice, and concluding with an admonition full of point
   and pathos. Yet he always exhibited a mind deep and solemn, ever intent
   upon securing the salvation of his own soul and the souls of those who
   heard him.

   4. For diligence in his calling, he was surpassed by no one, unless we
   may except the ever active Wesley; and for suffering privations and
   enduring hardships, he even far exceeded his prototype; inasmuch as the
   former was not called, in the discharge of his important duties, to
   such a rugged and extensive field of labor as that into which Bishop
   Asbury was thrust.

   During the forty-five years of his ministry in America, allowing that
   he preached on an average one sermon a day -- and he often preached
   three times on the Sabbath -- he delivered not less than sixteen
   thousand four hundred and twenty-five sermons, besides his lectures to
   the societies, and meeting classes; allowing him six thousand miles a
   year, which, it is believed he generally exceeded, he must have
   traveled during the same the about two hundred and seventy thousand
   miles, much of it on the very worst of roads; from the time of the
   organization of the Church in 1784, to the period of his death,
   thirty-two years, allowing an average of seven conferences a year, he
   sat in no less than two hundred and twenty-four annual conferences, and
   in their infancy their entire business devolved chiefly on himself; and
   he probably consecrated, including traveling and local preachers, more
   than four thousand persons to the sacred office! Here, then, is a
   missionary bishop worthy of the name, whose example may be held up for
   the imitation of all who engage in this sacred work.

   We have spoken of his travels. He was no idle traveler, nor did he ever
   journey for pleasure. As before noticed, to aid him in scattering the
   good seed of the kingdom, he distributed religious tracts, Bibles, and
   Testaments; and "into whatsoever house he entered," he not only said,
   "Peace be to this house," but he addressed himself to its inmates
   personally on the subject of religion, and let their character be
   whatever it might, unless absolutely prohibited, he never left them
   without prayer. In this exercise he was indeed mighty. As he frequently
   remarked that "He lived in God from moment to moment," so his prayers
   indicated the most intimate communion with Him and with his Son Jesus
   Christ. Though great in the pulpit, and strong in the government which
   he exercised, yet prayer seemed to be his forte, the delightful element
   of his soul. Though never boisterous in his manner, but solemn and
   devout, yet his prayers were comprehensive, frequent, and fervent, and
   sometimes attended with such an unction from the holy one, as made it
   evident that he was in truth in audience with the Deity.

   5. With all his other excellences, perhaps Bishop Asbury never appeared
   so great as in the tact of governing the conferences. He had deeply
   studied the character of man, and well understood the various springs
   of human action. But that which gave him such a commanding influence
   over others, was the confidence which he had inspired in his wisdom and
   integrity. The manner in which he had deported himself from the time he
   first landed on our shores, convinced all with whom he had intercourse
   that he "sought not his own but them," and that the high ends he aimed
   to accomplish, were the present and future salvation of immortal
   beings. His deadness to the world, to human applause, to riches and
   worldly honors, and his deep devotion to God, made an impression upon
   all who bore witness to his spirit and conduct, that he was actuated by
   the purest and most elevated motives and views. This pervading
   impression wrought that confidence in the uprightness of his intentions
   and wisdom of his plans, which gave him such a control over both
   preachers and people as enabled him to discharge the high trusts
   confided to him, with so much facility and to such general
   satisfaction. Hence the apparent ease with which he managed the
   complicated machinery of Methodism, guided the councils of the
   conferences, fixed the stations of the preachers, and otherwise
   exercised his authority for the general good of the entire body.

   It is true, he did not escape censure. "The archers shot at him;" but
   "his bow abode in strength." That a man occupying such an elevated
   station, and exerting such an extensive influence as he did, should
   wholly escape censure, is more than could be expected, constituted as
   human society is. But these censures generally fell harmless at his
   feet. Armed as he was "with the whole armor of God," he repelled "all
   the fiery darts" of his adversaries, and stood firm in the defense of
   the cause he had espoused, and in a holy consciousness of an upright
   mind and a blameless conduct.

   It has indeed been objected to him that in the exercise of that
   attribute of power with which he was invested, he sometimes manifested
   a sternness bordering upon a hardheartedness which cannot be justified.
   Not knowing the sympathies of a husband and a father from actual
   experience, [36] and accustomed as he was to make continual sacrifices
   himself in the cause of his Master, that he did not always make
   sufficient allowance for human frailties, and for the unavoidable ills
   which accompany a married traveling preacher, may be admitted without
   any impeachment of either his wisdom, goodness, or the tenderness of
   his nature.

   But those who think Bishop Asbury was unfeeling, have very much
   misunderstood his character. Though he suitably detested that
   squeamishness of nature and whining disposition which leads some men
   always to complain of their hard lot, yet no man was usually more alive
   to the happiness of others, or more assiduously endeavored to
   accommodate the feelings and meet the wishes of all, so far as a good
   conscience and the dictates of a sound judgment would allow. I have
   heard him in open conference request the preachers to give him a
   representation of their cases before making out their stations, that he
   might understand their peculiar circumstances, and act accordingly --
   and also, even after the conference adjourned, have I known him to make
   alterations to accommodate a brother who thought himself aggrieved, or
   to meet a case not before known. In these respects he felt and acted as
   a father among his family.

   It is true that in some instances, when oppressed with a multiplicity
   of cares, and assailed with numerous opposing claims, such as are known
   only to those who have had some experience in disposing of the stations
   of so many men, and perhaps thwarted in his good intentions by restless
   and fastidious spirits, who consulted their own interests more than the
   general good, he manifested some impatience and appeared unyielding in
   the decisions of his own mind. But if, at any time, he betrayed this
   weakness of human nature, like the well-tempered sword which, while it
   bends under the hand of him who tries its metal, quickly resumes its
   natural position, he soon regained his equanimity of mind, and sought
   the earliest opportunity to soothe the spirit of him he might have
   wounded. [37] And whatever errors he may have committed of this sort --
   and who is exempt from errors? -- it was manifest to all that he aimed
   at the right, and perhaps oftener hit it than those who attempted to
   correct him, or who complained of his defective administration.
   Allowing the truth of what he says in one place, "the measure he meted
   to others he expected to receive," he must have acted under the
   influence of the golden rule in meting to others their portion of
   ministerial labor; and his constant example refuted all the calumnies
   of those who accused him of laying burdens upon others which he himself
   was unwilling to bear.

   6. His charity knew no bounds but his ability. If a "bishop must be
   given to hospitality," and that he may be the more hospitable, "be
   temperate in all things," then did Bishop Asbury exhibit this excellent
   trait of the episcopal character. He literally begged from door to door
   to collect money to supply the wants of poor preachers, and so to aid
   them that the "poor might have the gospel preached to them." How often,
   when cases of distress were revealed in an annual conference, would he
   arise from his chair, seize his broad-brimmed hat, and, with a pleasant
   smile upon his countenance, first drop in a piece of money himself, and
   then hand it round to the others, making all, by the humorous manner in
   which he did it, feel glad of the opportunity of contributing, though
   it might be nearly their last shilling, for such an object! Thus, by
   his example, he provoked others to liberality.

   I believe, notwithstanding the change of the times, he never allowed
   himself to take over sixty-four dollars annually, and his traveling
   expenses; and though through the kindness of some friends who had
   bequeathed it to him, he was worth, when he died, besides his traveling
   apparatus, about two thousand dollars, yet he touched it not, but left
   it to the Book Concern, merely taxing it with the gift of a Bible to
   each of his nominal children, and an annuity to a dependent widow of a
   Methodist preacher.

   7. He was not only "temperate in all things," but he seemed to hold in
   utter abhorrence all approaches to external pomp, and the trappings of
   worldly glory. The same broad-brimmed, low-crowned hat, which was in
   vogue when he entered the ministry, his entire costume corresponding
   with it in plainness and cheapness, he wore until the day of his death.
   And though the General Conference of 1812 passed a resolution
   requesting him to sit for his likeness to be drawn by a portrait
   painter of Philadelphia, yet on the adjournment of conference, he fled
   so precipitately from the city, that the secretary found it necessary
   to write a letter of apology to the gentleman concerned, stating the
   reluctance of the bishop to have his portrait taken. And it was with no
   small difficulty that he was finally prevailed upon by his friends to
   gratify them with this boon. He, however, at last submitted to their
   importunity.

   The gaudy tinsels of fashion, the feastings of the rich and luxurious,
   the struttings of upstart young men who strive to ape the giddy and the
   gay, drew from him the most severe and very often most mortifying
   reproofs. But his own example was a justification for his severity in
   this respect. Yet he was always neat in his personal appearance, being
   as far removed from the negligence of the sloven, as he was from the
   fashionable airs of the supercilious fop [fop = an affectedly elegant
   or fashionable man; a dandy. Oxford Dict. -- DVM].

   8. In this plain dress, with a mind richly stored with knowledge and a
   heart seasoned with grace, Bishop Asbury seemed a fit representative of
   a primitive evangelist, wearing not the tinseled miter and flowing
   robes which decorate the persons of some modern bishops, but the grave
   attire which became an apostle, with his head silvered over with locks
   which had grown gray in a long and laborious service of his divine
   Master. Having a slender constitution, abstemious in his habits and
   living, suffering often from disease, and constantly exposed to wind
   and weather, burdened also with "the care of all the churches," there
   was rather a somber cast upon his countenance, and at times somewhat of
   a forbidding aspect in an eye naturally bright and piercing.

   Yet Bishop Asbury was not generally melancholy. Though at times subject
   to depression of spirits, and to temporary gloom, yet generally he was
   of a lively and cheerful disposition; sometimes, in conversation with
   his friends, humorous and playful, yet always directing his anecdotes,
   of which he had a fund, to some good end, to render vice the more
   odious or virtue the more lovely.

   9. In the discharge of his official duties in consecrating men to the
   office of deacons, elders, or bishops, he was remarkably solemn,
   dignified, and impressive. Who that has ever heard him say, in that
   solemn and commanding tone of voice which was to him natural and
   unaffected, "Take thou authority to preach the word of God, and to
   administer the holy sacraments in the congregation," has not felt a
   sensation of awe come over his mind, from the impressive and solemn
   manner in which the words were pronounced!

   In reading the several parts of the consecration services, he would
   sometimes, from the overflowings of a full heart, break forth in an
   extemporaneous effusion, in language of deep affection, admonition, or
   instruction, in a manner which indicated the lively interest which he
   felt in the welfare of those to whom he addressed himself. But these
   extemporaneous addresses were always short, pithy, and directly to the
   point; for Bishop Asbury never wearied an audience with a dull prosing
   harangue on common-place topics, as if previously prepared for the
   nonce [the time being], and much less on occasions when an attempt to
   mend is only to mar the beautifully appropriate services, as laid down
   in the examination of candidates, and in the ordinal of the book. And
   the manner in which he propounded those pointed questions, plain and
   intelligible in themselves, made them sufficiently impressive without
   the aid of a lengthened comment, which more frequently weakens than
   strengthens the sense; and the holy breathing of a devout soul which
   accompanied the devotional parts of the ordination services, which was
   so apparent when performed by Bishop Asbury, superseded the necessity
   of any extemporaneous effusions, especially in language less
   appropriate. This he knew perfectly well, and acted accordingly.

   Yet, sometimes, when he arose from his knees, and commenced reading, he
   would occasionally throw sentences, which for their point and
   appropriateness, would fall upon the ear with a force and emphasis that
   could hardly be resisted; and they were the more valuable because they
   seemed to come unpremeditatedly, springing up from a heart overflowing
   with the holiest and therefore the kindliest feeling.

   I remember on one occasion, when laying his hands upon a young man who
   was kneeling at the altar to receive the office of deacon, the bishop,
   instead of commencing in the ordinary way, lifting up his eyes toward
   heaven, with his soul heaving under a pressure he seemed to feel, began
   thus: -- "From the ends of the earth we call upon three, O Lord God
   Almighty, to pour upon this thy servant the Holy Spirit, that he may
   have authority," &c.; and this was accompanied with such an unction
   from the Holy One, that the young minister was suddenly suffused in
   tears, while his nerves became so relaxed that he could hardly sustain
   himself on his knees.

   At another time, being somewhat displeased at the gay attire of one of
   the candidates, and perceiving, as was supposed, an air of
   self-confidence in another, the bishop burst out into a strain of
   rebuke, mingled with the tenderest expostulation, in a manner which
   made the ears of all that heard it to tingle, creating, in the mean
   time, a sudden sensation of abhorrence against every thing beneath the
   dignity, the gravity, and the holiness of the ministerial character.
   The words he used on this occasion are forgotten by the writer, but
   they were few, well chosen, and delivered with that deep feeling and
   solemnity, which no man unless he possess the same gift need attempt to
   imitate, lest he come under the suspicion of uttering what he neither
   feels nor understands.

   These sententious [pithy, concise, moralizing], and often abrupt
   sentences, usually made a more deep and lasting impression upon the
   mind and heart than the most finished composition could have done,
   because they were thoughts of sudden inspiration, uttered spontaneously
   from the fullness of a heart always hearing upon it an impress of the
   divine image-a heart breathing in an atmosphere sanctified by the
   constant presence of his God.

   What a thrill did he send through the congregation on a certain
   occasion, when, after having completed the ordination service in the
   city of Albany, he lifted up the Holy Bible, and exclaimed with an
   emphasis peculiar to himself, "This is the minister's battle-axe. This
   is his sword. Take this therefore and conquer!" These same words might
   have been uttered by another, and yet produce no effect. For it was not
   the words simply, but the manner and the occasion of using them which
   invested them with that sublimity, that solemn grandeur, and
   overwhelming pathos and power which produced the thrilling effect I
   have in vain attempted to describe. Those now living [in 1838] who have
   heard him may, however, comprehend my meaning, and hence make up from
   their own recollection for the imperfection of my description.

   10. Another trait in the character of Bishop Asbury was, the influence
   which he exerted over others in the social circle. In whatever company
   he appeared, whether religious or irreligious, whether high or low,
   learned or unlearned, he generally had such ascendancy over the minds
   of others, that he could easily lead the conversation, and thereby
   exert an influence in favor of religion highly beneficial to all
   concerned. Where he was known, such was the respect felt for his
   character, that great deference was paid to his judgment, and hence a
   greater desire was generally manifested by others to listen to his
   discourse, than to intrude their own opinions in the social circle.

   It has already been observed that he seldom, if indeed ever, either
   visited others or received visitors, without praying with them before
   they separated. On a certain occasion, being indisposed, two of the
   most eminent physicians were employed to afford him their medical
   advice. When they had ended their services, the bishop asked them the
   amount of their demand. They very courteously and respectfully replied,
   that they desired nothing more than his prayers. The bishop then
   remarked that he never suffered himself to be in debt, and therefore he
   would discharge this obligation without delay, and instantly bowed upon
   his knees, and offered up a most fervent prayer to almighty God for the
   salvation of his generous medical friends. This took them upon
   surprise. It is said, indeed, that one of them was skeptically
   inclined, and was somewhat abashed to find himself so unceremoniously
   brought upon his knees for the first time in his life, to listen to the
   prayer of a Christian bishop, offered up in the name of a Savior in
   whom he had little or no faith.

   The other who was in attendance, the late Dr. Benjamin Rush, with whom
   Bishop Asbury was on terms of intimacy, being as eminent for his
   Christian virtues as he was for his medical skill, was no less edified
   than delighted in this opportunity of participating with his friend in
   an act of devotion so highly creditable to his head and heart.

   This perfect command of himself and of others enabled him to keep at a
   respectful distance all frivolous company, to awe into silence the
   facetious witling, as well as to secure the respect, love, and
   confidence of the wise and good with whom he associated. And though
   sometimes, in his extensive travels, he was thrown into promiscuous
   assemblages of men, especially when obliged to lodge in the public
   inns, he always availed himself of the opportunity drop a word for God,
   nor would he depart without proposing prayer, and seldom, such
   influence had his personal appearance over the minds of others, was he
   denied the privilege of performing this duty.

   11. It may be expected that I should speak of his faults. But what need
   of this? Have not all human beings human frailties? Why then dwell upon
   that which is common to man? But all men have not the virtues which
   adorned Bishop Asbury. These therefore may be selected, not so much
   indeed in praise of the man, as to "glorify the grace of God in him,"
   which wrought mightily, to the destroying of all sinful desires, and
   which enabled him to "wrestle" necessarily against "principalities and
   powers," and to "triumph in Christ Jesus" over all opposition. In the
   midst, therefore, of these infirmities which are common to man, this
   grace of God in Christ shone out consciously, made him equal to his
   herculean task, and finally crowned him "more than a conqueror through
   Him who loved him."

   But the sun has its spots. And though mindful of the maxim that we
   should "tread lightly on the ashes of the dead," I will venture to
   mention two things in which I think, with great deference indeed, he
   erred in his administration. In the first place, he and Dr. Coke having
   been baffled in their earlier attempts to establish seminaries of
   learning, I think Bishop Asbury, becoming discouraged from these
   failures, was at length too indifferent to this subject, especially in
   the ministry.

   Probably having beheld the deleterious effects upon the Church by
   trusting to learning alone as a qualification for the ministry, and
   also seeing the disgusting pedantry of some who had a smattering
   knowledge of the sciences, he might have imbibed an undue prejudice
   against learning and a learned ministry, fearing that learning and deep
   piety were not easily associated in the same man. He had also long been
   a witness to the deadening effects of a lifeless, though learned
   ministry, upon the interests of true religion on the one hand, and the
   enlivening effects of a spiritual though unlearned ministry on the
   other; and he doubtless persuaded himself that it was extremely
   difficult to pursue the one without sacrificing the other. And as to
   general education, he thought that the Methodists were not called to
   devote their energies to the promotion of this, but to preach the
   gospel, not considering probably that this might be done without
   leaving the other undone.

   But whatever consideration might have influenced him, it is certain
   that after the destruction of Cokesbury College, and the failure of the
   district schools, he did not sufficiently encourage the pursuit of
   literature and science, and that some preachers who, in despite of
   every obstruction thrown in their way, manifested a determination to
   acquire all the knowledge within their reach, were sometimes checked in
   their progress from a fear of incurring the suspicion of being more
   ambitious to shine in the galaxy of literature than to be useful as
   ministers of the sanctuary. And it is highly probable that some who
   gave evidence of the existence of this weakness, by drawing forth the
   rebukes of the bishop, may have given birth to the suspicion. He knew
   perfectly well that "knowledge" without charity "puffeth up" the soul
   with vanity; and that while it is possible to be "spoiled with
   philosophy and vin conceit," it is equally possible for the minister of
   Christ, though destitute of the embellishments of human literature and
   science, to be useful to his fellow-men.

   But though these considerations are offered as an apology for the
   indifference manifested by Bishop Asbury on the subject of education,
   they are not intended as a justifiable excuse for its general neglect
   for so many years by the Methodist Episcopal Church. It was a fault
   which will require years of bitter repentance and assiduous amendment
   to atone for, as it has thrown us behind the age in scientific and
   mental improvement, with whatever care and diligence we may now redeem
   the time. It is, however, cause of gratitude that a redeeming spirit
   has gone abroad, which augurs well for the future prosperity and rising
   glory of the Church.

   But whatever indifference he might have manifested toward the cause of
   education in general, he by no means neglected the improvement of his
   own mind. Though his constant traveling and the other indispensable
   duties of his office, prevented him from any regular and systematic
   pursuit of knowledge, yet he was, as far as his circumstances would
   permit, a hard student, a man of general information, much addicted to
   reading and study, and a close observer of passing events, of men,
   manners, and things. He was, indeed, in the habit of reading the sacred
   Scriptures in the languages in which they were first written, though
   his modesty in this respect prevented him from making any ostentatious
   show of learning. It is manifest, however, from his journal, though
   they were all erased in the revision which was made under his own
   inspection up to the year 1807, and was well known to his friends, that
   he was in the habit of referring for the illustration of difficult
   texts, to the original Scriptures, and to the critical interpretation
   of certain passages. Such, indeed, was the rich store of his knowledge,
   that he could bring "from his treasury things new and old," and he
   applied it all for the promotion of experimental and practical
   godliness.

   The other defect in Bishop Asbury's administration, as I think, was the
   not encouraging the people sufficiently in making provision for their
   ministers, particularly for men of families. He did not, certainly,
   wish them to suffer from poverty, for he often, as we have before seen,
   exerted himself, and gave his own money to supply their wants; but
   while he wished them to be above suffering pecuniary distress, he
   seemed to fear, that if they were too well off as it respects this
   world's goods, they would lose their zeal and spirituality, and thus
   cease to be useful; and as it was very congenial to that covetous
   disposition so natural to men, to withhold when they are not compelled
   to pay, many such quoted Bishop Asbury to justify their want of
   practical liberality. [38]

   He was, no doubt justified in his fears respecting the freezing effects
   of worldly prosperity upon the spiritual interests of the soul, by the
   example of many, as well as by the admonitory language of the Saviour
   respecting the danger of riches; but it should be recollected that
   extreme poverty is as often associated with the vices of murmuring and
   fretfulness as riches are with luxurious indulgence; and that
   therefore, to avoid both the one and the other, a reasonable competency
   is the most desirable way, agreeably to the prayer, "Give me neither
   poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me."

   Bishop Asbury considered the itinerant ministry, under God, as the
   grand instrument of the world's salvation. To support this therefore,
   in all its vigor and spirituality, he bent all his energies. And he
   feared that were the ministry to become wealthy there would be so many
   temptations to locate that they could hardly be resisted. Hence, to
   prevent a catastrophe which must come upon the Church by the
   substitution of a located for a traveling ministry, he thought it
   essential to keep it aloof from the world, by preventing it from
   accumulating worldly property; yet it may be questioned whether more
   have not been induced to locate from a feeling or a fear of poverty,
   than by the enjoyment of a competency. This, at least, has been the
   pretense, and no doubt, in numerous instances, the real cause. And had
   a competent provision been they made for the support of itinerant
   ministers, and for the suitable education of their children, I have no
   doubt we should have been far stronger every way, in wisdom, in
   numbers, in ministerial talent and usefulness, if not also in holiness
   and general prosperity.

   Thus have I, according to the best of my judgment, and under a
   consciousness of the infirmities which are the common lot of humanity,
   honestly expressed my views of the character of one of the most holy,
   laborious, and useful men that ever trod the American soil. Others may
   have exceeded him in general literature, in systematic and various
   branches of knowledge; but in the depth and genuineness of his
   experience, in his knowledge of the human heart and character, as well
   as of theological truth, in the art of government, in varied and useful
   labors, in the extent of his travels, and severity of his sufferings in
   the cause of Christ, he stands perhaps unrivaled among American
   preachers.

   The defects above noticed no more detract from the general excellence
   of his character than the fleeting clouds do from the glory of the sun.
   They are lost amid the general effulgence which shines out from every
   aspect of his moral and intellectual countenance. He has, indeed,
   imprinted his image upon the institutions of the Church he was
   instrumental in building up in this western world; and he "finished his
   course with joy," went down to the grave with an unsullied reputation,
   and bequeathed to his brethren in the ministry and to the Church
   generally a name and a character not only untarnished, but resplendent
   with every ministerial and Christian virtue.

   Concluding Remarks

   When I commenced writing, my intention was to complete the history by
   bringing it down to the present time, in two moderate-sized volumes,
   but it has lengthened out on my hands far beyond my expectation, when I
   began; and being frequently exhorted by friends in whose judgment I
   have much confidence, not to abridge, and my own convictions coinciding
   with theirs respecting the expediency of furnishing a complete history
   of all our affairs, so as to give the reader a full view and a right
   understanding of our doctrine, economy, labors, and success, as well as
   the difficulties with which we have to contend, -- I am thus compelled
   to close this volume here, without even adding, as I intended, a
   chapter in relation to the Book Concern.

   On reviewing my work I am very far from being satisfied with what I
   have done. In addition to some incidental errors, which seem almost
   unavoidable in carrying a work through the press, though I have labored
   most assiduously to present every thing in consecutive order, yet the
   whole appears more like scraps and shreds than like a connected
   history. The reader may rest assured, however, that this was
   unavoidable, at least with the present writer, from the very manner in
   which he has attempted, year after year, to weave the materials
   together. And the labor necessary to produce a work of this character
   can be known only to those who may have made the trial, as I have
   frequency labored for hours, turning from one document to another,
   comparing and collating, in order to sift out the truth, to ascertain a
   fact that may have been recorded in a line or two.

   This perplexing labor might, indeed, have been avoided, by writing what
   is called the philosophy of history, and by sliding over important
   facts, neglecting true historical details: and slurring over
   difficulties without attempting to remove them. The work, nevertheless,
   has, on the whole, been pleasant and profitable to myself, by
   increasing, as I humbly trust, my gratitude to God for having done so
   much for this branch of his Church.

   I have aimed at truth -- and in telling it have ventured to commend or
   censure, as I thought that sterling attribute required. In doing this,
   however, I have not lost sight of that consciousness of fallibility
   which so strikingly distinguishes human beings, and have uttered my
   thoughts with the same cautious freedom and impartiality with which I
   hope myself to be judged and spoken of by others.

   With these remarks the present volume is dismissed, by only adding that
   whether I shall proceed further in the history is somewhat uncertain,
   and will depend on those contingencies over which human beings have but
   little control.
     __________________________________________________________________

  Note A

   The following extract of a letter I received from the Rev. William
   Case, in answer to one I wrote to him requesting information respecting
   the state of things on the lines, feeling, as I did, very anxious for
   the fate of those who were exposed to the calamities of war, many of
   whom, I was well aware, might be among my former acquaintances. The
   affecting description of the scene at Sackett's Harbor, contained in
   the following extract, struck me with such force at the time, that I
   received permission of the author to make it public. In answer to this,
   under date of July 24, 1814, the writer says, --

   "I submit to your wisdom and prudence the propriety of publishing part
   of my last letter to you."

   Of this permission, however, I have not availed myself until now, and
   it is published at this time with a view to illustrate the horrors of
   war, as well as to show that its anticipations mentioned in the text
   were fully realized, as also to exhibit the pious concern which was
   felt by God's faithful servants for those who were compelled to suffer
   in the calamities of a war which was then raging along the frontiers
   and in Canada.

   Extract of a letter from the Rev. William Case, dated Utica, May 29,
   1813

   "I was present a few hours after the battle at Sackett's harbor, where
   I witnessed a scene of death and carnage more moving than all I ever
   saw before. Numbers lay cold in death! Many were groaning with their
   wounds and bleeding in their gore! ... Myself and two more preachers
   were in Rutland, about ten miles from the harbor, and were about to
   commence clearing off a camp ground, but on hearing the cannon and
   constant roll of small arms we gave up the idea of work, and betook
   ourselves to prayer. Such sensations I never realized before! We knew
   many of our acquaintances were there, among whom were brethren in the
   Lord. We thought on the condition of women whose husbands and sons were
   exposed, the welfare of our country, where so much interest was at
   stake, and the honor of the nation concerned! But more than all this a
   thousand times, the immortal interest of thousands who were engaged in
   the contest. And here I know not that I felt any partiality for
   Americans more than for Englishmen: all of one creation -- alike the
   subjects or redeeming blood, all accountable to the King of kings, and
   deserving the same condemnation! With these reflections we immediately
   called the household and fell upon our knees in prayer, and the Lord
   poured on us the spirit of supplication. We wept aloud and prayed most
   fervently to the Ruler of nations and the Savior of men that he would
   pardon our national crimes, save men from death, protect the harbor
   from conquest, and have mercy on the precious souls of those who were
   constantly falling in battle. You may suppose that the constant sound
   of the instruments of death gave weight to our concern, and ardency to
   our petitions with, all that our grace could inspire.

   "We then mounted our horses and set out for the scene of action, that
   if possible we might afford some assistance as ministers, and
   administer consolation to the wounded and dying. When we reached the
   harbor the British had retreated to their shipping, leaving part of
   their dead and wounded on the field of battle. These, with our own men,
   were brought in from the field, the dead were stretched side by side in
   rows, and the wounded on beds and straw in as comfortable a condition
   as could be expected. We were conducted by a friend to the several
   hospitals, where I saw the distress of about eighty wounded. I cannot
   describe my feelings, to hear the groans of the wounded and dying, some
   pierced through the body, others through the head, some bruised by the
   falling of the timbers of trees, others with broken bones, and one
   whose face was shot away (save his under jaw) by a grape shot. He was
   yet breathing strong. This was a shocking view ... Some were in such
   pan they could not be conversed with, others being fatigued and broken
   of their rest were asleep. But we conversed with many who manifested
   seriousness, whom we pointed to the suffering bleeding Savior, and
   exhorted them to look to him for mercy. Here I saw how useful a
   faithful and feeling chaplain might be. The best opportunity would
   present in alleviating the miseries of men in some degree, by procuring
   such things as the distressed most needed, and by comforting them in
   their afflictions. And here he might be heard though at other times his
   counsel would be slighted.

   "In conversation with the British wounded I found a serious young man
   who had been a hearer of the Methodists in Ireland, Quebec, and Upper
   Canada; his name was Hornbrook, and he belonged to the 100th regiment.
   Also a brother, Charles Pratt, one of our own militia, badly wounded.
   Both were very glad to see and talk with their preachers.

   "Having been without bread a long time, many of the militia were very
   hungry. Some wanted coffee, some milk, some bread. We gave them the
   biscuits we carried down, but could procure no milk for them. I really
   desired to stay with them, my heart thirsted to do them good. One young
   man who was wounded told me his brother was killed in battle. His
   parents, I think, live east of Connecticut River ... We were then
   conducted to the remains of Col. Mills, of the Albany volunteers. He
   and the British General Gray were laid out together, both brave, "by
   mutual wounds expired," but now slept peaceably together. Among the
   wounded I heard no swearing. In this battle several of our brethren
   suffered. Brother Graves, an ensign in the militia, living near the
   harbor, and several others, were taken prisoners. He has since written
   from Montreal to his family. Brother Fay, of Ellisburgh, was wounded in
   the first part of the action, and in attempting to make his way through
   the woods toward home, fell in with a body of Indians who had landed
   farther up, who shot him several times, scalped and mangled him in a
   horrible manner. His body was found some time after and interred by his
   father near the place. It seems the Indians were somehow interrupted,
   and in their hasty flight left the scalp and knife, which were found
   near the body. Brother F.'s money was found near him on a root; his
   scalp is in the possession of the widow.

   "On leaving the harbor we called on some brethren, who, with their
   neighbors, carried down several gallons of milk, and distributed among
   the wounded. We also represented their case to the congregation at the
   close of the camp meeting, when twenty-five dollars were contributed
   and put into proper hands, who purchased coffee, sugar, and other
   delicacies which they most needed, and from time to time distributed
   among them. For this they were very thankful, and both English and
   American blessed me with many good wishes when I again visited the
   hospital four weeks ago. I found Hornbrook had recovered so far as to
   be able to hobble about. Of about seventy-five of our wounded
   twenty-one died; of twenty-four British wounded seven had died. They
   carried most of their wounded off the field to their boats in the of
   battle. Brother Pratt has also recovered ... The body of Col. Mills was
   removed to Watertown, where his funeral was attended by a numerous
   assembly of soldiers and citizens, where a sermon was preached on Prov.
   xxii, 1, when several traits in the character of the amiable colonel
   were proposed for imitation. The assembly were moved and wept.

   "Our preachers on the lines have frequent opportunities of preaching to
   the soldiers, who are very fond of hearing. We find it necessary to
   avoid all political discussions, both in public and private."

   The following extract from the same writer will show the deep interest
   he and others of a like spirit felt for those who were suffering the
   consequences of this bloody contest.

   Albany, Oct. 26, 1813

   "This moment I have returned from a visit to the barracks, in
   Greenbush, in company with brother Merwin.

   "Having been kindly indulged by Col. Larned, commandant to the
   prisoners, we most joyfully embraced the privilege of proclaiming to
   them the sweet liberty of the gospel. They were called together by
   their officers, and a more attentive congregation I never expect to
   address again. As soon as we began to sing there was weeping; and
   immediately on our kneeling to prayer they all knelt down, and here and
   there we heard the voice of Amen to our petition for their salvation. I
   could not solve this till after the service. To my great surprise and
   mingled grief and joy, several brethren and acquaintances from Canada
   came and made themselves known to us; they were militia in arms, and
   were taken near Fort George; among these were Messrs. George Lawrence,
   leader at Four Mile Creek, William Clinton, from the head of the lake,
   and Russell Hawley, brother of David Hawley of Bay of Quintie; their
   captivity was an affliction which made friends more consoling.

   "By them I was informed, that in consequence of the troubles there had
   been no preaching in that part for some time: that Mr. Ryan and others
   were traveling and doing all they could for God and souls: that none of
   our brethren in that part had been killed.

   "Brother Merwin has permission to preach to them every week, and he has
   appointed to do so every Tuesday afternoon, if the weather will permit.
   They are a mixed multitude of English, French, &c., amounting to about
   five hundred and fifty-nine, but were very anxious for meetings.
   Brother Merwin is to send them Bibles from the society in this place,
   and other books. O, pray for them!"

   Much individual suffering was experienced in various places, and many
   instances of Christian sympathy were exhibited by ministers as well as
   private Christians, highly creditable to themselves and recommendatory
   of that religion which breathes good-will to man.

   On the return of peace, the first national ship which anchored in the
   port of New York, under the command of Commodore Chauncey, by his
   permission, was visited by one of our preachers, who delivered a sermon
   to the officers and men, which was listened to with serious attention,
   and for some time thereafter regular preaching was kept up at the
   navy-yard in Brooklyn, and at the barracks on Governor's Island and the
   other military posts in the bay of New York. These efforts have been
   crowned with success, many of the sailors and soldiers having given
   evidence of a thorough reformation of heart and life.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [31] See note A at the end of the volume [Below Note 8].

   [32] This event, with the causes which led to it, belongs to another
   period of our history, and will be noticed in its proper place.

   [33] It is stated, on good authority, that in the time of the war, a
   number of clergymen in the city of New York held a meeting for the
   purpose of deliberating on the propriety of praying for their civil
   rulers, and they finally came to the grave conclusion that they could
   not do it conscientiously. This, however, was by no means the case with
   all, though I believe most of the clergy in the eastern states were
   very much opposed to the measures of the government.

   [34] The preachers in Canada, owing to the war, are not included in
   this enumeration, which makes the apparent decrease: nor are the
   members, else the increase would have appeared nearly three thousand
   more.

   [35] For a few years past, some of the older members of the New York
   conference, deprecating the weakening effects of these numerous
   locations, determined to hold on to the itinerancy themselves, whatever
   the sacrifice might be, and induce as many others as possible to follow
   their example.

   [36] It is generally known, I believe, that Bishop Asbury was never
   married. And as it will give the reader an idea of his thoughts on this
   subject, together with the reasons for his celibacy, I will here insert
   them, as I find them in his Journal, vol. iii, p. 128. "If I should the
   in celibacy, which I think quite probable, I give the following reasons
   for what can scarcely he called my choice. I was called in my
   fourteenth year; I began my public exercises between sixteen and
   seventeen; at twenty-one I traveled; at twenty-six I came to America;
   thus far I had reasons enough for a single life. It had been my
   intention of returning to Europe at thirty years of age; but the war
   continued, and it was ten years before we had a settled, lasting peace:
   this was no time to marry or be given in marriage. At forty-nine I was
   ordained superintendent bishop in America. Among the duties imposed
   upon me by my office was that of traveling extensively, and I could
   hardly expect to find a woman with grace enough to enable her to live
   but one week out of the fifty-two with her husband: besides, what right
   has any man to take advantage of the affections of a woman, make her
   his wife, and by a voluntary absence subvert the whole order and
   economy of the marriage state, by separating those whom neither God,
   nature, nor the requirements of civil society permit long to he cut
   asunder: It is neither just nor generous. I may add to this that I had
   little money, and with this little administered to the necessities of a
   beloved mother until I was fifty-seven if I have done wrong, I hope God
   and the sex will forgive me: it is my duty now to bestow the pittance I
   may have to spare upon the widows and fatherless girls, and poor
   married men."

   [37] As an evidence of this disposition of mind, so amiable in itself,
   I give the following extract of a letter which I have in my possession,
   dated in New York, May 7, 1812. It seems the bishop had before written
   to the person to whom this letter was directed, in which the latter
   thought the bishop in some indirect way, had accused him of a species
   of duplicity, and the preacher had requested an explanation. To this
   the bishop answers in the following manner: -- "My Dear Brother and
   Son: -- It is impossible for me to enter into explanations. Unhappily
   suspicions have taken place, I said, I think, among us, including
   myself. I confess I had better not have said any thing. I did not mean
   a charge against you nor any innocent person. I am sorry I am not more
   prudent; but when I am called upon so often to speak and write, I am
   not sufficiently on my guard. I hope you will bear with me. I am
   persuaded of your uprightness. Brother * * * * has spoken in the
   highest terms of you to me, in word and letter. You will pardon me, and
   pray that I may say, [blotted text here -- DVM] and preach, and write
   better. "I remain thine in Jesus, "Francis Asbury." I need hardly say
   that this letter melted the heart of the young preacher into
   tenderness, entirely removed his apprehensions, and gave him a more
   exalted opinion of his venerable bishop than he ever had before, and
   indeed made him feel ashamed of himself for having laid the bishop
   under an obligation to make such a concession. Many such instances of
   ingenuous acknowledgment, in the same conciliatory strain, might be
   mentioned, greatly to the credit of his head and heart. As he was
   conscious that he was too fallible net to err, so he was too wise and
   good to persist in an error when convinced he had committed one; a
   virtue of rare occurrence among those who willfully go astray, because
   the same perverse disposition which impels them to the one prevents
   them from the performance of the other. Sincere and honest himself,
   whatever errors he may have committed, they were of a venial character,
   and were therefore atoned for with the same frankness and readiness
   with which an honest mind would forgive and forget them.

   [38] A certain steward of a circuit, when urged to exert himself to
   make a more ample provision for the support of their preachers,
   remarked that he had heard Bishop Asbury pray to the Lord to keep the
   preachers poor! The presiding elder to whom this was said replied, that
   "such a prayer in that place was quite unnecessary, as he and the
   people would, without any such prompting, see that this was done to
   perfection."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
