     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: A History of the Methodist Episcopal Church. Volume IV.
      Creator(s): Bangs, Nathan, D.D.
     Print Basis: T. Mason and G. Lane, 1839
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; History
      LC Call no: BX8235.B35 1838 V.4
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Protestantism

                  Post-Reformation

                  Other Protestant denominations

                  Methodism
     __________________________________________________________________

   A History Of The

   Methodist Episcopal Church

By Nathan Bangs, D.D.

   In Two Volumes

   (Later Expanded To Four Volumes -- DVM)

   VOLUME IV

   FROM THE YEAR 1829 TO THE YEAR 1840.

   THIRD EDITION, REVISED AND CORRECTED.

   "How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob; and thy tabernacles, O Israel,"
   Numbers xxiv, 5.

   "Behold, I send an Angel before thee -- beware of him, and obey his
   voice; provoke him not. -- If thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do
   all that I speak, then I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and an
   adversary to thine adversaries,"
   Exod. xxiii, 20-22.

   NEW-YORK:

   PUBLISHED BY T. MASON AND G. LANE,

   FOR THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH,

   AT THE CONFERENCE OFFICE, 200 MULBERRY-STREET.

   J. Collord, Printer.

   1839.

   Entered according to act of Congress, in the year 1838, by T. Mason

   & G. Lane, in the clerk's office of the Southern District of New York
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   Volume IV.

    FROM THE YEAR 1829 TO THE YEAR 1840.
     __________________________________________________________________

BOOK V

  CHAPTER 10

   Nineteen annual conferences -- episcopal duties; education -- extract
   from report of General Conference; new missions; Publishing Fund; its
   objects and capital; death and character of Bishop George; numbers;
   controversy; Its causes; Bible Society, Clarke's Commentary, Wesley's
   Testament, and general economy of Methodism assaulted and defended; Its
   ministry; its government and success; national societies -- why
   censured; temperance; Oneida and other missions; Mariners' Church in
   Boston; protracted meetings; deaths; numbers; aboriginal missions;
   Shawnee mission; other missions; death of Henry Holmes; numbers; Upper
   Canada; aboriginal missions; removal of Indians, and its effects; other
   missions; Wesleyan University; Randolph Macon College; La Grange
   College; numbers.

  CHAPTER 11

   General Conference of 1832; number and names of delegates; address of
   the bishops; report on missions; on education; Bible, Sunday School,
   and Tract Societies; pastoral address; report on temperance; American
   Colonization Society; affairs of Upper Canada; report on the
   episcopacy; election of Bishops Andrew and Emory; regulation lessening
   the number of delegates; relief of worn-out preachers; against leaving
   preachers without an appointment; traveling agents; jurisdiction of
   bishops; adjournment.

  CHAPTER 12

   Number of bishops and annual conferences; Liberia; how and when
   settled; first emigrants; disastrous results of first settlement;
   removal to another place; prosperity of the new colony; missions in
   Liberia, and appointment of Melville B. Cox; his arrival in Africa;
   organizes a church; plans of usefulness; sickens and dies; his
   character; Green Bay mission; other missions; death and character of
   Lemuel Green; of Wm. Phoebus; of Nathaniel Porter; numbers; work
   prosperous; domestic missions; their use; Dickinson and Allegheny
   Colleges; Genesee Conference Academy; death and character of J. M.
   Smith; numbers; general improvement; Liberia mission; Flat head, or
   Oregon mission; description of Oregon; Hudson Company; Astoria; general
   reflections; Visit of Flat Head Indians to General Clark; great
   sensation produced by the announcement of this fact; Jason and Daniel
   Lee appointed to the mission; on their journey; arrival; reception at
   Fort Vancouver, and first sermon; commence at Williamette;
   reinforcement sent; arrival; more sent; cattle procured from California
   -- Temperance Society formed; revival of religion; other missions;
   Lebanon College; legal decision respecting class and other collections;
   influence of this decision; deaths of preachers; numbers; mission to
   South America -- general state of the country; encouragements to
   commence the mission; appointment of Mr. Pitts; other missions; for the
   slave population; death an character of Bishop McKendree; death and
   character of Bishop Emory.

  CHAPTER 13

   General Conference of 1836; names of delegates; address of the Wesleyan
   Methodist Conference; answer; Fast; address of the bishops; death and
   funeral discourse of Bishops McKendree and Emory; Bible Society of M.
   E. Church dissolved; corresponding secretary Missionary Society
   appointed; Liberia annual conference; additional rule respecting
   receiving preachers; periodical literature, and settlement of Canada
   affairs; election of bishops; locating preachers without their consent,
   and a rule for trying superannuated preachers; abolitionism; strength
   of the argument; pastoral address; resolutions respecting agents for
   societies not connected with us.

  CHAPTER 14

   Diminution in Church members; its probable causes; deaths of preachers;
   numbers; South American missions; Liberia mission; other missions;
   numbers; missions in Illinois; in Texas; German and French missions;
   colleges and academies; death and character of Dr. Ruter; of others;
   numbers; general work; Oregon mission -- Christianity must precede
   civilization; great work of God in Oregon; centenary of Methodism;
   education promoted; death and character of Thomas Morrell; of Samuel
   Merwin; of Wilbur Fisk; of Smith Arnold; of John D. Bangs.

  CHAPTER 15

   General Conference of 1840; names of delegates; delegates from England
   and Upper Canada; address of the bishops; address from the British
   Conference; answer of the General Conference; address of the managers
   of the Missionary Society; report on the journal of secretary; report
   on moderate episcopacy; remarks of Mr. Newton; report on education; on
   episcopal powers; on presidents of Q. M. conferences; slavery and
   abolitionism, and colored testimony; temperance; method of receiving
   ministers from other denominations; on sabbath schools; on ordaining
   those to the ministry who own slaves; on the alterations in
   constitution of Missionary Society; American Colonization Society;
   regulations for trying supernumerary and superannuated preachers;
   pastoral address; close of the conference.

  CHAPTER 16

   Book Concern -- its origin; first book published; others issued; death
   of John Dickins, the first book steward; succeeded by Ezekiel Cooper;
   John Wilson his assistant, and then the principal; embarrassed state of
   the Concern; revives under Joshua Soule and Thomas Mason; Magazine
   resumed; increase of publications; debts likewise increased, with means
   of liquidation; revised hymn and tune book; book bindery; printing
   office; Clarke's Commentary and other books, and stereotype plates;
   Christian Advocate; enlargement of the Concern -- branch in Cincinnati;
   new arrangements; good effects of; new buildings and increased variety
   of books; labor of editors and agents; enlargement of buildings;
   consumed by fire; origin of the fire; public sympathy and aid to
   rebuild; presses and hands employed; various periodicals; objects and
   influence of the Concern misunderstood; moral, scientific and
   religious; pecuniary incidental only; closing remarks.
     __________________________________________________________________

Book V
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 10

    From the close of the General Conference of 1828 to the beginning of the
    General Conference of 1832

   Our last volume closed with an account of the doings of the General
   Conference of 1828, including a brief history of the radical
   controversy, and its results. With a view to give a consecutive
   narrative of that affair, the chronological order of the history, in
   relation to that controversy, was anticipated for three or four years;
   and therefore no more need be said in reference to that subject than
   merely to remark, that great peace and harmony prevailed throughout the
   bounds of the Church, and the work of God was generally prosperous.

   The Oneida conference was formed at the General Conference of 1828,
   making in all nineteen annual conferences to be attended by five
   bishops. As, however, the health of Bishop McKendree was very feeble,
   the labor of the superintendency devolved chiefly on the other four
   bishops; and as Bishop George died early in 1828, the remaining three
   bishops had work enough on their hands for the three succeeding years.
   The manner, however, in which they fulfilled their high and weighty
   trusts gave general satisfaction to the Church, and tended powerfully
   to keep up its union, and to promote its peace and prosperity.

   The cause of education was now advancing with much more rapidity than
   heretofore. A very able report was adopted at the last General
   Conference in favor of education, tending to show the great importance
   of this subject to the welfare of the Church, and particularly to the
   rising generation. In addition to three academies heretofore noticed,
   it appears that at this time the Mississippi conference had established
   the "Elizabeth Female Academy," the name being given to it in honor of
   Mrs. Elizabeth Greenfield, who laid its foundation by the gift of a lot
   of land, and a building estimated to be worth three thousand dollars.
   Another had been commenced under hopeful prospects in Tuscaloosa, in
   the state of Alabama, and two others in Illinois, under the patronage
   of the Illinois conference, one in Green county, and the other in the
   county of St. Clair.

   After some general statements on the number and character of the
   literary institutions then in existence under the patronage of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church, the report, the production of the late Dr.
   Fisk, contains the following very just and timely remarks: --

   "In review of the whole, we find the efforts and successful operations
   in different conferences to promote the cause of literature and science
   have increased very considerably since the last General Conference.
   There are now six or seven promising institutions in successful
   operation, two of them having college charters, namely, Madison College
   and Augusta College, which are already prepared to take students
   through a regular course, and confer on them the ordinary degrees and
   literary honors of such institutions, and hold out encouragements and
   assurances that authorize us to recommend them to the patronage of our
   friends. Other institutions are advancing to the same standing, and
   several more are contemplated, and will probably soon be put into
   operation. And it is a matter that ought to be noticed as calling for
   special gratitude to God, that revivals of religion have been so
   frequent in our literary seminaries. And this, too, ought to stimulate
   our people to encourage and patronize these institutions. If God smiles
   on our undertakings, shall we not proceed? We have reason, indeed, to
   think that the minds of both ministers and people are more awake to
   this subject than heretofore. The importance of literary institutions
   is more generally felt than formerly, and a greater and more general
   disposition to aid in this work is manifested. But we are still too
   much asleep on this subject. We are in danger of not keeping up with
   the improvements of society. If we should fail of contributing our
   share in this work, we should not only fall short of our obligations to
   society in general, but to our own Church in particular. The subject of
   education ought to be considered of special importance and of special
   interest to Methodist preachers, both as it respects their own
   usefulness and the interests of their families. We do not, indeed,
   profess to educate young men and train them up specifically for the
   ministry. But it will be readily seen, that, as our ministers are
   raised up mostly from among ourselves, their literary character will
   vary according to the general character of the Church.

   "We said this subject was of special interest to Methodist preachers'
   families. We wish this to be deeply impressed on the minds of all, and
   we could wish every conference would by some means make provision for
   the education of the children of itinerant ministers. The changeable
   and uncertain life of a traveling minister, the duties which call him
   so much from his family and domestic concerns, all show the almost
   imperious necessity for such a provision. Posterity will hardly suppose
   we have conferred a great favor upon the world, if, in our zeal to
   benefit others, we suffer our own children to grow up uneducated and
   unrestrained, a disgrace to the gospel we preach, and a reproach to
   their parents. If we would save the itinerant plan from falling into
   deserved disrepute, we must see to it that our children be not
   neglected in their moral culture and literary instruction."

   There can be no doubt that this report gave a fresh stimulus to the
   cause of literature and science among us, and made many feel the
   obligations they were under to promote it, who had hitherto been
   indifferent to its success.

   Such was the influence which the missionary cause was now exerting on
   the Church generally, that most of the new places which were occupied
   were entered under the patronage of the Missionary Society. This year
   the Red Hook mission, which embraced a territory lying on the east side
   of the Hudson River, the inhabitants of which were chiefly descendants
   of the Dutch, was undertaken in compliance with the earnest request of
   the late Rev. Freeborn Garrettson, whose widow contributed one hundred
   dollars a year toward its support.

   In Steuben country, in the western part of New York, there was a
   considerable number of Welch people settled, who could not understand
   the English language; and the Rev. David Cadwalder, who was able to
   preach in Welch, was sent as a missionary among them. His labors were
   so blessed that be formed a society of sixty members, and also erected
   a house of worship for their accommodation.

   In the western country new fields were constantly opening for gospel
   laborers. This year St. Marys mission was commenced. It embraced the
   new settlements in the northwestern counties of the state of Ohio. The
   labors of the missionary were blessed to the awakening and conversion
   of souls, and the work has gradually prospered and enlarged the sphere
   of its influence from that day to this. Another, called St.. Clair
   mission, in Michigan, was also begun under favorable prospects, and it
   was the happy commencement of a gracious work in all that region of
   country.

   This year the "Publishing Fund" was established. This originated in a
   consultation with the book agents and the editor of the Christian
   Advocate and journal, the latter of whom had prepared a constitution
   for the contemplated Bible Society, at the suggestion of the late
   Bishop Emory, who was then the senior book agent. The object was to
   devise ways and means to enable the Book concern to publish Bibles and
   Testaments, Sunday school books and tracts, on the cheapest possible
   terms. When these societies were formed, the book agents had pledged
   themselves to furnish the books for the Sunday schools, and tracts for
   tract societies, as cheap as they could be purchased elsewhere; and as
   the American Bible, Sunday School, and Tract Societies, being largely
   patronized and aided by the public munificence, were able to supply the
   demand for their respective publications almost at cost, it was soon
   found that we could not compete with them in the market unless ways and
   means were devised to furnish the needful funds. Our Book Concern at
   that time was deeply in debt, and could not therefore, from its own
   resources, print and circulate the books for Sunday schools, and
   tracts, at as low prices as they were furnished by the American
   societies, without risking its own reputation, if not, indeed, its very
   existence. To remedy this defect, and to supply the deficiency in
   funds, at the consultation before alluded to, it was agreed to make an
   attempt to establish a "Publishing Fund," in connection with the Bible,
   Sunday School, and Tract Societies of the Methodist Episcopal Church,
   which was accordingly done, and the constitution, together with the
   address of the managers, was published in the Christian Advocate and
   Journal on the 17th of October, 1828.

   The following extract from this address will more fully explain the
   principles and objects of this fund, and show that it was not intended
   to increase the actual resources of the Book Concern, or to add to its
   available funds, but simply to meet the extra expense incurred by
   furnishing publications on such terms as to enable our people to
   purchase books at their own establishment as cheap as they could be had
   elsewhere, without the hazard of being compelled to use books of which
   they could not approve. The following is the extract: --

   "The managers of these societies, in conjunction with the agents of our
   General Book Concern, have resolved to make a joint effort for the
   efficient prosecution of our common objects. God has blessed us in all
   our borders, temporally and spiritually. A thousand times we have
   exclaimed, What hath be wrought.' And yet the fields are opening before
   us, and still whitening to the harvest. The vast extent and the immense
   improvements of our country; its rapid growth, both in population and
   resources; the great and steady increase of our own denomination as a
   body of Christians, and our consequent obligations as stewards of the
   manifold grace of Him whose we are and whom we serve, and who requires
   us to excel in good works; our own growing resources, which ought to be
   consecrated to the Author of our mercies; the wants of the millions, of
   every age and sex, who sit in darkness or in guilt, and who must
   increase with the rapidly and vastly increasing population, without
   increased efforts for their good; the zealous and highly liberal
   efforts of other denominations, and our own special call, as we have
   from the beginning believed to be the design of God in raising us up,
   to aid in spreading Scriptural holiness over these lands: -- in a word,
   the cause of God and of our country, of the rising generation and of
   posterity, demand of us, at this crisis, an exertion bearing at least
   some ratio of proportion to our obligations and to our means.

   "The present is an era in our history of unparalleled interest. In the
   great spiritual and moral objects avowedly contemplated by the
   benevolent institutions and the Christian movements of the day, we have
   repeatedly declared our cordial and entire concurrence. With regard to
   the means of accomplishing them, we have differed. For various reasons,
   repeatedly assigned, we have considered it our duty to decline the
   proposed national' combinations, which, in our view, threatened for a
   while to swallow up, and absolutely to annihilate, every other plan of
   operation in our country. Such a result we still believe would have
   been pregnant with hazard. This sentiment does not by any means
   necessarily imply an impeachment of the Christian motives of those who
   may have differed from us in judgment. Our resistance to the
   consolidation of denominations, in effect, has had, we believe, a happy
   influence. But does it free us from our responsibilities as stewards of
   the mysteries and of the mercies of God? Does it release us from our
   obligations to contribute our full share toward the great work of
   civilizing, moralizing, and Christianizing the world? It does not. On
   the contrary, it increases both, since, from the stand we have taken,
   it is peculiarly incumbent on us now to see to it that the great and
   common cause shall, at least, sustain no loss by our course. If we
   desire, indeed, to be a peculiar people,' redeemed from all iniquity'
   by the precious blood of HIM who, for this purpose, gave himself for
   us,' let us not forget that we cannot sustain this high character
   without being at the same time, and in a correspondent degree, zealous
   of good works,' for which also Christ died.

   "The great object of the Methodist Book Concern, from the beginning,
   has been to serve as an auxiliary in spreading Scriptural truth and
   holiness. With this view it has been the medium through which our
   Sunday school books and tracts have been issued, and it is intended
   also to be the medium for the publication of our Bibles and Testaments.
   The well-known character and the established credit of this
   institution, under the direction of the General Conference, and, in the
   intermediate years, of the New York conference, is an ample guaranty
   for the faithful application of funds. Hitherto almost the whole
   business of our general benevolent associations has been performed
   through the agency of this concern, with the aid of its agents abroad.
   And whatever expenses, or risks, or losses have been incurred, either
   in the general depository, or by supplying the auxiliary depositories,
   were so extensive a country, have been wholly borne by this
   establishment. If it were practicable, as in ordinary cases, to
   establish the prices of such publications so as to cover all such
   expenses, and risks, and occasional losses, and to provide for such
   additional service as may be required, this might, perhaps, still be
   done. But the terms on which Sunday school books, tracts, Bibles, and
   Testaments are now expected will not admit of this; nor, in the
   prospect of the vastly increased demand, will it be possible for us, in
   this way, to maintain any thing like a fair and honorable competition
   with other institutions, which were originally endowed with large
   funds, and are still largely assisted both by regular annual
   contributions and by occasional donations; whose treasuries,
   nevertheless, we are assured, are still usually exhausted, and their
   calls for further aid are frequent and earnest. The consequence to us
   must be, either that the Methodist Book Concern, if left single handed
   and unaided, must be run down, and its great and benevolent objects be
   defeated, or our own publications, of the description mentioned, must
   be forced out of circulation:' to prevent which, if we mean to prevent
   it, ways and means must be devised to aid this establishment. It only
   remains for us, therefore, to determine whether we will aid our own
   institutions, or contribute our funds elsewhere. For give we must,
   somewhere; and continue to give, as God shall continue to bless us, and
   as occasions and objects continue to rise before us. Without this we
   cannot, we ought not to maintain our name or standing as a Christian
   people. Shall we, then, refuse to give at home, and suffer our own
   institutions to flag or fail; and, after all, from sheer shame, if from
   no better principle, be compelled to give elsewhere? We say, no.

   "In view of the facts and premises above stated, the managers of the
   Bible, Sunday School, and Tract Societies of the Methodist Episcopal
   Church have resolved, jointly, to co-operate with the agents of the
   Book Concern, and their auxiliary agencies, to raise a fund to be
   vested in that concern, as a permanent and certain resource for the
   accomplishment of their common objects. And they have resolved to aim
   at a foundation broad and strong, in view not only of the wants
   immediately pressing on us, but also of those of which the vast
   prospect opens before us; and to erect a superstructure from which,
   with the divine favor, streams of blessing may flow to generations yet
   unborn.

   For the buildings requisite for depositories, agents' offices, printing
   office, bindery, and for the transaction of the general business of the
   three societies, and for stereotype plates, binders' and printers'
   presses, and all the requisite apparatus for printing and binding, on
   the scale contemplated, a sum not less than fifty thousand dollars will
   be requisite. For these objects a debt of nearly one fourth of that sum
   has already been incurred by the Book Concern, without any charge
   whatever for personal services And yet we can scarcely be said to have
   more than commenced in the operation of these Societies; and with
   regard to the Bible Society, hardly to have made a beginning, except in
   the preparation of a few sets of stereotype plates, in anticipation. To
   conduct our operations to the extent intended, and to which, with
   united exertion, we are amply adequate, much greater sums must yet be
   raised. It will doubtless be found necessary to introduce power
   presses, with other improvements, both to increase the rapidity of
   publishing, and to reduce the prices. In view of all which, after
   conferring together, in deliberate consultation, we are of opinion that
   it is not safe, for the purpose of enabling the three societies to make
   the necessary preparations, to name to our friends a less sum than that
   above mentioned. After these preparations shall have been made, it must
   be recollected, however, that considerable annual and current expenses
   still must necessarily be incurred, in the service necessary for
   preparing, packing, carting, and forwarding books and tracts, with the
   requisite clerkship, fuel, lights, insurance, ground rent, and postage,
   the latter item of which alone will probably increase to perhaps not
   less than from one thousand to fifteen hundred dollars per annum. All
   such expenses have heretofore been borne by the Book Concern, which,
   consequently, has been obliged to fix the prices of the publications so
   as, in a measure at least, to cover those expenses, or else to sustain
   heavy actual loss. With a view, therefore, still further to lessen the
   prices, by having respect, in fixing them, to the actual cost of paper,
   press-work, and binding only, on the most economical principles, it is
   judged indispensable that a fund be raised, and be vested in the Book
   Concern, the use or interest of which shall be permanently appropriated
   to cover the above or any other unavoidable items of current expense
   and in consideration of which investments, when made, the said concern
   has pledged itself to submit to the managers of the above societies
   respectively, in conjunction with the agents, the determination of the
   prices at which their respective publications shall be furnished, on
   the principles above stated. And on this plan only, in our opinion, can
   they be furnished at the very low rates at which they are called for,
   and must be supplied. The further sum necessary for these purposes, on
   the enlarged and extensive plan contemplated, cannot be safely
   estimated at less than fifty thousand dollars, the interest of which
   alone, namely, three thousand dollars per annum, it will be observed,
   is to be applied to cover the items of annual and contingent expenses
   above-mentioned, or which I may unavoidably occur in the course of
   business. In all of which, however, it may be proper to mention, that
   it is not intended that an addition of one cent shall be made, out of
   any of these funds, to the support already allowed, agreeably to
   Discipline, to the regular agents of the Book Concern; and that they
   are intended solely to cover the extra expenses incurred by the extra
   business of these societies, whose publications are issued in
   connection with that concern. It was with a view to the extra labor
   caused by such publications, in part, that an additional agent was
   appointed at the last General Conference; and as our operations shall
   be extended, further help, in various ways, will undoubtedly be found
   indispensably requisite."

   It will be perceived that this fund was to be vested in the Book
   Concern, and the interest alone used to meet the unavoidable expense of
   publishing the requisite books for the above-mentioned societies. And
   though it was in contemplation to raise one hundred thousand dollars,
   the fund, even now, (1841,) amounts to only about forty thousand.
   Comparatively small, however, as it is, it has done much good, and the
   Book Concern has been enabled to fulfill its obligations in supplying
   the books on as low terms as they could be purchased at other
   depositories. The dissolution of the Bible Society of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church, by which the concern has been relieved from
   publishing Bibles and Testaments on those terms, will be noticed in its
   proper place.

   Twelve deaths are recorded; fifty were located; seventy returned
   supernumerary; one hundred and one superannuated; and three had been
   expelled.

   Among those who had died this year was Enoch George, one of the bishops
   of the Methodist Episcopal Church. The following is taken from the
   Minutes of the Conferences for 1829: --

   "He was born in the state of Virginia, Lancaster county, in the year
   1767 or '68. His mother died when he was young, and he was left in the
   care of an elder sister. During his minority his father removed to the
   state of North Carolina. At about the age of eighteen or nineteen he
   became, through the instrumentality of the Methodist ministry, deeply
   convinced of sin, and sought and obtained the pardoning mercy of God,
   through our Lord Jesus Christ. He was soon called to the exercise of
   public prayer and exhortation; and after fruitless struggles to
   suppress the impression of duty which increasingly rested upon his
   mind, with great diffidence he entered the field of labor as a
   preacher. He traveled a short time with Philip Cox, and was then sent,
   by Bishop Asbury, to assist Daniel Asbury in forming a circuit on the
   head waters of the Catawba and Broad Rivers.

   "In 1790 he was received into the itinerant connection on trial, and
   appointed to Pamlico circuit; and in 1791 to Caswell. In 1792 he was
   admitted into full connection, ordained deacon, and appointed to
   Guilford circuit; and in 1793 to Broad River. In 1794 he was ordained
   elder, and appointed to Great Pee Dee. The next year he was appointed
   to Edisto, with instructions to labor three months in Charleston, South
   Carolina; and the two years following he filled the office of presiding
   elder.

   In 1798, on account of ill health, be traveled to the north as far as
   New York. Having measurably recovered his health, in 1800 he resumed
   his labors, and was appointed presiding elder of Potomac district, in
   the Baltimore conference. His health failed a second time, and he
   located in 1801. In 1803 he again entered the itinerant field, and was
   appointed to Frederick circuit; in 1804 to Baltimore district; 1805,
   Alexandria district; 1807, Georgetown, D.C.; 1808, Frederick; 1809,
   Montgomery; 1810, Baltimore circuit; 1811, Potomac district; and in
   1815 to Georgetown district.

   "At the General Conference held in Baltimore, May, 1816, he was elected
   and ordained bishop. In the active discharge of the arduous duties of
   this highly responsible office he continued until his death. He died at
   Staunton, Va., August 23, 1828, in the peace and triumph of gospel
   faith, and with his latest breath giving glory to God.'

   Bishop George was a man of deep piety, of great simplicity of manners,
   a very pathetic, powerful, and successful preacher, greatly beloved in
   life, and very extensively lamented in death."

   A more minute and extended memoir of this servant of God may be seen in
   the Methodist Magazine and Quarterly Review for 1830.

   That which distinguished Bishop George among his fellows was the warmth
   of his zeal, and the quickness of his movements. This no doubt arose
   from the depth of his piety. He seemed, indeed, to live and walk in
   God. This was evident from the uniformity of his devotions, as well as
   from his general deportment, both before the public and in his more
   private intercourse with his friends. He always lose early in the
   morning, and, if circumstances permitted, would spend the morning
   before breakfast in a solitary walk in the field, for meditation and
   private devotion; and in these lonely rambles he delighted in the
   contemplation of the Deity, as he is seen in his works and ways, and in
   holding communion with him in praise and prayer.

   He was naturally eloquent, and his eloquence was all natural. He never
   sought to embellish his subjects with those artificial tinsels of
   pulpit oratory substituted by some for those overflowings of the heart
   which proceed from being filled and fired with the truth which the lips
   utter. Hence his "preaching was not with the enticing words of man's
   wisdom," but it was in "demonstration and power," and "with much
   assurance in the Holy Ghost." He was more distinguished, however, for
   affecting the heart and moving the passions, than for enlightening the
   understanding and informing the judgment. Whenever, therefore, you saw
   him begin to rub his eyes with his fingers, as if wiping thence the
   gushing tear, you might expect a pouring forth of those streams of
   gospel truth, generally of that declamatory or hortatory character,
   which were calculated to move the hearer to weep or shout, according to
   his predominant feeling. And he seldom concluded a sermon without
   greatly moving his audience in either of these ways, because he was
   first moved himself by those sacred and heavenly emotions which were
   evidently produced by the energetic workings of the Holy Spirit.

   Viewing him, therefore, simply as an ambassador of God, sent peculiarly
   to awaken the conscience of the sinner, and to alarm or to strengthen
   the faith of the believer, and quicken him in the divine life, he was
   most eminently qualified for his great work. In addition to the holy
   pathos with which he breathed out the "words of truth and soberness,"
   his voice was exceedingly musical, shrill, and clear, his action
   natural, and expressive of the feelings of his heart, and all
   calculated to impress the hearer with the solemn truths which fell from
   his lips. If, however, we were to judge him by other tests of a pulpit
   orator, we should detect some defects. In education he was quite
   deficient, and his general reading was very limited. For this lack of
   acquired knowledge he might be considered as furnishing more than a
   substitute in the pointedness of his appeals, and the manner in which
   he fortified all his positions by direct appeals to the sacred
   Scriptures. And if he dealt in detached sentences instead of following
   a consecutive order and arrangement of argumentation, he was abundantly
   compensated in the blessed effects which he saw produced in the hearts
   of those who heard him, and knew how to appreciate the value of a
   sermon more from its unction than its argument. His premises were
   found, where every minister of Christ should find them, in the Bible;
   and his conclusions were thence drawn without much regard to logical
   arrangement, and certainly without any circumlocution, direct, and with
   a force it was hardly possible to resist. And from the earnestness of
   his manner, some have entirely mistaken his objects and motives.
   Beholding the emotions which were very generally produced in the pious
   part of his hearers, sometimes expressed in loud shouts of praise,
   those who were mere outward court worshipers, or uninterested hearers,
   have retired from the sanctuary under a conviction that Bishop George
   was acting the part of a mountebank, speaking for the purpose of
   gaining shouts of applause. A sad mistake this. He ascended the pulpit,
   not as a stage-player mounts the stage, but as an ambassador of Christ,
   commissioned to declare his counsel unto the people, and to negotiate a

   "Peace twixt earth and heaven."

   And in the fulfillment of this commission he did not trifle with the
   awful realities of time and eternity, but poured forth from a full
   heart the solemn truths of God, in a manner which penetrated the
   conscience and drew forth the confession, by sobs and shouts, that God
   was with him of a truth.

   Such was Bishop George in the pulpit. In the chair of the conference he
   was less acceptable. Though he was always intent on accomplishing the
   greatest amount of good by the best possible means, he often defeated
   his purpose by the haste with which he endeavored to dispatch the
   business. His manner, also was sometimes abrupt and undignified, and of
   course did not always command that respect which every conscientious
   mind would wish to feel and pay to a superior. Nor were his decisions
   always made with that wisdom and deliberation needful to produce a
   conviction of their correctness in all cases. He appeared, therefore,
   to much greater advantage in the pulpit than its the chair of the
   conference; and had he lived and died simply as an itinerant Methodist
   preacher, he had commanded more respect than was felt for him as a
   general superintendent of the church. These defects, however, detract
   nothing from his moral worth, nor render him less worthy of affection
   as a Christian bishop, or as a man deeply and seriously devoted to the
   best interests of the human family; for who is perfect in every
   respect?

   But in whatever light we view him, he will long be remembered with
   affection, as one of our early pioneers in the ranks of the itinerancy,
   as an indefatigable laborer in his Lord's vineyard, who won many
   sinners to Christ, and was always a son of consolation to God's
   believing people.

   The warmth of his affections won him many friends, and the affability
   of his manners endeared him to them as a brother beloved, who might be
   approached at all times with a cheerful confidence.

   His death was sudden and unexpected. Its announcement, therefore,
   spread a temporary gloom over the Methodist community. But death did
   not find him unprepared. He met this "last enemy," not only with meek
   submission, but with a holy triumph, and a well-grounded hope of
   eternal life. As the words, "Glory to God!" had often fell from his
   lips in the pulpit, so in his last moments, in full view of the
   invisible world, he shouted forth the praises of God, and no doubt went
   to the abodes of bliss and immortality.

   The following statement of the numbers will show that the work was
   generally prosperous.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 359,533; Last Year: 327,932;
   Increase: 31,601 -- Colored This Year: 58,856; Last Year: 54,065;
   Increase: 4,791 -- Indians This Year 4,501; Last Year 4,209; Increase:
   292 -- Total This Year: 418,927; [1] Last Year: 382,520 -- Increase:
   36,407 -- Preachers This Year: 1,642; Last Year: 1,576; Increase: 66.

  1829

   We have before alluded to a controversy which arose between us and some
   other denominations of Christians; and as it came to its height during
   this and the two following years, that the reader may have a clear and
   full understanding of its character and results, it is thought
   expedient to give a short account of it in this place. It has been
   before remarked, that for a long time after our establishment in this
   country, very little was done to enlighten the public mind from our
   press, except the republication of some of Wesley's and Fletcher's
   sermons, Checks, and tracts, and the biographies of a few eminent
   servants of God. But in 1818 the Methodist Magazine was resumed and in
   1826 the Christian Advocate and Journal made its appearance. The
   extensive circulation of these two periodicals, and the publication of
   numerous tracts, of a doctrinal, experimental, and practical character,
   and the continual augmentation of books on a variety of subjects,
   together with the prosperous state of our missions in various parts of
   our country, seemed to awaken the attention of others, and to call
   forth strictures upon our doctrines and general economy, of such a
   character as called for defense on our part.

   Another thing seemed to put us in somewhat of an awkward position
   before the public. The organization of a separate sabbath school for
   the Methodist Episcopal Church made it necessary to provide means to
   supply our schools with suitable books. This led to the preparation and
   publication of sabbath school books from our own press; but as Bibles
   and Testaments formed the principal basis of sabbath school
   instruction, and as the American Bible Society was an institution in
   which all denominations were supposed to have an equal interest, it was
   thought that we had a right to claim a share from that society, in
   Bibles and Testaments, for the use of our Sunday schools. We
   accordingly petitioned the "Young Men's Bible Society" of the city of
   New York, which had been constituted for the express purpose of
   supplying sabbath schools gratuitously with the Holy Scriptures, and to
   which the Methodists, as well as others, contributed, for a supply of
   Bibles and Testaments for the use of our sabbath schools but our
   petition was rejected, merely because, as was stated by the secretary
   of that society, we were sectarians, and therefore came not within the
   legitimate range of their charities.

   This rejection of our petition compelled us, either to suffer our
   schools to languish for want of suitable books, or to devise ways and
   means to supply them from our own resources; and hence a proposition
   for forming a separate Bible Society was submitted to the General
   Conference of 1828, and the conference recommended its organization in
   the city of New York. In conformity with this recommendation, the Bible
   Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church was formed, with the view of
   obtaining a supply of Bibles and Testaments for our sabbath schools,
   and for the poor members of our own congregations. This separate
   organization, together with the steps which led to it, provoked no
   little opposition from various quarters, particularly from writers in
   the Presbyterian and Congregational Churches, by whom our motives,
   being misunderstood, were misrepresented. These things tended to keep
   alive the spirit of controversy. And as religious newspapers were now
   very generally patronized by the several Christian denominations, and
   agents employed for the several societies now in operation were
   traveling extensively through the country, each one zealous for his own
   sect, many things were written and published in those periodicals,
   implicating our character, impugning our motives, denouncing our
   doctrines and usages, and calculated to bring our institutions into
   contempt.

   As Dr. Adam Clarke's Commentary had obtained an extensive circulation,
   and Wesley's translation of the New Testament, accompanied with his
   notes, was also published and circulated by our Book Concern, an
   attempt was made by a writer in the west, and his efforts were seconded
   by several editors of the periodical press, to bring these two writers
   into disrepute, by endeavoring to prove that they had altered, with a
   view to sustain their peculiar tenets, the sacred text, and thereby
   corrupted the word of God. As this was a heavy charge, and, if
   sustained, must impeach their moral character and Christian integrity,
   it was considered no more than a sacred duty we owed to their
   characters, and to the Church which delighted to honor them, to rescue
   their memories from this undeserved reproach.

   Indeed, we had reason to suspect that there was a combination among
   certain sects, if possible, to destroy our influence. This we inferred
   from the fact, that the presses under the control of Calvinistic
   editors, in different parts of the country, almost simultaneously
   uttered the same language against Methodism, without at all mitigating
   the severity of their censures by an acknowledgment of the good we had
   been instrumental in accomplishing. The Christian Spectator, a
   Quarterly Review conducted by an association of gentlemen connected
   with Yale College, in a "Review on the Economy of Methodism," commenced
   a rude and unprovoked attack upon our doctrine, discipline, and general
   economy, which was copied into other papers, accompanied with remarks
   as hostile to our Church, as they were untrue and unkind. This
   systematical and simultaneous attack upon us as a church was conducted
   with unsparing severity, and led us to conclude that a war was
   commenced upon our economy, as unjustifiable as it might be injurious
   in its results. Indeed, it was by no means confined to argumentative
   assaults upon our doctrines and usages, but the character of our
   ministers was assailed, their motives impugned, and they were
   represented as even hostile to the civil institutions of the country,
   and also of exercising a lordly despotism over the consciences of our
   own people.

   Let us, however, classify these objections, and notice the answers to
   them.
    1. Dr. Adam Clarke was accused of introducing into his Commentary
       unauthorized criticisms upon the original text.

   To this it was answered, that he scrupulously followed, throughout, the
   present authorized version; and if at any time he dissented from it, he
   very modestly did it in his notes, assigning his reasons, and leaving
   every reader to judge for himself of the correctness of his opinions.
   But even allowing that he had altered the common English Version in
   some obscure places, with a view to render the text more intelligible,
   he did but follow the example of such men as Campbell, Houbigant,
   Macknight, and others, most of whom were Calvinistic commentators.
   This, therefore, was a groundless accusation, only calculated to raise
   the popular prejudice against Dr. Clarke, for the purpose of
   circumscribing his usefulness as a most able and pious commentator of
   the Holy Scriptures.

   2.?Wesley also was accused of mutilating the sacred text in such a
   glaring manner as to make "nonsense of some of the plainest texts in
   the Bible," and several instances were adduced to sustain this heavy
   charge. And as this controversy may be revived at some future time, or
   may be referred to in an unfavorable point of light, I think it proper
   to insert here the answer to these objections to Mr. Wesley's
   translation of the New Testament. It is as follows: -- -

   "The following texts are produced by the Religious Intelligencer, to
   show that Wesley has made nonsense of some of the plainest texts in the
   Bible:'

  JOHN 6:64

   COMMON VERSION: -- But there are some of you that believe not. For
   Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and who
   should betray him.

   WESLEY'S ALTERATION: -- But there are some of you who believe not. (For
   Jesus had known from the beginning who they were that believed not, and
   who would not betray him.)

  ACTS 4:27, 28

   COMMON VERSION: -- For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom
   thou hast anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles
   and the people of Israel. were gathered together, for to do whatsoever
   thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.

   WESLEY'S ALTERATION: -- For of a truth both Herod and Pontius Pilate,
   with the Gentiles and people of Israel, were gathered together against
   thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, to do whatsoever thy
   hand and thy counsel before determined to be done.

  JUDE 4

   COMMON VERSION: -- For there are certain men crept in unawares, who
   were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning
   the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord
   God, and Our Lord Jesus Christ.

   WESLEY'S ALTERATION: -- For there are certain men crept in unawares,
   who were of old described before, with regard to this condemnation,
   ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and
   denying our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.

  REV. 22:19

   COMMON VERSION: -- And if any man shall take away from the words of the
   book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of
   life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written
   in this book.

   WESLEY'S ALTERATION: -- And if any man shall take away from the words
   of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part of the tree
   of life, and the holy city, which are written in this book.

  1 PET. 1:19, 20

   COMMON VERSION: -- But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
   without blemish and without spot; who Verily was foreordained before
   the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for
   you.

   WESLEY'S ALTERATION: -- But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
   Lamb without blemish and without spot; who verily was foreknown before
   the foundation of the world. but was made in the last times for you.

   "Now whether Wesley's translation be more in accordance with the
   original or not, we believe it is at least equally plain, and easy to
   be understood.

   "In respect to the first cited text, the chief difference is in the
   last clause, and who would not betray him,' though even this is very
   far from making nonsense.' Having never noticed this variation before
   we saw it produced in the Charleston Observer, we were not a little
   surprised that it should exist. To ascertain whether Mr. Wesley so
   translated the passage -- knowing that the original would not admit of
   it -- we searched the different editions of his Testament, with notes,
   and the result is that it is a mere typographical error. In the English
   edition, printed in London in the year 1795, the negative particle
   (not) is not found. Neither is it found in the American edition,
   containing his notes, which was printed in the year 1812 -- three years
   before the Testament which contains the error was printed.

   "In regard to the second and following passages, we wonder not that our
   Calvinistic friends are offended at the version made by Mr. Wesley, for
   some of them strike at the root of the peculiarities of their creed. To
   be satisfied whether Wesley can be justified in his translation, it is
   necessary to examine the original Greek text.

   "In the first mentioned text, For of a truth both Herod and Pontius
   Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel, were gathered together
   against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed to do whatsoever
   thy hand and thy counsel before determined to be done,' although the
   difference is very considerable, we think Mr. Wesley is fully sustained
   by the original text. The Greek verb "poiasai" is in the infinitive
   mood, and therefore may agree with either Herod, Pontius Pilate, &c.,
   or with the singular, thy holy child Jesus. Allowing this to be
   correct, it does not follow that the inspired penman meant to say that
   those wicked people were gathered together to do what the hand and
   counsel of God before determined should be done; but that it was the
   holy child Jesus whom God had anointed to do' what he had before the
   foundation of the world determined he should do, for the redemption and
   salvation of mankind.

   "The whole context requires this interpretation, we will not say to
   prevent its speaking nonsense,' but from speaking blasphemy. According
   to the present rendering and the Calvinistic interpretation of the
   text, it is brought to prove that Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the people
   of Israel who clamored for the life of Christ, in all their wicked and
   blasphemous conduct, did nothing more than fulfill the eternal and
   unalterable counsel and will of God! The reader may now see the reason
   why our Calvinistic friends are so exceedingly displeased with John
   Wesley, merely because he has so rendered this text that we need not
   necessarily infer that all this evil conduct of the persecutors and
   murderers of Jesus Christ was according to the predetermination of God
   -- although in doing so he has only followed the Greek text, by
   preserving the infinitive form of the verb "poiasai," to do; -- whereas
   had he done otherwise he might justly have been accused, as we shall
   presently see Beza may be, of corrupting the text. Although it does not
   appear from his comment on the passage that Wesley made the
   transposition from a conviction that it materially affected the sense,
   yet the zeal of his opposers seems to be kindled into a flame whenever
   such an interpretation is given, however fairly, which goes to question
   their favorite theory respecting God's having determined, and as now
   influencing, men to all their sinful actions.

   "We said that the context requires that the text should be so construed
   as to attribute the works which God had before determined should be
   done, to Jesus Christ, and not to Herod and his wicked associates.
   Those who lifted up their voice' on this occasion said, quoting from
   the second Psalm, The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were
   gathered together against the Lord.' Now if those infatuated people
   were acting against the Lord, how could they at the same time be
   fulfilling his counsel and will? Do people fulfill the counsel of the
   Lord in acting against him? And must they be consigned to eternal
   burnings for thus acting? This would be a hard case indeed.

   "Look also at the 29th and 30th verses, -- And now, Lord, behold their
   threatenings; and grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness they
   may speak thy word, by stretching forth thy hand to heal; and that
   signs and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy child Jesus.' The
   true state of the case appears to be this: God had ordained that when
   Jesus Christ should be manifested in the flesh, in addition to his
   dying for the sins of the world, 'signs and wonders should be done' by
   him; that he should 'stretch forth his hand to heal' the sick, to
   restore sight to the blind, raise the dead, &c; for this purpose he had
   been anointed, that he might do the things thus before determined in
   the eternal counsel should be done; and hence the apostles, after
   stating that Herod and his wicked associates had gathered together to
   oppose the Lord's anointed, and to frustrate this gracious
   determination of God, pray that as their malevolent attempts had been
   so far defeated by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, that
   even now 'signs and wonders' may be done; that thus a full
   demonstration may be given to all that Jesus is the Christ, the true
   Messiah promised in the Old Testament.

   "It is probably on account of the manifest absurdities involved in the
   contrary supposition, that led Episcopius and many other commentators
   to adopt a similar construction to that of Wesley's. And to show that
   Wesley is by no means singular in his translation, we may observe that
   the French version of the New Testament, printed from the London
   stereotype edition, and according to the edition of Paris for the year
   1805, said to be reviewed and compared with the Hebrew and Greek
   texts,' and printed under the inspection of the New York Bible Society,
   renders this text precisely as Wesley has done. The following is the
   translation

   "Car en effet Herode et Ponce Pilate, avec les Gentils et le peuple
   d'Israel, se sont assembles contre ton saint Fils Jesus, que tu as
   oint, Pour faire toutes les choses que ta main et ton conseil avoient
   auparavant determine' devoir etre faites.' It will be perceived by
   those who understand the French, that the translators have transposed
   the sentences in the same manner that Wesley has done, preserved the
   infinitive form of the verb "poiasai," by rendering it pour faire,' to
   do, and connected it closely with the nonn, ton saint Fils Jesus,' "thy
   holy on Jesus," thereby allowing us to refer the works to be done to
   Jesus Christ, and not necessarily to his enemies who were gathered
   together against him.

   "The Latin version of Montanus follows the common English version, and
   preserves the infinitive form of the verb, Facere quaecumque, "to do"
   whatsoever, &c.

   "It is somewhat singular that Beza, to whom we referred in our former
   number as having been accused by the indefatigable Macknight of
   corrupting the sacred text to support his own contracted Calvinistic
   views, in the translation of the passage under consideration, has
   changed the form of the verb from the infinitive to the subjunctive
   plural, (facerent,) with a view to make it agree exclusively with
   Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the people of Israel!

   "Beza also introduces a clause -- which, to be sure, is not of much
   consequence, either way -- into his version not found at all in the
   common Greek text, in hoc civitate, in this city.' The following is his
   translation of the two verses under consideration . --

   "Coacti sunt enim in hac civitate vere adversus sanctum Filium tuum
   Jesum quem unxisti, Herodes et Pontius Pilatus cum Gentibus et populis
   Israelis, Ut facerent quaecumque manus tua et consilium tuum prius
   definierat ut fierent.' By thus rendering the verb in the plural
   number, making it to agree only with a plural nominative, Beza's
   translation amounts to a comment on the text, which, to those who
   understand no other language than the Latin, is a manifest deception.
   We grant, indeed, that the grammatical construction of the sentence, as
   the infinitive mood of the verb may agree with either a singular or
   plural noun, does not necessarily require our interpretation or the
   contrary, but leaves the reader to adopt that which from the context
   appears most agreeable to the analogy of faith; and this consideration
   makes the conduct of Beza the more censurable; it is the same as if any
   one on the opposite side should render the passage thus -- Thy holy
   child Jesus, whom thou host anointed that he might do the things thy
   hand and counsel before determined should be done; -- and although we
   believe this is the genuine sense, we are far from thinking ourselves
   warranted in taking such liberties with the sacred text. However
   Calvinistically inclined our English translators may have been, they
   did not feel themselves authorized to follow Beza's translation, but
   have given a literal rendering of the verb "poiasai," to do.

   "Now could Wesley be convicted of such rashness as Beza was guilty of,
   his enemies might well triumph. But Beza was a Calvinist. and
   therefore, in the estimation of his followers, who approve of his
   translation, he may be considered guiltless. Perhaps they may think
   that, being of the elect, God did not behold iniquity in' him; but poor
   John Wesley, being an Arminian reprobate, must have his name blotted
   from the book of life! For what, think you, gentle reader? For altering
   the sacred Scriptures? No, surely. This he never did; but for abjuring
   Calvinism -- for taking off the mask by which its modest friends had
   endeavored to conceal its haggard visage. This is his sin -- the
   offense for which he is now so severely castigated.

   "But whatever corrections Mr. Wesley may have introduced in his
   version, we are persuaded that they do not affect, in the smallest
   degree, any fundamental doctrine of Christianity. To this sentiment we
   think all will subscribe except those who believe that the distinctive
   feature of Calvinism, namely, unconditional predestination,
   comprehending unconditional election and reprobation, is a fundamental
   doctrine.

   "And although some have affirmed, in the heat of controversy, that
   unless we believe that doctrine according to the Calvinistic
   interpretation, we cannot be in a state of grace, yet we can scarcely
   persuade ourselves that any one, in his calm and sober moments, I say
   that all who demur at receiving this doctrine, thus explained, must
   inevitably be condemned at last. If any should assume such a position,
   we should despair of reasoning with him with any hope of success.

   "When we speak of fundamental doctrines, we mean those by which the
   Christian system is eminently distinguished from all other systems of
   religion; but more especially the fall and depravity of man; the
   redemption of the world by the atoning merits of Jesus Christ; the
   necessity of regeneration by the Holy Spirit; holiness of heart and
   life, and all those collateral truths which are connected with or
   necessarily accompany these doctrines. Now if any man will show us a
   single text in Wesley's translation which invalidates, or in the
   smallest degree weakens any one of these essential truths of Jesus
   Christ, or strikes at his real Godhead, or at the unity in trinity of
   the Deity, we will in that particular abandon him as our leader; we
   will believe in that instance he was under a mistake, and that he
   deserves the severe criticisms and censures of his adversaries.

   "Believing that we shall not be called upon to controvert this point
   with our polemical friends, we proceed to notice the other texts which
   have been produced to prove that Wesley has made nonsense of some of
   the plainest texts of the Bible.' The first in order is,

  Jude 4

   COMMON VERSION -- For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were
   before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the
   grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God,
   and our Lord Jesus Christ.

   WESLEY'S TRANSLATION -- For there are certain men crept in unawares,
   who were of old described before, with regard to this condemnation,
   ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and
   denying our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.

   "Now we presume that the material words in Wesley's translation to
   which our opponents in this controversy object, are, of old described
   before,' which Wesley has substituted for of old ordained,' in the
   common version; which is much nearer the original than the other.

   The Greek text reads, "oi pulai progegrammenoi," the most literal
   translation of which would be, of old before written;' for the word
   "progegrammenoi" is derived from "pro," before, and "grapho," to write,
   or "gramma," a letter or character of writing; though some have
   supposed that it means here, before proscribed, believing that the
   apostle meant to say that the ungodly characters he was about
   describing assimilated in their character and conduct to those ungodly
   persons who had long since, in the sacred writings, been proscribed and
   condemned. Whichever of these meanings may be put on the word here, it
   cannot be made to mean foreordained, as the word justly so translated
   has an entirely different meaning, and comes from a totally different
   root. The word which the lexicons and our translators have rendered
   foreordained, comes from "proopizo," and this from "pro," before, and
   "opizo," to bound, limit, or decree, and hence the compound word
   signifies to limit, bound, or decree beforehand, or, as very properly
   translated in the sacred Scriptures, to foreordain, or before appoint.

   "Macknight, whom we have before quoted, and who was a professed
   Calvinistic minister in the Church of Scotland, gives the following
   translation of this passage: Who long ago have been before written.'
   His comment upon the passage is thus: Jude means that those wicked
   people had their punishment before written, that is, foretold in what
   is written concerning the Sodomites and rebellions Israelites, whose
   crimes were the same as theirs, and whose punishment was not only a
   proof of God's resolution to punish sinners, but an example of the
   punishment which he will inflict on them. According to some, the words
   have an allusion to the ancient custom of writing laws on tables, which
   were hung up in public places, that the people might know the
   punishment annexed to breaking the laws.'

   "To this rendering of Macknight the French version agrees: Dont la
   condemnation est escrite depuis longtems,' -- whose condemnation has
   been written a long time since.

   "The Latin version of Montanus, which usually accompanies Leusden's
   Greek Testament, translates -- Olim praescripti in hoc judicium,' the
   literal English of which is, "of old before written, or described,"
   which is a faithful translation of the Greek, and a justification of
   the version of Wesley.

   "It is somewhat of a singular coincidence, that in this passage Wesley
   and Beza exactly agree in their translation; so that if Wesley has had
   his name blotted from the book of life for altering the sacred
   Scriptures in this place, he will be in the company of one of the
   leading champions of the Calvinistic forces. Beza translates, prius jam
   olim descripti ad hanc damnationem,' before of old described to this
   damnation.'

   "None of the versions, indeed, to which we have had access, except our
   English translation, have rendered the word in question ordained; and
   we may say with Dr. Adam Clarke, that it is as ridiculous as it is
   absurd to look into such words for a decree of eternal reprobation,
   &c., such a doctrine being as far from the apostle's mind, as that of
   Him in whose name he wrote.'

   "As to the text in Rev. xxii, 19, the only material deviation from the
   common version is, that Wesley translates, his part of the tree of
   life,' and the common version, the book of life;' and how this can
   affect the meaning at all we are at a loss to see, as the person who
   has not his part in the tree of life, will hardly have his name in the
   book of life. Wesley, however, is sustained by Griesbach, who gives the
   word "xulon," tree, as the true reading, referring to the margin for
   the word "biblon," as being according to the commonly received text. We
   trust, therefore, that neither justice nor candor requires Wesley to be
   condemned for this emendation, especially as it does not at all affect
   the sense, and is justified by so high an authority as Griesbach.

   "The only remaining text to be examined is 1 Peter i, 20, where Wesley
   translates the word "proegnosmenou," foreknown, instead of
   foreordained, as it is in the common version. On this we need not say
   much, as the merest tyro [beginner, novice] in the Greek language knows
   that this is the literal, grammatical meaning of the word; and that
   there is no more authority for rendering it foreordained, than there is
   for saying that because I know that this rendering of Mr. Wesley is
   accurate, I therefore decreed it; for the radix [origin] for the above
   word, "ginosko," signifies to know, and can never be made to mean to
   ordain, or decree.

   Is it not a little strange, that those Calvinists who contend that
   there is so slight a difference between foreknowledge and decree, that
   the one necessarily implies the other, should so vehemently reprimand
   Wesley for giving the literal translation of this word? If there be no
   difference between knowledge and decree, as they contend, how has
   Wesley altered the meaning of Scripture, even allowing that the
   original word here had been "proorizo", which it is not, by translating
   it foreknown?"

   3.  Not only were the characters of Wesley and Clarke thus ungenerously
   assailed, but the integrity of our ministry also was called in
   question. The Christian Spectator had said, "Nor can we here so much as
   begin to speak of the misrepresentations, and the many cunningly
   devised artifices, by which the doctrine and discipline of Methodism
   are so assiduously propagated." This, indeed, was a grievous
   accusation. But how did they attempt its support? How! Why, by merely
   vague conjectures. It was wittingly surmised that we had immense funds
   at our command, by which our ministry was supported independently of
   the people; that even these funds were so dexterously managed that our
   own people themselves did not know; being kept in ignorance by our
   "cunningly devised artifices," either their extent or application. This
   unfounded and cruel charge was met, refuted, and fully put down, by an
   appeal to facts. It was demonstrated that the funds of the Church --
   derived, as was alleged, from the Book Concern and Chartered Fund -- so
   far from being immense, did not yield over three dollars a year to each
   claimant; and that those supernumerary and superannuated preachers,
   widows, their children and orphans, who were the legal claimants upon
   these funds, did not receive, including what they derived from the
   voluntary contributions of the people, over 25, 50, or seventy-five
   percent of that which was allowed them by the Discipline, which was one
   hundred dollars for such preacher or widow, and not over twenty-four
   dollars a year for each dependent child; and that, so far from
   concealing from the people either the amount of the revenues of the
   Church, or their application, the whole was annually published in the
   Minutes of our conferences.

   This complete refutation of such a groundless charge seemed to silence
   our inconsiderate opponents, and to make their friends ashamed of their
   temerity in bringing it against us in so public a manner.

   4.  Another complaint was brought against the manner in which our
   Church property was held. It was alleged that it was deeded to the
   General Conference, and that therefore the people had neither a right
   in nor control over it. To this it was replied, that the statement was
   false in point of fact. Church property, instead of being secured to
   the conference, and therefore the property of the preachers, was held
   by trustees appointed by the people -- where the laws of the states in
   which the property was located provided for that manner of their
   appointment, and in other places as the Discipline of the Church
   directs -- in trust for the use of the members of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church in that place. This, it was justly contended, placed
   the legal right of the property where it should be, in the hands of the
   people, and not in the conference, as our accusers had asserted.

   5.  Our mode of Church government was represented, not only as
   unscriptural, but as being set up and vindicated in "contempt of
   Scripture authority." This led to a Scriptural defense of our Church
   government, of our itinerancy, and general method of conducting our
   affairs; and finally to a comparison between Methodist Episcopacy and
   Presbyterianism and Congregationalism, as well as a defense of our
   entire economy. [2]

   6.  Another subject of controversy arose out of the representations of
   the state of things in the valley of the Mississippi. We have before
   noticed the origin of the society for the education of pious young men
   for the gospel ministry. Out of this arose the "American Home
   Missionary Society," which was organized in 1826. This society was
   composed of members and friends of the Presbyterian, Dutch Reformed,
   and Congregational Churches, and as altogether a voluntary association;
   that is, it was not a church organization, not being recognized as the
   exclusive property of any particular denomination, nor under the
   control of its church judicatories. And as the missionaries who were in
   the employ of this society were taken from either or all of the
   above-mentioned denominations, they were instructed to form churches
   according to the principles of either the Presbyterian or
   Congregational plan of church government, as might best suit the
   people; and to give greater efficiency to their labors, and a wider
   range to their operations, a "Plan of Union" was formed between these
   two denominations, so as to admit commissioners into the General
   Assembly from those churches which might be established on
   Congregational principles.

   Comprehending these three large denominations in this society, under
   the name of American Home Missionary Society, its patrons gave it the
   name of a national institution, as though in it were represented the
   Christianity of America. To this assumption of a national society, we
   of course, entered our protest because it was calculated to mislead the
   public mind, especially in foreign countries. To say nothing of the
   Baptists, who were more numerous than either of the above
   denominations, the Protestant Episcopalians, the Lutherans, and
   numerous other sects, all of whom were exerting less or more influence
   in favor of Christianity, the Methodists were more numerous than
   either. It seemed, therefore, unjust to select a single society, made
   up of those three denominations, which represented not one fourth of
   the Christians in the United States, and call it a national society,
   thereby accounting all the others as nothing.

   We had other objections. This society, by assuming a national
   character, was contrary to the genius of American institutions, which
   acknowledged no national religion. It seemed, therefore, like an effort
   to force public opinion to recognize the existence of a national
   church, in direct opposition to the declared intention of all our civil
   institutions.

   This assumption of a national society, together with the avowed
   intentions of some of the reports of the American Sabbath School Union,
   respecting the circulation of their books, and the influence which it
   might have upon our state and general elections, excited an alarm in
   some minds, lest comprehensive plans were forming to secure the
   patronage of the state for the support of those denominations which
   were committed for the support of this society. And though this might
   have been a groundless alarm. it tended to awaken attention to the
   subject, and led other denominations to look about them, and watch over
   the welfare of their own institutions. And it is somewhat remarkable,
   that the very measures which were taken by this society to combine so
   many discordant materials in the range of their operations, and to make
   an impression abroad of the nationality of its character, should have
   led eventually to the dissolution of the union of the Presbyterian
   Church; for there can be no doubt that the Plan of Union," by which
   that church permitted Congregational principles to become incorporated
   into their judicatories, was the entering wedge which finally split
   that church asunder; so that the means adopted to make themselves
   great, and to impress upon the minds of others that they represented
   the religion of the nation, were the very means of lessening their
   number and influence, and of creating one other instead of combining
   three into one sect.

   But the means used by those missionaries who were sent out by this
   society to enlist the sympathies of the church and the public mind in
   favor of their vast project gave great and very just offense. At the
   time of the organization of this society, a periodical was commenced,
   under its immediate patronage and control, called the "Home Missionary
   and Pastor's Journal," in which the reports of these missionaries were,
   from time to time, published. These reporters very often gave such a
   description of the moral wastes and religious destitution of the
   countries where they traveled, as was truly alarming to the real
   friends of the country and of Christianity. On examination, it was
   found that many of those places which were thus represented as entirely
   destitute of the gospel, had been regularly supplied for years by our
   ministry, and that there existed in them large and flourishing
   societies. The fact was, that our ministers had penetrated every part
   of that country, had kept pace with the progress of the new
   settlements, had gone to the Indian tribes, hundreds of whom had been
   converted to the Christian faith, and had carried the glad tidings of
   salvation to the black population of the south and southwest, entering
   every open door, and preaching the gospel to all to whom they could
   have access. Yet these were represented as being totally destitute of
   the gospel and of Christian ordinances. These things were thought to be
   unjust and unchristian, as well as unwise and impolitic. We therefore
   considered it a duty which we owed to ourselves to expose them, and to
   enter our protest against them. This was done, principally, through the
   columns of the Christian Advocate and Journal, both by the editors, and
   those correspondents who were on the spot, and who therefore spoke from
   what they had seen and felt. And so palpable were the facts, that few
   undertook to justify the proceedings of these missionaries. Indeed,
   their own friends became convinced of the impolicy of such statements,
   and advised them to refrain; and hence, instead of saying that there
   were no ministers, they afterward reported that there were no
   Presbyterian ministers in such and such a place. To this manner of
   reporting there could be no objections.

   The following extract from the Christian Advocate and Journal for this
   year will show how these objections were met and refuted: --

   "Every year, from the time that Schemerhorn and Mills made their
   missionary tour to the west and south, and published their famous
   journal of observation, the thrilling note of complaint has been heard
   echoing from one end of the continent to another, about the paucity of
   educated ministers,' competent ministers,' &c., and the people have
   been called upon in no ordinary strains of mournful eloquence to exert
   themselves to replenish the funds of education societies, that the
   number of these ministers might be speedily increased; that the nation,
   to adopt the language of the Rev. Dr. Beecher, might arise and save
   itself by its own energies.' To keep up the stimulus thus excited, --
   to continue the language of the last cited author, -- the trumpet must
   sound long and press must groan,' and utter in the ears of our
   countrymen the story of their miseries, or the nation is undone.' And
   from the time this note of alarm was sounded by Dr. Beecher, it has
   continued rolling through our country, until the doleful ditty of the
   moral desolations of the vast valley of the Mississippi' has
   reverberated from hill to valley, with a sickening repetition. Yes,
   this fertile numerous, valley, where, besides the Baptists, who are the
   Protestant Episcopalians, and other denominations, we have no less than
   seven annual conferences, composed, according to the Minutes for 1829,
   of 516 traveling preachers, and probably more than twice that number of
   local preachers, and 128,316 church members, has been, and is still,
   represented as being in such a fearful state, that unless mighty
   exertions are made to replenish the funds of the national societies, it
   is apprehended that such a swelling tide of immorality will flow back,
   and cross the Alleghenies, as to sweep away pure religion from the
   Atlantic states and every succeeding year, from that time to this, our
   ears are stunned with the deafening cry, The treasury is empty!' the
   committee are in advance' for so many hundreds or thousands of dollars.
   To add energy to this voice of distress, all other ministers are
   deposed as incompetent,' uneducated,' inefficient.' To say nothing
   respecting the truth or falsity of these statements, we would ask
   whether it is becoming in gentlemen who utter this doleful cry of
   distress, with a view to replenish their exhausted treasuries, while it
   would seem that their funds are already so great that some think that
   the people ought to be warned against lavishing any more into their
   hands, to accuse us of accumulating funds dangerous to the state?"

   It is by no means intended to say that there was no call for additional
   laborers either here or elsewhere. No doubt there were many moral
   wastes, both in the west and in the east, in the populous cities, in
   the villages, and country places, which needed the reforming influence
   of the gospel, and more active laborers to effect it. We could
   therefore have no objection to an increase of zealous and holy
   ministers. Our objections were to the unwillingness manifested to
   acknowledge the gospel character and labors of others, and to recognize
   the good which had been most evidently effected by them, and
   particularly by the self-denying exertions of our ministry in the
   western country. Indeed, in many of these reports there seemed to be a
   desire manifested to depreciate those who had long since planted the
   gospel in those very places now represented as destitute, and where our
   preachers had labored with great success, amid hardships and privations
   to which few were willing to submit; and these things are here
   recorded, that those who shall come after us may know to whom they are
   indebted for the first promulgation of the gospel in our western wilds.

   It is believed that this discussion did good. At any rate, it tended to
   enlighten the public mind on these subjects, to make our doctrines,
   usages, labors, and success, more generally known and more justly
   appreciated, and thus strengthened the hands and cheered the hearts of
   the members and friends of our Church. It tended likewise to convince
   our opponents, that if they presumed to misrepresent or to slander us,
   we had the means of self-defense, and an ability and disposition to use
   them; and that when the facts were clearly stated, our doctrines and
   manner of propagating them fully explained, we should not be considered
   such dangerous heresiarchs as we had been represented to be. We are
   glad know, however, that these days of strife are past, and that a more
   friendly and amicable spirit prevails. We hope, therefore, that
   hereafter we may mutually strive only to provoke one another to love
   and good works."

   Another subject was agitated about this time which gave no little
   uneasiness, and occasioned much discussion. I allude to the Temperance
   reformation. The American Temperance Society had commenced its powerful
   operations in 1826, and was now doing much good to the souls and bodies
   of men both in and out of' the churches. A proposition had been
   submitted to us to unite with that society, and on such terms as we did
   not think it expedient to accept. It was proposed to raise a permanent
   fund of twenty thousand dollars for the support of an agent or agents,
   who should be exclusively devoted to the temperance cause. To this it
   was objected, because it was thought that a permanent fund was
   unnecessary for the success of the enterprise, as the money needed to
   carry it forward might be better raised as it should be wanted. It was
   moreover urged that we had always been a temperance society, having
   made abstinence from intoxicating liquors as a beverage a term of
   church communion and therefore to come into the measures of the
   American Society would be a virtual acknowledgment that we, as a
   church, needed such a reformation.

   This occasioned no little discussion, and gave rise to some
   heart-burnings on both sides of the question. By some, whose zeal was
   not always tempered with knowledge, it was contended that, because we
   did not unite in the society, and co-operate with it in all its plans
   and movements, we were opposed to the cause of temperance itself, and
   therefore stood in the way of its success. To this it was replied, that
   being already the friends and advocates of temperance, having, as a
   church, recognized the practice of total abstinence from intoxicating
   liquors as a common drink, it was unjust to accuse us of a want of
   friendship for the men engaged in this enterprise of benevolence, or of
   zeal in promoting their objects.

   This was the true state of the controversy; but the manner in which it
   was conducted elicited facts and brought forth light which had been
   dormant, or had not been perceived for though it had been made it a
   term of church communion by one of our general rules, it was found, on
   a closer inspection, that the rule itself had been softened down, and
   that in many instances even this had been suffered to remain as a dead
   letter. In consequence of these things, it was clearly discovered that
   members of our own Church were in the daily habit using intoxicating
   liquors, and that the Discipline, at best, had been but partially
   enforced. This discovery led to important results. For though our
   opinion remained unchanged respecting the inexpediency of some of the
   measures of the American Temperance Society, particularly as regarded
   raising a permanent fund, yet the necessity of the reformation, even in
   our own Church, notwithstanding our prohibitory rule, became very
   apparent. Hence temperance societies were formed, and our preachers and
   people very generally fell in with the temperance measures, greatly to
   the edification and benefit of the Church, and to the cause of God
   generally.

   In noticing this subject, I am very desirous of correcting an error
   respecting the course taken by the official organ of the Church, the
   Christian Advocate and Journal, then under the editorial control of the
   writer of this History. It was alleged frequently, and is sometimes
   even repeated now, that the paper opposed the cause of temperance. This
   was and is a sad mistake. It never, intentionally at least, opposed
   either the principles or practice of temperance. It did oppose some of
   the measures of the American Temperance Society, and advised our
   brethren and friends not to contribute their money to raise the
   contemplated fund; but its opposition was directed chiefly to the
   misrepresentations which were made of our real position, namely, that
   we were enemies to temperance, merely because we pleaded that our
   Church had favored the principles and practice of temperance from the
   beginning, and therefore had no motive to join the American Society.

   This is the ground we took. And though afterward convinced we were in
   error in supposing that the strict principles of temperance were
   generally exemplified in practice by all the members of our Church, and
   therefore lent our aid to exterminate the evil from among us, yet we
   remain unchanged in our views respecting the impolicy of some of the
   measures of the American Temperance Society, while we hail with delight
   the onward march of the temperance reformation. And if any of our
   sayings or measures were construed into opposition to this reformation
   at the time, through misapprehension or otherwise, we think sufficient
   has been said and done since to convince all candid and unbiased minds
   of the rectitude and consistency of our course; and I here record my
   most solemn conviction that the temperance cause should be ranked among
   the most benevolent and efficient means now in use for the benefit of
   mankind. And this is recorded with the more pleasure from the fact that
   John Wesley was the first in modern days to proclaim a war of
   extermination upon the use of all intoxicating liquors, "except in
   cases of extreme necessity."

   The Oneida mission was commenced this year. This tribe of Indians were
   settled on an Indian reservation in the western part of the state of
   New York. They had been partially civilized, and some of them were
   cultivators of the soil, and had adopted the habits of civilized life.
   Though the Protestant Episcopalians had had a mission among them for
   several years, they were in a deplorable state as to religion and
   morals. Like most of the semi-civilized barbarians who skirted our
   states and territories, they were deeply debased by habits of
   intoxication, and all those degrading vices, which connect themselves
   with a course of intemperance. By these means, instead of being in a
   thriving condition, they were diminishing in numbers, and deteriorating
   in property and morals.

   In this state they were when visited by a young man of the Mohawks, of
   Upper Canada. This man had been converted in the revival which had
   taken place among that tribe of Indians, and was now impelled by his
   thirst for the salvation of others to make known the way of peace and
   reconciliation to these people. Being able to speak to them of the
   things of God in their own language, and from his own experience, they
   received the tidings with penitent and believing hearts, and a work of
   reformation commenced among them, which eventuated in the conversion of
   upward of one hundred. A school was also established for the education
   of the children, and those adult Indians who were desirous of learning.
   This good work has steadily gone on to this day, and a number of the
   converted Indians have emigrated to Green Bay, who became the nucleus
   of a flourishing society in that place.

   Through the example and teachings of these people, the Onondagas, a
   neighboring tribe, received the gospel, and twenty-four of them were
   converted to God and brought into church fellowship.

   Several other missions were commenced this year in the new and
   destitute settlements in our western regions. St. Joseph's mission
   embraced a tract of country on the St. Joseph's river, which flows into
   Lake Michigan in Berrien county, Michigan. Among these new settlers the
   missionary found his way, and conveyed to them the glad tidings of
   salvation, and was instrumental in establishing several societies,
   which have continued to increase and flourish to this day.

   In the frontier settlements of the states of Indiana and Illinois, on
   the waters of the Fox river, between that river and the lake Winnebago,
   the Rev. Jesse Walker, one of our old and experienced preachers, was
   sent as a missionary. Into this new and thinly settled country he
   penetrated, and succeeded in establishing several societies, and
   opening the way for the continued preaching of the gospel in that new
   country.

   The country on the head waters of the Wabash was fast filling up with
   inhabitants from the older states, and therefore greatly needed the
   gospel. Hence a mission was commenced this year for the benefit of
   these people; and the missionary, the Rev. S. R. Beggs, so far
   succeeded, that through his and the labors of his successors, in 1831
   there were returned one hundred and forty-six Church members.

   Galena mission was begun this year. This was in the state of Illinois,
   on the banks of Fever or Bean river, upward of four hundred miles above
   St. Louis. Though Galena has since become a considerable town and a
   seat of justice, in the midst of the rich lead mines in that region,
   yet, at the time of which we now speak, it was but thinly settled, and
   its resources were just beginning to be known and appreciated. Though
   the people were generally so taken up in their speculating concerns --
   the mines presenting a fascinating temptation for obtaining wealth --
   as to manifest much indifference for religious things, yet a few were
   brought to the knowledge of the truth, and the cause has continued to
   advance steadily from that day to this.

   Another mission, called Providence, was opened this year in the new
   settlements on both banks of the Mississippi river, from Vicksburgh to
   Lake Washington, and the adjacent settlement along the bayous and
   little lakes. The nature of the country and the condition of the
   settlers were such as to require great labor and many privations to
   carry the gospel to them. The self-denying exertions of God's servants,
   however, were owned and blessed, so that in 1832 there were returned on
   the Minutes one hundred and sixty-six members, sixty-seven of whom were
   colored, and the good work has prospered from that time onward.

   We have already noticed the exertions that were making in behalf of
   seamen, and particularly the establishment of the Mariners' Church in
   the city of New York. The example thus set excited benevolent
   Christians to adopt similar plans in other places for the melioration
   and salvation of this class of our fellow-citizens. Accordingly, about
   this time, the "Boston Port Society" was organized, and the Rev. Edward
   T. Taylor -- who, before his conversion to God, had followed the seas
   -- a member of the New England conference, was employed to preach to
   seamen, in the city of Boston. He commenced his labors this year, under
   the parsonage of this society, in the old Methodist meeting-house, the
   first built in Boston, and which was afterward purchased for the
   special use of seamen. Having been accustomed to the sea-faring life,
   and now thirsting for the salvation of seamen, Mr. Taylor was able to
   sympathize with them in a very peculiar manner, and to preach to them
   with energy and effect. And such has been the success of his labors,
   that a large and commodious house of worship has been erected, in which
   the word of God is preached to these sons of the ocean, a sailors'
   boarding-house established, on both of which floats the Bethel flag; --
   a clothing store and a school for the education of seamen's daughters,
   have also been opened, as most useful appendages to this institution of
   benevolence. A ladies' society has been organized for the purpose of
   aiding in this good work, by furnishing employment to the poorer class
   of females, wives and widows of seamen, and the garments thus made are
   deposited in the store, sold to those who are able to pay for them, or
   given away to such as are most indigent.

   This, altogether, is a noble charity; and the wealthy merchants of
   Boston know how to appreciate its worth. The manifest improvement,
   through the agency of the gospel, in the lives and general deportment
   of the seamen who attend the Bethel meeting, convinces all of the
   beneficial influence of the institution, and has prompted some
   individuals to give largely of their wealth for its support.

   The spiritual interests of the congregation, and we may say its
   temporal interests too, are mainly intrusted to Mr. Taylor, and he has
   the satisfaction to see his house well filled, from sabbath to sabbath,
   with attentive hearers, who receive the word with joy; and the serious
   part of his hearers, as well as the sailors generally, look up to him
   with the utmost affection and confidence. In addition to administering
   to them the word and ordinances -- for the ordinances of the Church are
   regularly attended to -- Mr. Taylor is in the habit of visiting the
   ships in the harbor, and especially on their arrival, or on the eve of
   their departure on a voyage to a foreign port; of praying with them,
   and furnishing them with Bibles and tracts, and giving them words of
   admonition and encouragement. His congregation is indeed a floating
   one; and thus., while their pastor is stationary, they are the means of
   carrying the word of God to every port, and of exhibiting the blessed
   effects of experimental religion wherever their lot may be cast.

   The sailors' boarding-house connected with the establishment is of
   great use, as it is kept on strictly religious and temperance
   principles, and is designed as a refuge for them, while on land, from
   the temptations to those vicious indulgences so common to this class of
   men, as well as from the rapacious grasp of those who delight in
   cheating them out of their hard earnings when they come on shore. These
   "land sharks," as they have been not unaptly called, are ever ready to
   open their jaws whenever a ship arrives, that they may readily and
   remorselessly devour the earnings of the unsuspecting sailor, by
   presenting to him the intoxicating cup, and enticing him to haunts of
   gambling and licentiousness.

   That these exertions in favor of seamen have done and are still doing
   much good, is evident to all who are acquainted with the extent and
   influence of their operations. Instances of most powerful conversions,
   both on the land and on the water, have been recorded, and since the
   temperance reformation has been pushed forward with so much energy and
   success, many merchants have banished the use of inebriating liquors
   from their ships, greatly to their own advantage, and to that of those
   who manage their affairs. By these means the word of God and religious
   tracts have been substituted for the gambling table and the sailor's
   grog, and the voice of prayer and thanksgiving has been heard instead
   of the voice of profane mirth and revelry, on board many of our
   merchant ships. And in some sense many of our seamen have become
   missionaries, by carrying the glad tidings of the gospel into the ports
   they have visited, thus teaching foreign nations that our God and his
   Christ are acknowledged and worshipped even by the hardy sons of the
   ocean. These floating Bethels, have therefore become, to some extent,
   itinerant ministers to foreign countries; and if the good work shall
   spread, as it may and will if suitable means are used, our sailors will
   become the connecting links between the several missionary stations in
   the different parts of the globe.

   About this time the general work was much aided by means of what were
   first called "four days' meetings," and have since been known as
   "protracted meetings," because they were appointed to be held at first
   for four days, and afterward for an indefinite length of time, to be
   determined by the probabilities of effecting good to the souls of the
   people. Such meetings, to be sure, were not new among us. We have
   before recorded several instances, in seasons of great revivals, when
   meetings of this character were held from three to sixteen days, while
   the camp meetings were always continued from four to eight days in
   succession. But at this time they were introduced in a more formal
   manner, and instead of inviting people from abroad, they were held from
   one neighborhood to another, with a view to awaken a more general and
   individual attention to the concerns of eternity.

   They were commenced by the Rev. John Lord, of the New England
   conference, in the month of September, in the year 1827; and such were
   their good effects, that they soon spread through the country, even
   among other denominations, particularly the Presbyterians,
   Congregationalists, and Baptists. They are generally conducted in the
   following manner: -- Meetings are held morning, afternoon, and evening,
   opened with a sermon, and closed with a prayer meeting, during which
   penitent sinners are invited to come to the altar, to receive the
   benefit of prayer and exhortation; and they are continued from three to
   ten, and even twenty days, according to the nature and strength of
   religious excitement which may be produced; though generally, when they
   are lengthened out beyond four days, the exercises are confined chiefly
   to the afternoon and evening. These meetings, in some places, have
   nearly superseded camp meetings, and probably will, if continued, in
   many other places. That in some instances they have run into excesses,
   is no more than what might be expected, constituted as human nature is;
   but this is no more an argument against their continuance, than it
   would be to infer that any other good thing should be laid aside
   because of its abuse. As a means of awakening sinners to a sense of
   their sinfulness, and leading them to Jesus Christ for life and
   salvation, they have been abundantly blessed and owned of God, and
   should therefore be kept up so long as they are productive of these
   results.

   Forty-two preachers received a location, sixty-seven were returned
   supernumerary, and one hundred and twenty superannuated; seventeen had
   died, three had withdrawn, and four had been expelled.

   Among those who had died this year, all of whom departed in peace, we
   may notice particularly Samuel Doughty, of the Philadelphia conference,
   who died in the thirty-fifth year of his age and the fifth of his
   itinerant ministry. Though young in the work of the ministry, he had
   established a character which, had it pleased God to lengthen out his
   life, would doubtless have shone forth with a peculiar brightness
   before the Church and the world. The following testimony to his worth
   is taken from the account of his death in the Minutes for this year: --

   "Brother Doughty, as a preacher, was popular and useful. His discourses
   were frequently truly eloquent; and had his voice been equal to his
   other qualifications as a speaker, he would have attained much greater
   eminence. His literary and theological acquirements were highly
   respectable, of which his sermons in the Methodist Magazine,
   particularly that entitled Instability in religion,' afford
   satisfactory evidence.

   "His zeal for the glory of God and the welfare of men appeared in the
   interest which he took in the success of benevolent institutions. He
   was their eloquent advocate, and was particularly active in the
   promotion of Sunday schools, both before and after he became a minister
   of the gospel. Just previous to his death he was engaged, with others,
   in organizing and bringing into operation a Conference Sunday School
   Union, auxiliary to the Sunday School Union of the Methodist Episcopal
   Church, of which auxiliary he was corresponding secretary. In
   September, 1825, he was invited to assist in certain religious
   exercises at the enlargement of the church edifice in Wilmington,
   Delaware, and was there seized with the illness which terminated his
   life and labors on the seventeenth of that month, at the house of the
   Rev. Solomon Higgins. He died in great peace, rejoicing that death, to
   him, had no terrors.' He was highly respected and beloved, and the
   tribute of affection paid to his memory by the numerous and weeping
   members of his charge, who followed him to his grave, was gratifying to
   his brethren and to his surviving relatives."

   To those who knew him it is not necessary to add any thing more. Yet,
   having had the pleasure of his acquaintance, I cannot forbear saying
   that there always appeared in him a meekness of spirit and gentleness
   of deportment highly becoming the Christian minister, and which
   commended him to the affection and confidence of his brethren and
   friends. Though he possessed more than ordinary endowments as a
   preacher, and could convey his thoughts with a most graceful and easy
   elocution, yet he seemed unconscious of any superiority over others,
   and always put himself in the attitude of an humble learner, looking up
   to his seniors with diffidence, and to God by faith and prayer. He was
   therefore much beloved by his brethren, and hailed by the Church as a
   messenger of good tidings, and a willing and useful pastor to the flock
   of Jesus Christ.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 382,679; Last Year: 359,533;
   Increase: 23,146 -- Colored This Year: 62,814; Last Year: 58,856;
   Increase: 3,958 -- Indians This Year: 2,250; Last Year: 538; Increase:
   1,712 -- Total This Year: 447,743; Last Year: 418,927 -- Increase:
   28,816 -- Preachers This Year: 1,817; Last Year: 1,642; Increase: 175.

  1830

   The reformation which had been effected among the aborigines of our
   country seemed to awaken a most lively interest in their behalf
   throughout every department of the Church, and no less so among those
   of the natives themselves who had been truly converted to the Christian
   faith. For these converts were not merely nominal believers in
   Christianity. They had felt its renovating and transforming power upon
   their hearts, and this had produced a correspondent change in their
   habits, civil, domestic, and religious. By this means they presented in
   their own lives a living, palpable, and irrefutable evidence to all who
   beheld them, that the gospel of Jesus Christ is even now the power of
   God unto salvation to every one that believeth. These, therefore, were
   living epistles, written, not with pen and ink, but by the finger of
   the living God, and sent unto the other tribes that they might read
   with their own eyes of the wonderful works of Almighty God, and be
   convinced that Christianity is "not a cunningly devised fable," but
   that it is still "the power of God and the wisdom of God."

   Acting under the sacred impulse thus produced, an effort was made this
   year to introduce the gospel among the Shawnee and Kansas Indians, and
   the Rev. Thomas Johnson was sent to the former, and the Rev. William
   Johnson to the latter tribe. These Indians inhabited the western part
   of the state of Missouri, and the missions were therefore undertaken by
   the Missouri conference. The Shawnees, especially, were found to be of
   a docile and tractable disposition, had commenced the cultivation of
   the soil, and manifested a great desire to be taught in religion, in
   literature, and the arts of civil and domestic life. Though the
   missionaries met with much difficulty, at first, for want of a
   qualified interpreter, yet a school was soon established for the
   education of the children, and a house erected for the accommodation of
   the mission. The commencement was small, and the progress slow, but
   success has attended the labors of God's servants, and the mission has
   continued to flourish and enlarge its dimensions to this day. Many,
   indeed, have been raised up among these natives of the forests, who are
   now ornaments to their profession, bringing forth the fruits of
   righteousness to the glory of God.

   This year also several missions were commenced for the special benefit
   of the slave population in the states of South Carolina and Georgia.
   This class of people had been favored with the labors of the Methodist
   ministry from the beginning of its labors in this country, and there
   were at this time 62,814 of the colored population in the several
   states and territories in our Church fellowship, most of whom were
   slaves. It was found, however, on a closer inspection into their
   condition, that there were many who could not be reached by the
   ordinary means, and therefore preachers were selected who might devote
   themselves exclusively to their service. A catechism was prepared for
   their use, in which they might be taught the leading doctrines and
   duties of Christianity, and many of these slaves have been brought to
   the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ.

   This year a mission was begun on the island of New York, called the
   Harlem mission. This embraced a population in the neighborhood of the
   city, many of whom were but transient residents, and generally
   destitute of the means of grace. It has been continued on the list of
   missions to the present time, always yielding, however, a partial
   support to the missionaries. In the bounds of the mission four houses
   of worship have been erected, and a good foundation is thus laid for
   the future salvation of the people who may inhabit that part of our
   city and its environs.

   Some of the old towns on the eastern banks of the Connecticut river
   were as yet unvisited by our ministry, and this year a mission was
   undertaken for their benefit. It was so far blessed that it soon became
   adequate to its own support, and has since remained among our regular
   circuits.

   In the northwestern parts of the state of Missouri, on the several
   branches of the Sak river, Gasconade, and southern waters of the Osage
   river, there were extensive tracts of country, fast filling up with
   emigrants from the older states and territories. These people were "as
   sheep without a shepherd," and therefore needed the gospel to bring
   them into the fold of Jesus Christ. Accordingly there were three
   missions commenced this year, namely, the Salt River, the Gasconade,
   and the West Prairie, for the benefit of these people. Notwithstanding
   the hardships and privations the missionaries had to endure in
   traversing this new country, they succeeded in raising up several
   societies and establishing regular circuits, which have continued to
   flourish to the present time, and are now aiding to send the gospel to
   other and more destitute place.

   The Iroquois and Jonesborough missions, in the bounds of the Illinois
   conference, were likewise commenced this year. The former included the
   tribe of Kickapoo Indians, the condition of whom was somewhat singular.
   It seems that a prophet had risen up among them, who acknowledged the
   true God, and was zealously engaged in instructing his people in
   religious things. Whether he had acquired his knowledge of God by
   intercourse either directly or indirectly with the white people, or had
   been conducted along by the secret whispers of that "Spirit which
   giveth understanding to man," it appears that, though mixed with many
   errors and superstitions, he had made considerable progress in divine
   things, and was piously engaged in his exertions for the temporal and
   spiritual benefit of his people. He was not averse to hearing the
   truths of the gospel, though it was some time before he fully gave up
   his peculiar notions, and came heartily to embrace Christianity in its
   fulness and power

   The Jonesborough mission, which embraced a new country about one
   hundred and fifty miles from Vandalia, the capital of the state, was
   prosecuted with such success that it returned the next year two hundred
   and sixty-four Church members, and has since been numbered among the
   regular circuits.

   Eleven preachers had died during the past year, and sixty-one had
   located; sixty-seven were returned supernumerary, and one hundred and
   twenty-two superannuated; four had been expelled, and four had
   withdrawn.

   Among those who had taken their departure in peace was Henry Holmes, of
   the Virginia conference who died on the 27th of July, 1829, in the
   forty fourth year of his age, and the eighteenth of his itinerant
   ministry. The record of his death awards to him an eminent standing
   among his brethren in the ministry, as a man of deep piety, of
   unquestionable integrity and with rare qualifications as a minister of
   the sanctuary. In 1823 he was appointed to the office of presiding
   elder, which office he continued to fill with becoming dignity and
   great usefulness until he finished his work. He has therefore left a
   name behind him which will be remembered in connection with the
   progress of Methodism in that part of Virginia with pious gratitude by
   the people who were blessed under his ministrations. Though his death
   was sudden, it did not find him unprepared, for he met it with pious
   resignation and a joyful hope of future blessedness.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 402,561; Last Year: 382,679;
   Increase: 19,882 -- Colored This Year: 69,383; Last Year: 62,814;
   Increase: 6,569 -- Indians This Year: 4,209; Last Year: 2,250;
   Increase: 1,959 -- Total This Year: 476,153; Last Year: 447,743 --
   Increase: 28,410 -- Preachers This Year: 1900; Last Year: 1817;
   Increase: 83.

   In consequence of the action of the General Conference of 1828, by
   which it was mutually agreed, that if the Canada brethren saw fit, they
   might form an independent conference in Upper Canada, of which they had
   availed themselves, the members belonging to the Church in that
   province are not included in the above enumeration. Had these been
   added, the actual increase would have been 37,935. This shows that,
   notwithstanding the secessions of the "Reformers," so called, and the
   agitations which followed, the labors of our ministry were still
   sanctioned by the Head of the Church. Indeed, greater peace and harmony
   pervaded the ranks of our Israel than had been realized for many
   previous years, all being convinced that bold experimenters were not
   the most infallible leaders.

  1831

   From the movements already alluded to in Upper Canada, the Indian
   missions in that province, including no less than ten stations, and
   1,850 adult Indians under religious instruction, most of whom were
   members of the Church, were taken from our superintendence and put
   under the care of the Wesleyan conference in England. These missions,
   which had become endeared to us by such associations as could not be
   easily dissolved, and for the benefit of which we had expended so much
   labor and money, still clung to our affections and could not therefore
   be surrendered, even in the amicable manner in which the arrangement
   for their future supply was made, without feelings of regret. Knowing,
   however, that they would be provided for by our brethren in England
   with the same assiduous care with which they had been from the
   beginning, we withdrew our pastoral oversight with the less sorrow,
   still praying almighty God to bless and prosper them.

   Hitherto our Indian missions in the United States and territories had
   been attended with unparalleled success. About this time, however, the
   action of the general government of the United States on the Indian
   settlements began to exert an injurious influence upon some of these
   missions, and even to threaten them with destruction. In 1821 the Rev.
   Dr. Morse made an extensive tour of observation among the western
   tribes of Indians, under the patronage of the general government; and,
   in his published report, gave it as the result of his observations,
   that, could an amicable arrangement be made between the government and
   the aboriginal tribes, for their removal west of the Mississippi, where
   they could live under the protection of the United States, and be
   taught the arts of agriculture and domestic life, it would be mutually
   beneficial. This opinion, which seems to have been adopted by the
   government, and by the leading men of the nation, was manifestly
   founded on the presumption that the Indians, while they remain under
   their own laws and usages, cannot flourish in the vicinity of the white
   population, nor yet so amalgamate with the whites as to become
   identified with them. And does not the painful history of these people
   fully justify this opinion? From the first settlement of the country
   until now, notwithstanding all the efforts which have been made by
   philanthropists and Christians to civilize and Christianize these
   people, they have gradually receded on the advance of civilized
   society, or melted away and become extinct. Why is this? Is it because
   they have refused to obey the original command given to man, that he
   must "dress the garden "and keep it," and "till the ground whence he
   was taken?" Whatever may have been the cause, such are the facts in
   relation to their history thus far; and whether the efforts recently
   put forth and now using to save them from barbarism and destruction
   shall prove ultimately successful, we must leave for other generations
   to testify.

   But whatever may be their future destiny, the general government have
   adopted the policy already suggested, of removing them from their
   present residences to the regions west of the Mississippi, with the
   promise of protection from future aggressions upon their rights, and
   the hope of bettering their condition. To effect this object, treaty
   stipulations were entered into with some of the tribes to purchase
   their lands, to indemnify them for their losses, and to aid in
   transferring them to their new habitation. As these treaties were often
   concluded in opposition to large minorities of the natives, they became
   difficult of execution, produced much irritation, and in some instances
   the hazard and even the loss of life.

   This policy operated most injuriously upon the Cherokees, who were
   settled principally in the state of Georgia. Over these people Georgia
   undertook to extend her laws, and thus force them either to sell their
   lands and remove west of the Mississippi, or be deprived of the
   privileges of living under their own laws, as members of a separate
   community. As the project was resisted by the most opulent part of the
   Cherokees, and a considerable portion of the nation, a division of
   sentiment was created among themselves in regard to their removal,
   which excited much irritation of feeling, and operated injuriously on
   the interests of the mission. At this time there were no less than
   seventeen missionaries, including interpreters, and eight hundred and
   fifty Church members, and the prospects of extensive good were
   brightening until they were overcast by these movements. This year,
   1831, the troubles increased, and one of our missionaries, the Rev. Mr.
   Trott, for refusing to take the oath of allegiance required by the
   state of Georgia, was arrested, imprisoned, put in chains, and
   otherwise maltreated. On promising, however., to leave the territory,
   he was pardoned by the governor and set at liberty. These proceedings
   greatly harassed the Christian Indians who resided within the chartered
   limits of Georgia, while those without the state were in a more
   prosperous condition.

   Similar results were produced by similar movements among the Choctaws.
   This mission had been remarkably owned of God, so much so that in 1830
   there were reported not less than four thousand Church members,
   embracing all the principal men of the nation, their chief and
   captains, many of whom were eminently useful in instructing their
   brethren by exhortation and prayer. They were, however, less averse to
   being removed than the Cherokees, and finally, in a council which was
   held in March, 1830, [3] they passed a resolution to sell their lands
   to the United States and emigrate to the west. This resolution,
   however, gave offense to a part of the nation, and furnished a pretext
   to the pagans to plot the destruction of the missionaries and Christian
   Indians. The treaty, however, was finally consummated, though with much
   difficulty, and the missionaries determined to accompany the Christian
   Indians to their new habitation. It should be recorded that the general
   government did all it could to mitigate their sufferings, by affording
   provision and protection to the emigrants, and securing to them their
   lands in the west.

   Yet, with all the precautions which were used by the government and the
   missionaries, they suffered much in their religious enjoyments, became
   divided, some were disheartened, and not a few apostatized from
   Christianity. For these sad disasters there seemed to be no adequate
   remedy. The decree was passed, and remove they must; and the Rev.
   Alexander Talley, who had devoted his best days and energies to this
   mission, and that too with a rare success, accompanied them to their
   new residence; and in a letter dated Sept. 5, 1831, he states that
   about five hundred had arrived, most of whom were members of the
   Church. These, with others that occasionally arrived at their new home,
   attended regularly to their Christian duties, and they have prospered
   more or less to the present time. These movements may account for the
   diminution in the number of Christian Indians on these missionary
   stations.

   The Wyandott mission, which now included two hundred and twenty-three
   Church members, and had attached to it a flourishing school, was this
   year extended to the river Huron, where, through the labors of the
   missionaries and some native exhorters, there was a reformation
   effected among a few families of the Wyandotts and Shawnees, ten of
   whom became members of the Church.

   The western country was almost daily presenting claims upon the bounty
   and labor of the Church to supply its spiritual wants. This year a
   mission was undertaken in Jackson county, Illinois, with the
   encouraging prospects of success. Another, called Deplain, was
   commenced, and has since been prosecuted with diligence and success.

   The Lee mission, which embraced a tract of country in the counties of
   Lee and Marion, west of the Flint river, was commenced this year. This
   new country was now filling up rapidly with inhabitants and they were
   thus supplied with the word and ordinances of the gospel. The
   missionary formed a regular circuit, having no less than fifteen
   preaching places and in the course of the year received one hundred and
   twenty-five into the Church, besides erecting two houses of worship.

   The cause of education was advancing steadily among us since its late
   revival, so that during the present year no less than three collegiate
   institutions had been founded, and had made a promising commencement.
   One of these was in Middletown, in the state of Connecticut. The
   buildings, which were of stone, and the land connected with them,
   estimated at from thirty to forty thousand dollars, were presented
   gratuitously to the New York and New England conferences by the
   Literary and Scientific Society of Middletown, on condition that forty
   thousand dollars more should be raised for the purpose of establishing
   a literary institution to be under the control of the two conferences
   above named, and any others that might unite with them in the
   enterprise. These conditions being complied with, the premises were
   deeded to a board of trustees elected by said conferences, who have the
   sole management of the financial concerns of the institution; and it
   soon afterward received a charter from the legislature of the state of
   Connecticut, of a very liberal character.

   The Wesleyan University, for this is its name, is located in a most
   delightful place, on an eminence in the western section of the city,
   having a commanding view of the Connecticut river, and the adjacent
   country east, north, and south, and is surrounded by a population noted
   for their steady, industrious, and religious habits, all zealous for
   the promotion of education, and most of whom take a deep interest in
   the university. The late Wilbur Fisk, D. D., was selected as its
   president, and, being aided by an able faculty, the university went
   into operation under favorable auspices, and has continued to meet the
   public expectation. Here, under the able guidance of its estimable
   president and his colleagues, many a youth has received his diploma in
   a manner alike creditable to himself and his instructors and what has
   tended to endear the institution to the Methodist Episcopal Church, a
   spirit of piety has pervaded its inmates, many of whom were born unto
   God during their sojourn in this young and rising nursery of learning
   and religion. It may be said in truth, that no place, in proportion to
   its numbers, has been more frequently or more generally blessed with
   revivals of religion than the Wesleyan University.

   Another was established this year under the patronage of the Virginia
   and South Carolina conferences, in Boydston, Mecklenburgh county, Va.,
   called the Randolph Macon College, under a charter from the state of
   Virginia. The Rev. Stephen Olin, favorably known to the public for his
   sound learning and deep piety, was elected its president, and he
   continued to discharge his duties with great satisfaction until his
   declining health obliged him to resign his station, for the purpose of
   making a voyage to Europe, in the hope of regaining his lost health.

   This institution is also favorably located, and it went into operation
   under circumstances highly promising to its patrons and friends, having
   about sixty thousand dollars pledged to begin with. It has continued to
   fulfill public expectation, and, like the Wesleyan University, has been
   blessed with frequent revivals of religion, and has sent out sons
   imbued with sound learning and solid piety.

   La Grange formed the third college which had been recently established
   under Methodist patronage. This was commenced under the patronage of
   the Tennessee and Alabama conferences, and was located in La Grange, in
   North Alabama, in a beautiful and healthy part of the country. Though
   its commencement was small, the whole property being estimated at only
   about twenty thousand dollars, yet it has gone on increasing in
   strength and patronage, commanding the public confidence and giving a
   useful education to its students. The Rev. Robert Paine was its first
   president, and he has proved his competency for the office by the
   satisfactory manner in which he has discharged its duties to this day.
   God has also smiled upon this institution, by pouring out his Spirit
   from time to time upon the students, and bringing them to the knowledge
   of the truth as it is in Jesus.

   In addition to these collegiate institutions, the several academies
   heretofore mentioned were in successful operation, and were so many
   feeders to these higher and larger fountains of learning and science.
   It would seem, therefore, that the Methodist Episcopal Church was
   determined to redeem its character from the foul blot cast upon it, not
   without some reason, that it had been indifferent to the cause of
   literature and science. And the experiments which had been recently
   made had thus far succeeded so well, that many who had hesitated
   concerning the propriety and feasibility of the enterprise seemed to be
   convinced that the indications of divine Providence spoke so
   emphatically in its favor that they felt it their imperative duty to
   come up to its help. And all that is wanting to establish these
   institutions upon a permanent foundation, is more ample endowment from
   the wealthy and benevolent. If supported and conducted as they ought to
   be, and certainly may be, they will become the fruitful nurseries of
   learning and religion, and tend to add strength and beauty to that
   Church, under the patronize of which they have been founded and thus
   far sustained.

   The work of God this year was generally prosperous, as may be seen by a
   reference to the increase of membership.

   Seventy preacher had located, two withdrawn. two had been expelled,
   seventy-six returned supernumerary, and one hundred and thirty-four
   superannuated.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 437,024; Last Year: 402,561;
   Increase: -- Colored This Year: 71,589; Last Year: 69,383; Increase:
   2,206 -- Indians This Year: 4,501; Last Year: 4,209; Increase: 292 --
   Total This Year: 513,114; Last Year: 476,153 -- Increase: 36,961 --
   Preachers This Year: 2,010; Last Year: 1900; Increase: 110.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] The total number in the printed Minutes is set down as being
   421,156, which is, 2,229 more than it should be. See Methodist
   Magazine, and Minutes of Conferences for 1828.

   [2] Those who wish full information on this subject may consult the
   "Defense of our Fathers," "Reviewer Reviewed," and "Original Church of
   Christ."

   [3] The following letter from an eye-witness of these things will show
   how matters were conducted: -- "The Choctaw country is divided into
   three districts, called Lower towns, Six towns, and Upper towns. The
   Upper towns form the western district. Colonel Lefleur was formerly
   chief of the Upper towns, and Colonels Folsom and Garland were chiefs
   of the two eastern districts; until at a great council, held in March
   last, at which a majority of the warriors of the nation were present,
   Colonels Folsom and Garland [both Christians of the Presbyterian
   denominational resigned and Colonel Lefleur [a member of the Methodist
   Church] was chosen chief of the whole nation. This council, it will be
   recollected, also voted to offer their country for sale to the United
   States, on certain conditions, and to remove west of the Mississippi.
   "The vote to sell the country excited so much dissatisfaction, that
   Mushulatubee, [the leader of the pagan party,] who formerly been chief
   of the Lower towns district, but had been deposed, availed himself of
   it to recover his fortunes. He placed himself at the head of his
   friends, and with the aid of Netockache, the leader of the Kunshas, a
   little pagan clan in the Six towns district succeeded in obtaining a
   temporary ascendency in the eastern part of the nation. The followers
   of Mushulatubee went through the form of appointing him chief of the
   Lower towns in the place of Folsom, and Netockache took the place of
   Garland as chief of the Six towns. They then combined their efforts
   tried all means in their power to put down religion, and becoming
   gradually more and more bold, at length threatened to drive out the
   missionaries out of the nation, and if they were compelled to emigrate
   west of the Mississippi, declared that not one should accompany them.
   They deposed the Christian captains throughout the two districts, and
   made use of threats, persuasions, and bribes, to induce those who had
   professed Christianity to cast off fear and live without God. It was
   now a time of great and almost constant alarm, and probably the only
   consideration which prevented the pagans from proceeding to extremities
   was the fear of Lefleur. At last, believing themselves sufficiently
   strong, they resolved to break him,' but in this they were
   disappointed, as will be seen in the sequel. "At the time of the
   distribution of the annuity for the two eastern districts at the
   factory, Mushulatubee and Netockache surrounded the building with their
   men, and resolved to prevent the Christian party from receiving any
   part of the goods. For this purpose they stationed guards along the
   road, and had collected a body of fifty or sixty armed men. But what
   was their surprise when Colonel Lefleur suddenly appeared before them,
   at the head of eight hundred armed warriors! The truth is, he left home
   with the determination of settling the controversy. He had, therefore,
   made ample preparation, and on his arrival near the factory he sent to
   the pagans a straight forward talk,' and it was also a hard talk,' --
   Mushulatubee must resign,' and must make his decision in fifteen
   minutes. At the end of this period, receiving no answer, Colonel
   Lefleur, at the head of his mounted men, proceeded toward
   Mushulatubee's quarters. It was now expected that there would be bloody
   work, but Mushulatubee had secreted himself; and Netockache, coming
   forward, offered his hand for peace and was accepted. Colonel Lefleur
   and Colonel Folsom, themselves unarmed, but at the head of their men,
   then pushed their way, in company with Netockache, through the guard,
   toward the body of the pagan party, who fled in all directions at their
   approach. Mushulatubee at length made his appearance, and, finding all
   resistance hopeless, consented to resign, and was told not to think of
   the office of chief for himself so long as Folsom or Lefleur lived.
   "Every thing," says the letter, "has turned out well. Lefleur has
   raised himself in the esteem of thousands. He was very prudent, but
   determined. His cause was good. Mushulatubee and Netockache were
   usurpers and bitter persecutors, but Mushulatubee has sunk, and
   although Netockache is at present acknowledged as chief of the Kunshas,
   he is to walk straight.' or he will himself sink. Another chief will
   soon be selected in Folsoms district. The United States commissioners
   will probably visit the nation to treat before long. What the Choctaws
   will finally do, I know not, or what troubles are before them. One
   thing is pretty certain, that they are threatened with a famine on
   account of the drought. Many will have no corn at all, and others only
   part of a crop."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 11

    The General Conference of 1832

   This conference assembled in the city of Philadelphia on the first of
   May, 1832, and was composed of the following delegates:

   New York Conference: Nathan Bangs, John Clark, Laban Clark, James
   Covel, John Emory, Samuel D. Ferguson, Buel Goodsell, Noah Levings,
   Samuel Merwin, Daniel Ostrander, Fitch Reed, Phineas Rice, Marvin
   Richardson, Peter P. Sandford, Robert Seney, Tobias Spicer, John B.
   Stratten, Nicholas White.

   New England Conference: Daniel Fillmore, Wilbur Fisk, Benjamin F.
   Lambord, John Lindsey, A. D. Merrill, Timothy Merritt, B. Otheman,
   George Pickering, Orange Scott, J. Steele, J. Stoddard, F. Upham,
   Daniel Webb, Shipley Wilson.

   Maine Conference: C. Baker, Oliver Beale, S. Bray, P. Burgess, W. H.
   Norris, D. Hutchinson, B. Jones, John Lord, W. Marsh, E. Robinson, J.
   Spalding.

   New Hampshire and Vermont Conference: John Adams, C. D. Calhoon, John
   W. Hardy, Benjamin R. Hoyt, Samuel Norris, Jared Perkins, George
   Storrs, Eleazer Wells,

   Oneida Conference: Elias Bowen, Joseph Castle, John Dempster, George
   Harmon, Josiah Kies, Zachariab Paddock, Nathaniel Salisbury.

   Genesee Conference: Asa Abell, Robert Burch, Israel Chamberlayne, Abner
   Chase, John Copeland, Edmund O. Fling.

   Pittsburgh Conference: Alfred Brunson, Ira Eddy, Charles Elliott,
   Robert Hopkins, Daniel Limerick, Wilder B. Mack, Joshua Munroe,
   Billings O. Plympton, David Sharp, William Stevens, John Waterman.

   Ohio Conference: Russell Bigelow, W. B. Christie, John Collins,
   Zachariab Connell, A. W. Elliot, James Finley, Curtis Goddard, Charles
   Holliday, Greenbury Jones, James Quinn, W. H. Raper, L. Swormstedt, J.
   F. Wright, David Young.

   Illinois Cenference: James Armstrong, Thomas Hitt, G. Lock, Calvin W.
   Ruter, William Shanks, Samuel H. Thompson, Allen Wiley.

   Holston Conference: John Bowman, W. G. Brownlow, J. K. Catlett, James
   Cumming, George Ekin, John Henninger, Samuel Patton, Thomas
   Springfield.

   Kentucky Conference: William Adams, Peter Akers, Henry B. Bascom,
   Benjamin T. Crouch, H. H. Kavanaugh, Marcus Lindsay, George McNelly,
   Martin Ruter, Jonathan Stamper, G. W. Taylor, John Tevis, Joseph S.
   Tomlinson, Richard Tydings.

   Missouri Conference: Joseph Edmundson, Jesse Green, Alexander
   McAllister.

   Tennessee Conference: Thomas L. Douglass, Lewis Garrett, Alexander P.
   Green, G. W. D. Harris, Greensville T. Henderson, J. M. Holland, Wilson
   L. McAllister, James McFerrin, William McMahan, Lorenzo D. Overall
   Francis A. Owen, Robert Paine, Fountain E. Pitts.

   Mississippi Conference: William M. Curtis, Thomas Griffin, Ebenezer
   Hearn, Joseph McDowell, Robert L. Walker, William Winans.

   Georgia Conference: James O. Andrew, William Arnold, Ignatius A. Few,
   Andrew Hamil, Samuel K. Hodges, John Howard, William J. Parks, Benjanim
   Pope, Elijah Sinclair, Allen Turner.

   South Carolina Conference: Charles Betts, William Capers, Samuel
   Dunwody, Bond English, William M. Kenneday, Malcom McPherson, Hartwell
   Spain, Nicholas Talley.

   Virginia Conference: Bennet T. Blake, James Boyd, Moses Brock, Thomas
   Crowder, Benjamin Devany, Peter Doub, John Earley, William Hammett,
   Caleb Leach, Hezekiah G. Leigh, James Read, Lewis Skidmore, William A.
   Smith.

   Baltimore Conference: John Bear, Robert Cadden, Charles A. Davis, John
   Davis, Henry Furlong, Alfred Griffith, William Hamilton, James M.
   Hanson, Andrew Hemphill, Gerard Morgan, S. G. Roszel, Henry Slicer,
   Henry Smith, David Steele, Charles B. Tippett, Norval Wilson.

   Philadelphia Conference: George Banghart, Henry Boehm, Ezekiel Cooper,
   David Dailey, Manning Force, Solomon Higgins, John Kennaday, Joseph
   Lybrand, Lawrence McCombs, John Potts, William Torbert, Thomas Ware,
   Henry White.

   Bishop McKendree, though in the city, not being able to attend the
   conference, and Bishop Roberts, the next in official seniority, not
   having arrived, the conference was opened by Bishop Soule, with reading
   the Holy Scriptures and prayer, Bishop Hedding being present.

   Thomas L. Douglass was elected secretary, and Charles A. Davis
   assistant secretary. After the conference was thus organized, the
   bishops delivered the following address: --

   "To the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, assembled
   in Philadelphia.

   "Dear Brethren: -- We have abundant cause of thankfulness to the Father
   of all mercies, for that gracious providence which has preserved us to
   assemble on this interesting and important occasion. And it becomes us
   to look up to him in humble prayer for his direction through the
   arduous business which may come before us.

   Since the last meeting of this body, it has pleased the great Head of
   the church to pour out his Spirit upon us in an extraordinary manner.
   Our borders have been greatly enlarged, and the field of labor is
   continually extending with the advance of population. The increase of
   the membership for the four years ending last July has been one hundred
   and thirty-one thousand, one hundred and seventeen.

   "The troubles and dangers which threatened us at our last session have
   nearly passed away. The secession from the Church, although embracing
   some valuable members, has been far less extensive than was feared; and
   the results, with regard to the general interests of the Church, it is
   presumed, have been widely different from the calculations of the
   principal agents in the schism.

   "The measures which have been pursued by those who have been called
   Reformers,' have elicited a more careful examination of the principles
   of the government and economy of the Church, among our preachers and
   people, and through the community in general.

   "This examination has resulted in a clearer conviction of the
   excellence of our system, and especially the efficacy of our itinerant
   plan; and consequently peace, harmony, and reciprocal confidence have
   been greatly increased and confirmed.

   "To preserve such a happy state of things through that vast body of
   ministers and people to whom we are related in the strongest bonds of
   interest and affection, and to devise measures for the more extensive
   and efficient operation of that system which has already been so
   remarkably successful, is the chief business of your present
   deliberations and counsels.

   "Whatever may be the present apparent condition of the great Christian
   community, spread over this vast country, whatever success may appear
   to attend the measures adopted for the extension of the cause of truth,
   it is believed, that there has been no period in the history of
   Methodism in this country which involved greater interests, or called
   more loudly for a constant, clear, and zealous exhibition of those
   evangelical doctrines contained in our form of Discipline and standard
   works.

   "It may be the policy of others to suppress their articles or
   confessions of faith; to alter or change them to suit the condition of
   society; or to envelop them in the mists of metaphysical disquisitions
   and refinements; but with us it is very different. To circulate our
   articles of faith in the most extensive manner, to put our doctrine and
   discipline into as many houses and hands as possible, and to preach
   those doctrines everywhere, in the most plain and simple manner,
   especially holiness of heart and life, is our best policy.

   "Our Missionary, Sunday School, Tract, and Bible Societies have been
   found most valuable and efficient auxiliaries to the grand itinerant
   system, in carrying on the blessed work of spreading Scriptural
   holiness over these lands. Already much has been accomplished by the
   operation of these institutions, although they are but in their
   infancy. And it is believed that with the proper attention of the
   annual conferences, and the efficient agency of the preachers in the
   districts, circuits, and stations, all the objects for which these
   associations have been formed may be fully realized. It has, however,
   been thought by many, that the Sunday school system might be improved
   and made more simple, and that the organization of a school and mode of
   instruction might be so embodied and simplified, in a book, as to
   render the formation and discipline of the schools much less difficult.
   We recommend this subject to your attention.

   "The number of the annual conferences has considerably increased in the
   last four years, and in consequence of the enlargement of the work, it
   is probable others must shortly be organized. And as one of the
   superintendents has been removed from his labors and his sufferings to
   his eternal rest, we recommend to your attention the propriety of
   strengthening the general superintendency.

   "The Book Concern, under a judicious management, in the hands of able
   agents, has so increased as to afford, as the report of the agents will
   show, an increased dividend to the annual conferences. It is believed
   to be in a prosperous state. This institution, both in regard to
   pecuniary means, and the spread of doctrinal, experimental, and
   practical religion, has a high claim to the patronage of the community
   at large, and to your attention as the guardians of its prosperity.

   "The last General Conference authorized the superintendents, by and
   with the advice and consent of the annual conferences, to form several
   new conferences, which has accordingly been done. But we beg leave to
   suggest that this method of dividing conferences, and forming new ones,
   involves a responsibility which we desire may not rest on us in future.

   "We would invite an inquiry whether the rule, (page eighty-six,
   compared with page thirty-eight,) which authorizes a preacher to
   exclude a member of our Church from love feast without a regular form
   of trial: and the rule, (page eighty-five,) which requires a member to
   be put back on trial for an improper marriage, are consistent with the
   right of our members of a trial by a committee, as provided in the
   restrictive articles. (See page twenty-one.)

   "Some of the annual conferences have had doubts relative to the course
   proper to be pursued when a preacher on trial is accused of crime. We
   recommend an examination of this subject, with a view to the adoption
   of a rule, should it be thought expedient, which shall effect an
   identity in the administration in such cases.

   "The rule relative to members who fail in business, or contract debts
   which they are not able to pay, has been ought defective in two points.
   First, It appears to limit the inquiries of the examining committee to
   the accounts' of the delinquent; and secondly, It is doubtful whether
   the delinquent, if found guilty, is to be expelled on the decision of
   the first committee, or be tried before another committee in order to
   final expulsion. A difference of administration has resulted from this
   apparent defect in the rule. We recommend it to your deliberate
   consideration, together with the rule relative to cases where complaint
   is made for nonpayment of debts.

   Most of the annual conferences have established literacy institutions.
   In some cases this has been done by a single conference, and in other
   cases by two or more conferences, united. Most of these institutions,
   though in an infant state, are flourishing and prosperous, and promise
   great usefulness to the community in general, and to the Methodist
   Church in particular. We cannot but retard this as a subject of vital
   interest to the connection at large. Your wisdom will determine whether
   any, and if any, what measures can be adopted by the General Conference
   at its present session for the support and advancement of this noble
   work.

   "We have witnessed with deep regret the moral and religious condition
   of many of the children committed to our charge; children who have been
   consecrated to God, and brought into a special relation to his militant
   church by baptism. We would recommend a careful review of the section
   on the instruction of children, with a design to determine whether any
   thing can be added to those most excellent directions, which may tend
   to confirm and reserve such children in this relation to the church of
   God.

   "Notwithstanding our earnest desire to establish a mission at Liberia,
   in conformity with the request of the General Conference at its last
   session, circumstances which seemed extremely difficult, if not
   impossible, to control, have hitherto prevented the accomplishment of
   this desirable object. But at present we have an encouraging prospect
   of being able to embrace the first safe time and opportunity to send
   one or two missionaries to the coasts of Africa.

   Permit us, dear brethren, in conclusion, to commend you and ourselves
   to God, and to the word of his grace, praying earnestly that he would
   direct you by the light of his holy Spirit, and comfort and Support you
   by the word of his grace. And that the whole Church may be preserved in
   the unity of the Spirit, and in the bond of peace.

   "Yours, with much affection and esteem,

   "W. McKendree, "Joshua Soule, "Elijah Hedding.

   "Philadelphia, May 1, l832."

   The following extracts from the several reports which were adopted by
   this General Conference will show its feelings and views in relation to
   the various subjects which came up for consideration.

   The report on missions, which was adopted by the conference, after an
   approval of the general plan of operations, recommends again the
   establishment a mission in Liberia, the sending one person or more on a
   tour of observation to South America and Mexico, "with a view to
   ascertain the practicability of establishing missions in those
   countries," and likewise the extension of the aboriginal missions on
   our western and northwestern frontiers, as well as the use of more
   energetic measures to fill up the waste places, whether in the older
   parts of our work or in the more recently settled territories.

   The constitution of the society was, also, so amended as to make it the
   duty of the managers to make an estimate for the support of those
   aboriginal and foreign missions not connected with any particular
   annual conference, and authorizing the superintendent of such missions
   to draw on the treasurer of the society for the amount appropriated, in
   quarterly or half yearly installments.

   The committee on education, after enumerating the several academical
   and collegiate institutions heretofore mentioned, and expressing their
   entire confidence in their character, and the manner in which they had
   been conducted, reported the following resolutions, which were
   concurred in by the conference.

   "Resolved, That we have confidence in the above-named institutions, and
   that it be respectfully recommended to the annual conferences, and to
   our people and tends generally, to give their patronage and liberal
   support to these institutions as they may severally prefer.

   "Resolved, That the above resolution is not to be so understood as to
   discourage the establishing of conference seminaries, as heretofore
   recommended by the General Conference, and that it is desirable that
   there should be, as far as possible, one first-rate institution of this
   class in each annual conference.

   "Resolved, That self-supporting literary institutions re highly
   approved of by this conference, and the establishment of a department
   of industry in manual labor in our seminaries and colleges, where it is
   practicable, is -- earnestly recommended.

   "We deem it of great importance to the interests of our Church, that
   the colleges and academies which have been established under the
   direction of the annual conferences should be sustained and rendered
   permanent: and we invite our friends generally, as well as the members
   of our communion in particular, to bestow upon them a liberal
   patronage, and to assist in providing funds. To accomplish this it has
   been proposed to form societies for the purpose of raising moneys
   annually during a certain number of years, and the measure has been
   sanctioned by some of the annual conferences. The plan is evidently a
   judicious one, and we recommend it to our societies wherever it may be
   judged practicable, but particularly in those sections where it has
   been already introduced."

   The Bible, Sunday School, and Tract Societies were highly approved of;
   and recommended to the patronage and support of the members and friends
   of our Church, as may be seen in the pastoral and dress.

   The following extracts from this address will show the views which were
   entertained on the several subjects therein named: --
    1. Holiness. -- "When we speak of holiness, we mean that state in
       which God is loved with all the heart, and served with all the
       power. This, as Methodists, we have said is the privilege of the
       Christian in this life; and, we have further said, that this
       privilege may be secured instantaneously, by an act of faith, as
       justification was. Why, then, have we so few living witnesses that
       the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin?' Let us beware
       lest we satisfy ourselves with the correctness of our creed, while
       we neglect the momentous practical effects which that creed was
       intended to have upon us. Among primitive Methodists, the
       experience of this high attainment in religion may justly be said
       to have been common: now, a profession of it is rarely to be met
       with among us. Is it not time for us, in this matter at least, to
       return to first principles? Is it not time that we throw off the
       reproach of inconsistency with which we are charged in regard to
       this matter? Only let all who have been born of the Spirit, and
       have tasted of the good word of God, seek, with the same ardor, to
       be made perfect in love as they sought for the pardon of their
       sins, and soon will our class meetings and love feasts be cheered
       by the relation of experiences of this higher character, as they
       now are with those which tell of justification and the new birth.
       And, when this shall come to be the case, we may expect a
       corresponding increase in the amount of our Christian enjoyments,
       and in the force of the religious influence we shall exert over
       others."
    2. Family religion. -- "Closely connected with personal holiness is
       family religion. Indeed, it may be considered as resulting from,
       and depending more or less upon it. He in whom the love of God is a
       paramount principle of action, will live in the bosom of his family
       as an instructing prophet, an interceding priest, and a leading
       example; and his influence will be felt. He will attend to the
       duties of family religion, not merely because they are prescribed,
       but because his heart is in them, and because he finds his greatest
       happiness in such attendance; and, wherever the heart prompts to a
       course of action that leads manifestly to happy consequences, the
       influence upon those who come within its range is great as well as
       certain."
    3. Instruction of children. -- "The early instruction of our children
       in the knowledge of God, and of their duty to him, is a part of
       family religion which yields to none other in importance. Earliest
       impressions are usually the most lasting, and the most powerful in
       their influence upon the character of man. Hence it is, that so
       much emphasis is laid upon this duty in the sacred Scriptures. As a
       Church, we have admitted the high importance of an early religious
       education; but does our practice bear witness of the sincerity and
       practical influence of our convictions on this subject? Is it not a
       fact to be greatly deplored, that parents, religious, Methodist
       parents, too often act with no fixed plan in the education of their
       children? And where this is not the case, is not religion too often
       an object of; at most, secondary consequence in the arrangement of
       the plan adopted? Are we careful that not only our own
       instructions, but the books we place in the hands of our children,
       the company with which we encourage their association, the
       institutions in which we place them for education, and the
       instructors we provide for them, shall all, as far as possible, be
       such as shall contribute to the training of them up in the way in
       which they should go? Do we, when compelled to choose between them,
       prefer a course likely to make our children Christians, to one
       which will secure to them high standing in the world? If not, can
       we wonder if they shall choose the world rather than religion? We
       ourselves teach them that preference when we sacrifice their
       religious improvement to the acquisition of fashionable
       accomplishments. O, if parents would but consider how inconceivably
       important it is, that the minds of their children should be
       properly directed, they surely would shake off the indolence that
       prevents their own exertions for that purpose; and they would be
       careful that the influence exerted by others should, as far as
       possible, not only be innocent, but conducive to their forming an
       early religious character. When, as parents, we shall feel our
       weighty and fearful responsibility in this matter; when we shall
       properly appreciate the importance of an early religious education
       to the character and interests of our children, and when we shall
       act accordingly, then may we expect to see them early disciples of
       Jesus, steadily walking in the way in which they should go, and
       joyful partakers with us of the consolations of the gospel. Then
       may we see wiped off the reproach of that too often pertinent
       interrogatory, In what are the children of Methodists better than
       those of others?' And who of us that has known the joy of God's
       salvation, that would not prefer that our children should be
       partakers in that joy, rather than that they should possess all
       that the world esteems good and great?"
    4. Sabbath Schools. -- "Among the most efficient auxiliaries in the
       religions instruction of our children, we may rank sabbath schools.
       The good that has beers accomplished by these will never be fully
       known till that day arrives which shall reveal the secrets of all
       hearts, and the operation and tendency of the various influences
       which have acted upon the human character. Then it will be seen how
       many inexperienced feet have been prevented from wandering into the
       mazes of folly and sin how many thoughtless wanderers have been
       arrested in their course, and brought back to the ways of
       righteousness; and how many have been led to inquiry and to God by
       their instrumentality. Considering, then, the mighty and beneficial
       influence of sabbath Schools, allow us earnestly to recommend, that
       wherever it is possible, institutions of this kind shall be
       established, and zealously and perseveringly supported, by all who
       love the Lord Jesus, and care for the best interests of the rising
       generation.

   For reasons which we think must be obvious on the slightest
   observation, we prefer the establishment and support of sabbath schools
   in connection with, and supplied with books from, our own Sunday School
   Union. Doctrines which we esteem of vital importance are not to be
   expected in the books or instructions of schools under any other
   patronage. We shall instance in only two particulars -- the doctrine of
   Christian perfection, and that of the possibility of so falling from
   grace as to perish everlastingly. Now, believing these doctrines, and
   considering them as of immense practical importance, are we willing
   that our children should receive a course of religious instruction from
   which they are to be excluded? And yet in those schools which are under
   the patronage of the American Sunday School Union, these doctrines must
   not be taught because some of the parties to this Union do not receive
   them as doctrines of the gospel. There are other important
   discrepancies in the opinions of those who compose this Union and our
   Church; but these are mentioned, because they are familiar, and because
   no mode of reconciling them could be adopted.

   Nearly allied to this recommendation of our own Sunday School Union and
   Sunday Schools, is that which we would now urge upon you in relation to
   our own Tract and Bible Societies -- the former for the reasons already
   assigned, and both, because, in giving the preference to books issued
   from our own Book Concern, we afford support to that Concern, which is,
   in all its bearings, a very important part of that system by which
   Methodism has purposed to spread vital holiness over these lands. We
   are not ignorant that we have been reproached with sectarian
   exclusiveness, in holding off from national religious charities; but we
   are little concerned at this. We are a sect of Christians, who honestly
   and conscientiously hold opinions, which we esteem of great importance,
   different from those which are held by most other Christian
   denominations; and we believe it to be our duty, not only not to
   disguise or to keep back these peculiar opinions, but to urge them
   constantly and emphatically upon all those, and especially the young,
   who are under our instruction. For these reasons, we would wish the
   liberty to conduct our religious charities on our own account, and in
   our own way.

   Besides these, there are other reasons which have induced us not to
   connect ourselves with national religious charities. We believe that,
   in the arrangement of Providence, it is wisely permitted that the
   various sects of Christians should act upon their several views, the
   more extensively to spread the substantial truths of the gospel through
   the world, in order to check any aberrations, whether in doctrine or
   practice, to to which human infirmity renders the best and wisest of
   all sects liable, and in order to excite each other to activity and
   diligence. We, moreover, believe that a union of the various
   denominations of Christians, for the operation of religious charities,
   while they continue to differ in regard to important religious
   doctrines, would lessen the amount of these charities, and lead in the
   end to dissensions and animosities not otherwise to be apprehended. For
   these and other reasons, especially that we consider national religious
   societies incompatible with the safety of our free institutions, both
   civil and religious, we have long been known as in opposition to them.

   And, as this has long been known, it is, to say the least of it, not a
   little surprising that agents of those societies have been found, who
   have confidently reported the Methodist Church as their supporters. It
   would be ridiculous, if not wicked, for these agents to excuse
   themselves, by saying that a few individuals of the Methodist Church
   are such supporters, when they cannot but know that, as a body, we are
   avowedly opposed to any such connection. But, not even this apology can
   be made by those who have continued, on the ground of unauthorized
   appointments, to represent our bishops and other ministers as officers
   in these societies, after they have, in the most unequivocal manner,
   declined the acceptance of such offices."

   5.  General Exhortation. "And we earnestly recommend a strict
   observance of the requirements of our excellent form of Discipline,
   especially in what respects class meeting, conformity to the world, and
   the preservation of purity and peace in the members of a body
   associated for purposes of such mighty consequence, both to individual
   interest and the general good. If we would accomplish all the good
   contemplated in the formation of our society, we must strengthen and
   draw close the ties that hind us together; we most preserve the
   peculiar and distinctive features of our Christian character, and we
   must act with concentrated force.

   "In conclusion, dear brethren, after earnestly entreating your prayers,
   that we may have hearts to labor for God, and that he may crown our
   labors with success, we commend you to him and to the word of his
   grace, praying that he may make all grace to abound to you, and that he
   may bring us together to his everlasting kingdom and glory, through
   Christ Jesus, to whom be glory, for ever. Amen."

   We have before noticed the movements in the Christian world on the
   subject of temperance. It came up for consideration before this
   conference, and resulted in the adoption of the following report, from
   the pen of the Rev. Henry B. Bascom, secretary of the committee to whom
   the subject was referred: --

   The delegates from the several annual conferences of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church, in General Conference assembled, at Philadelphia,
   May, 1832, after due inquiry and deliberation, have deemed it necessary
   to submit to the consideration of the ministry and membership of the
   Church, throughout the United States, the following remarks and advice
   on the subject of Temperance, the viewed as a question of intense and
   growing interest, now extensively occupying the attention of the
   religious public and the American people in general.

   "The duty and necessity of strict and exemplary abstinence from
   indulgence in the use of ardent spirits and intoxicating liquors of
   every sort, will be found to have been a part of the moral discipline
   of our church from the earliest date of its existence and operations;
   and it is known to those who are at all familiar with our history, that
   we have accomplished much in preserving those immediately under our
   charge proverbially pure from the stain, and free from the curse of
   intemperance. Nevertheless, our success has not been entire, and much
   remains to be done before we can realize our wishes and the great
   object of our long-continued efforts in this very interesting
   department of Christian morals. And it is in order to effect this we
   now address you as the public servants of the Church, and officially
   intrusted with the administration of its discipline. We have too much
   confidence in the intelligence and piety of the persons addressed --
   the great body of our charge -- to suppose for a moment that any
   apology is necessary for offering you the reflections and advice we
   propose, believing, as we do, that the intemperance we discourage, and
   would banish from the Church and the world, is alike unworthy and
   unbecoming all who bear the Christian name, or would be considered
   useful and reputable members of society in general. The vice of which
   we complain, and against indulgence in which we would urgently and
   affectionately remonstrate, is broadly and unsparingly condemned in the
   Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, as directly inconsistent with
   Christian character, and fatally contravening in the hopes and claims
   of moral excellence. As Christians we how to the authority of
   inspiration; and its language is too explicit and solemn on this
   subject to be misunderstood, or waived, by any who are not utterly
   reckless both of the welfare of this life and the more weighty
   interests of immortality in another.

   In the language of the Bible on this subject there is nothing deficient
   or equivocal; and although we do not propose an enlarged discussion,
   yet we cannot refrain from asking your attention to its fearful and
   varied testimony against the sin of intemperance, the condemnation of
   which is uttered in every variety of form and phrase. Be not drunk with
   wine -- wine and new wine take away the heart -- wine is a mocker --
   strong drink is raging -- he transgresseth by wine -- they have erred
   through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way -- the priest
   and the people have erred through strong I drink -- woe to them that
   rise up early to follow strong drink and continue till wine inflame
   them: therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth
   without measure -- woe to them that drink wine in bowls -- be not among
   wine-bibbers -- who hath woe, sorrow, contentions, and babbling? they
   that continue long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed wine -- woe
   to them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle
   strong drink -- he is a drunkard, and all the men of the city shall
   strike him with stones, that he die -- it is not for kings to drink
   wine, nor princes strong drink -- he who shall add drunkenness to
   thirst, the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven -- woe to
   the drunkards of Ephraim they shall be trodden under foot -- while they
   are drunken they shall be destroyed as stubble full dry -- blessed art
   thou, O land, when thy princes eat and drink for strength, and not for
   drunkenness -- woe to him that giveth his neighbor drink, that putteth
   the bottle to his mouth, and maketh him drunken .' A statute of
   perpetual obligation, throughout all generations of the priesthood,
   was, that they were not to drink wine or strong drink' while engaged in
   the service of the tabernacle; and in another connection the obligation
   is made equally binding: Neither shall the priests drink wine when they
   enter into the inner court.' The drunkenness of Noah, Lot, Nadab,
   Abihu, and Nabat, incurred the displeasure of heaven; while the vow of
   the humble Rechabites, We will drink no wine;' is commemorated by the
   special and public approval of Jehovah; and to these we might add the
   examples of the wife of Manoah, Hannah, Samuel, and the Nazarites, as
   securing the sanction of divine commendation. We need scarcely add that
   these solemn and admonitory lessons of the Jewish Scriptures on the
   subject of intemperance are enforced in the language of persuasion, as
   well as the most fearful denunciation.

   "And the language and warnings of the New Testament are equally
   decisive and uncompromising in the utter condemnation of the vice of
   intemperance in all its forms. Drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom
   of God.' Drunkenness is ranked among the works of the flesh,' and is
   expressly said to exclude the delinquent from the kingdom of heaven. If
   any man be a drunkard, with such a one, no, not to eat.' Excess of wine
   is classed with the enormities of lasciviousness, revelings, and
   banquetings.' It is the offspring of darkness: They that are drunken
   are drunken in the night;' Take heed that your hearts be not
   overcharged with drunkenness;' Let us walk honestly, not in drunkenness
   -- be not drunk with wine -- the evil servant who drinks with the
   drunken shall be cut asunder, and have his portion with hypocrites and
   unbelievers.' The Pharisees thought the could not more effectually
   reproach our Lord than to style him a wine-bibber!' St. Paul ranks it
   among the virtues of Christian bishops and deacons, that they be not
   given to wine.' Look also at the example of John the Baptist and a
   greater than he. The stern and unyielding purity of the former in this
   as well as in other particulars is held up to the notice and imitation
   of all who name the name of Christ.' And when the intoxicating cup
   usually tempered to suffering malefactors, to procure insensibility to
   pain and lessen the agony of death, was by the courtesy of Jewish and
   Roman cruelty tendered our Lord, the lustrous sufferer disdained the
   unholy succor, and trod the winepress of the wrath of his Father
   without the dishonorable resort of accepting unworthy means to sustain
   him in the conflict. Would to God that we, that all Christians in
   affliction and trial, might do as he did, in the hope of overcoming
   with him! And allow us to add here, that such are the terminal and
   fatal effects of this species of intemperance, thus forcibly portrayed
   and denounced in the Bible, that wine, used as a generic term, denoting
   strong intoxicating drinks of every kind, and confining the remarks to
   its abuse, is made to symbolize the wrath of God and the misery of the
   damned in a future state of retribution! It follows, therefore, that no
   person of ordinary intelligence can consult the pages of inspiration
   without perceiving at once that the common use of alcoholic
   intoxicating liquors, of whatever kind, is strictly and unequivocally
   forbidden in the Scriptures, as plainly and fatally injurious to the
   best interests of man, in time and in eternity; and as in other
   instances, so in this, the beneficent Author of our being has
   unnaturally conformed the constitution and laws of our nature to the
   pre-existing purpose of his will in relation to the immutable
   principles of right and wrong, and accordingly all our physical
   aptitudes and moral instincts resist the allurements and motives to a
   course of intemperate indulgence, until a series of vicious experiment
   and training, offering rebellion to the best feelings of our nature,
   and grossly violative of every principle of duty and moral obligation,
   shall have prepared the victims of intemperance for all that is
   monstrous in folly or hateful in crime.

   God, who is the Author of nature, no less than of revelation, has
   abundantly provided for the essential happiness and relative usefulness
   of mankind but the experience of all ages and nations has furnished the
   most indubitable proof that the use of ardent spirits is totally
   inconsistent with either, and thus opposed to His benevolent intentions
   of heaven and provisions of nature, must be considered as a
   transgression of the will of God.

   "And this view of the subject becomes the more convincing and striking
   when we attend to the peculiar nature and properties of all
   intoxicating drinks. In all these alcohol is the principle of all
   intoxication, and it has been clearly demonstrated by the researches
   and experiments of ministry and pharmacy, in connection with the
   structure and pathology of the human frame, that alcohol is an
   essentially active poison, and that the constant use of it, in any
   shape, must necessarily injure health, and finally destroy life itself.

   The mischievous principle of inebriety, of which we now speak, cannot
   be made to nourish and invigorate the body. It is by the appointment of
   heaven and the constitution of our common nature rendered incapable of
   producing such a result. Its conversion into chyle, after being
   received into the stomach, and its subsequent appropriation by means of
   the blood vessels, for the purpose of renewing and invigorating the
   body, are known to be impossible. No alcoholic substance can be
   controlled, digested, or appropriated by the stomach. When received
   there it immediately diffuses itself throughout the whole system -- it
   penetrates the very substance of the body, the brain, the nerves, and
   the blood vessels. All become excited and inflamed; the functions of
   the entire system become deranged; its action is irregular, and the
   well-adjusted play of its parts and mechanism disturbed and disordered;
   often deranging not only the functions of the body, but even its
   organic structure; and in whatever assignable measure alcohol, found in
   all spirituous liquors, and in most of our wines and malt drinks, may
   be drunk, these effects must necessarily follow, in a proportionate
   degree. And hence the wisdom and kindness of our Creator, manifestly
   shown in the fact that the appetite for this popular but mischievous
   poison is unnatural, artificially acquired, and a perversion of the
   dictates and provisions of nature. And in our judgment this view of the
   subject furnishes us with a strong additional argument in favor of the
   utter rejection of alcoholic drinks, except as a medicine, when the
   want of proper skill, or other adequate means, may authorize, in rare
   instances, an exception to the general rule of total abstinence.

   We are the more disposed to press the necessity of entire abstinence,
   because there seems to be no safe line of distinction between the
   moderate and immoderate use of intoxicating drinks, -- the transition
   from a temperate to an intemperate use of them is almost as certain as
   it is insensible; indeed, with us it is a question of great moral
   interest, whether a man can indulge in their use at all, and be
   considered temperate. We have seen that the natural, unperverted
   appetite of man does not ask for them, and the only motive that can
   possibly determine such an indulgence, is to obtain from them a vivid
   impression upon the nerves, more or less agreeable at the time, but
   utterly oblivious of better, because more salutary feelings. This
   result is unnatural, and of course it offers violence to the
   constitutional order and functionary uniformity of nature, and we
   respectfully submit, whether the means therefore must not be sinful.

   "It has been already remarked, that the essential constituent in
   intoxicating liquors, producing inebriety, is alcohol, and that this is
   found, in large proportions, not only in the different kinds of
   distilled liquors, but also in most of the wines, and vinous, as well
   as malt preparations drunk in this country. Who is not alarmed, not to
   say confounded, when he reflects upon the amount of this bewitching
   poison which is found in all our fashionable drinks! How can a
   Christian account to his conscience and his God for swallowing daily an
   amount of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, of which alcohol is compounded,
   and which, if taken separately from other neutralizing ingredients,
   would deprive him of life perhaps in a few hours! In a bottle of
   brandy, for example, (we are guided in the estimate by Saussure and
   Brande,) there is more alcohol, by actual measurement, than water; --
   in our best wines, say Port and Madeira, as received and used in this
   country, nearly one half is alcohol; about six ounces of this poison
   will be found in a quart of strong cider, and little less than four in
   a bottle of porter or ale! In a brief address, however, we can only
   bring these facts into view in a summary way. We propose them for
   examination and reflection, and we implore the thousands under our
   charge to bestow upon the whole subject the attention it so obviously
   and pressingly deserves and demands.

   "The great and increasing interest, the deep and lasting stake we must
   always have, as a Church, in preventing and curing the evils of
   intemperance, will furnish an obvious and commanding vindication of the
   course we have adopted, in making this appeal to the good sense and
   enlightened piety of the Methodist Episcopal Church. We consider all
   intemperance, whether in its incipient or more advanced stages, as an
   abuse of the physical force and vigor of man, and seriously deducting
   from the integrity of his mental powers and moral purposes; and we
   therefore invoke the aid of our people in an attempt to banish the evil
   from our Church altogether.

   "We would remark here, also, that the immorality and curse of
   intemperance are most fearfully evinced, not only in its immediate and
   incipient, but in its final effects and relative bearings upon the
   confirmed intemperate, and others found in necessary connection or
   casual contact with them: impiety and worthlessness, disease and death,
   are its necessary attendants. God and nature have so disowned and
   frowned upon it, as to stamp it with the character of unmingled evil.
   The redeeming element or aspect about it. In it best and most imposing
   furnish it offers nothing but plague and pollution. God forbids it; it
   is the object of nature's abhorrence, and its uniform effects
   demonstrate that to persist in its practice is to renounce the
   friendship of heaven and claim kindred, not with brutes, but infernals.
   All therefore, must look upon it as an evil unhallowed by any, the
   smallest good. We have seen that it invariably undermines health and
   leads to death, and, in most instances death untimely and disgraceful.
   However insidious in its progress, it is fatal in its issue. We need
   not ask you to look at the brutal, the polluted, and demoralizing
   victim himself, -- a curse and a nuisance, whatever his name, or
   wherever found. We need not quote his beggared family and heart broken
   connections. We need not cite you to the wretched thousands found as
   criminals in your penitentiaries, patients in your hospitals, lunatics
   in your asylums, and vagabonds in your streets! Few, perhaps, are aware
   of the extent, the secret and insidious spread of the evil we would
   arrest. Its destructive influence is felt in every department of
   business, duty, and society: in our legislative halls; at the bar of
   justice; upon the judicial bench, and even in the pulpit. A large
   portion, we fear, of the most important and responsible business of the
   nation is often transacted under the influence, in a greater or less
   degree, of alcoholic excitement; and can those be innocent who
   contribute to secure such a result, whether by the pestilential example
   of temperate drinking, as it is called, or the still more criminal
   means of furnishing the poisonous preparation by manufacture and
   traffic for the degradation and ruin of others?

   The man who drinks intemperately ruins himself, and is the cause of
   much discomfort an inquietude, and perhaps actual misery, in the social
   scene in which he moves; but the manufacturer, and those who are
   engaged in the traffic of ardent spirits and other intoxicating
   liquors, do the work of death by wholesale; they are devoted by
   misguided enterprise to the ruin of human kind, and become directly
   accessory, although not intended by them, to the present shame and
   final destruction of hundreds and thousands. And we gravely ask, with
   no common solicitude, Can God, who is just, as well as good, hold that
   church innocent which is found cherishing in her bosom so awful and
   universal an evil? We have seen this evil broadly and unequivocally
   denounced in the Scriptures, as an utter curse, and big with ruin to
   the best hopes of man. Nature and Providence unite their testimony, and
   award to it the same condemnation. Our Church has long borne a similar
   testimony, and this is especially true of the father and founder of
   Methodism.

   "He says of ardent spirits in general, First of all, sacredly abstain
   from all spirituous liquors; touch them not on any pretense whatever.'
   On their manufacture and sale he remarks, It is amazing that the
   preparation or selling of this poison should be permitted, I will not
   say in any Christian country, but in any civilized state!' He
   pronounces the gain of the trafficker in ardent spirits, the price of
   blood,' and adds, emphatically, Let not any lover of virtue and truth
   say one word in favor of this monster. Let no lover of mankind open his
   mouth to extenuate the guilt of it. Oppose it as you would oppose the
   devil, whose offspring and likeness it is.' Of grocers, in this
   traffic, he affirms, They murder mankind by wholesale, and drive them
   to hell like sheep.' He denounces both the manufacture and the sale of
   spirituous liquors, except for mechanical and medicinal purposes, as a
   gross immorality declaring, None can gain in this way by swallowing up
   his neighbors substance, without gaining the damnation of hell!' And
   hence one of the original rules of the Methodist societies, as drawn up
   by John and Charles Wesley, precluded drunkenness, buying or selling
   spirituous liquors, or drinking them, except in cases of extreme
   necessity.' And we cannot but fear that the alteration of this rule by
   the American Methodists, and the substitution of another less
   unequivocal in its character, since 1790, have been attended with but
   little good to any, and perhaps with direct injury to thousands. And
   now that the engrossing question of total abstinence is arresting the
   attention of most evangelical churches in the United States, and in
   many of them becoming a term of membership, we are fully convinced it
   would be criminal in us to remain silent, and not lend our aid and
   co-operation in purging the church and redeeming the nation from this
   insidious, yet alarming and desolating evil.

   Finally, persuaded as we are that intemperance, in all its aspects and
   gradations, is a physical evil, unmitigated by any mixture of good, and
   also a moral offense against the laws of God, and the claims of
   Christian piety, unmodified by any indemnifying consideration whatever,
   we would at all times, but at this time especially, when such combined
   and powerful efforts are making to arrest the evil, cast in our
   dividend of social and moral aid, and do all in our power to accomplish
   an object as every way momentous as it is desirable. And we close by
   remarking, that we look upon all as implicated in the duty and the
   interest, and we shall cheerfully and promptly concur with all in an
   effort to expel the demon of intemperance, not only from our churches,
   but from the nation, whose welfare and fortunes must be always viewed
   in intimate connection with its morals."

   With a view to secure the hearty co-operation of ministers and people
   in the cause of missions, sabbath schools, and the distribution of
   Bibles and tracts, a clause was incorporated in the discipline making
   it the special duty of all those who have the charge of circuits and
   stations to attend to these things regularly and to aid them in this
   good work, it was also made the duty of presiding elders "to promote,
   by all proper means, the cause of missions and Sunday schools, and the
   publication, at our own press, of Bibles, tracts, and Sunday school
   books."

   The American Colonization Society was now gauling more and more on the
   affection and confidence of the American people. To aid in its
   benevolent enterprise, this General Conference passed a resolution
   authorizing the bishops to appoint agents in behalf of that society.

   The affairs of our brethren in Canada were once more brought before the
   conference. By a reference to the proceedings of the General Conference
   of 1828, it will be perceived that a claim which they made upon a
   portion of the Book Concern was deferred for future adjustment. This
   claim was presented to this conference in a forcible appeal from their
   delegates, the Rev. Messrs. William Case and William Ryerson, who had
   been deputed by the Canada conference to urge it upon this General
   Conference. Though it was generally agreed by the members of the
   conference that the Canada brethren had a just claim upon a portion of
   the Book Concern, yet, after a full examination of the subject, the
   conclusion was drawn that the General Conference had no constitutional
   authority to make the apportionment without first obtaining the
   concurrence of the annual conferences. A resolution was therefore
   passed, referring the entire subject to the annual conferences, and
   authorizing the book agents at New York, whenever it should be
   certified to them by the secretaries of the annual conferences that
   "three-fourths of all the members of the several annual conferences,
   who shall be present and vote on the subject, shall to make a division
   of the stock of the Book Concern, in proportion to the number of
   traveling preachers, including those on trial and superannuated, in
   both connections. But as three-fourths of all the voters were never
   obtained, the settlement was not made, and therefore the whole subject
   was postponed for final adjustment to the General Conference of 1836.

   As, however, the Canada conference had not yet fully organized itself
   according to its intention when it declared itself independent, in
   conformity to the stipulations between it and the General Conference of
   1828, the following resolutions were passed by this conference: --
    1. That if the conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church in the
       province of Upper Canada shall, previously to the next General
       Conference, elect a bishop for said Church, and request any one or
       more of the bishops, together with any two or more of the elders of
       the Methodist Episcopal Church in the United States, to ordain him,
       such bishop or bishops shall be at liberty so to do, provided the
       expediency and propriety of a compliance with such request be in
       accordance with the judgment of such bishop or bishops: and,
       provided also, that nothing herein contained be contrary to, or
       inconsistent with any law or laws of said province.
    2. That until a bishop shall have been elected and ordained for the
       Methodist Episcopal Church in Canada, any bishop or bishops of the
       Methodist Episcopal Church in the United States, on the request of
       the conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church in Upper Canada,
       shall be at liberty to ordain any elders or deacons for the said
       Methodist Episcopal Church in Canada, subject to the provisions and
       limitations specified in the foregoing resolution."

   The following report of the committee on the episcopacy was concurred
   in by the conference: --
    1. That they have examined the administration in the several annual
       conferences for the last four years, and find that it has been
       correct, and highly satisfactory, and therefore is entitled to the
       support and approbation of the General Conference.
    2. In consequence of the lamented death of our beloved bishop George,
       the extension of the work under our care and oversight, and the
       increase of the annual conferences, it is recommended that we elect
       two additional bishops at the present conference.
    3. As it is considered by the committee an evil of no small magnitude
       for the same preachers to be continued from year to year in town
       and city stations, the superintendents are respectfully requested
       to diversify appointments of this sort as much as possible among
       preachers deemed suitable for such appointments.
    4. As our charitable institutions, colleges, and seminaries of
       learning are continually increasing, and as the American
       Colonization Society is rising in its claims on the American
       community, it is considered proper for our bishops, whenever in
       their judgment, and in the judgment of an annual conference, it
       shall be found expedient, to appoint any preacher as an agent to
       promote the interest of either or all of these institutions.
    5. In consequence of the age and increased infirmities of our
       venerable and beloved bishop McKendree, it is recommended that his
       present relation be continued, and that the sum of two hundred and
       fifty dollars be allowed him annually for extra expenses, and to
       defray the expenses of a traveling companion, and one hundred
       dollars for the allowance of said traveling companion, and that he
       be authorized to draw this amount from the Book Concern.
    6. It is recommended that the rule to estimate the allowance of the
       bishops, for family expenses, be so altered as to make it the duty
       of the annual conference, within whose bounds the family or
       families of the bishop or bishops may reside, to estimate the
       amount necessary to meet such expenses.
    7. Considering the great extent of the work throughout this vast
       continent, committed to the oversight of the episcopacy, the
       committee deem it inexpedient to require each of our bishops to
       travel throughout the whole of their extensive charge during the
       recess of the General Conference, and therefore recommend to the
       episcopacy to make such an apportionment of the work among
       themselves as shall best suit their own convenience, and in their
       judgment most effectually promote the general good."

   Allusion is made in the above report to the enlargement of our work in
   connection with the death of Bishop George. The Illinois and New York
   conferences were divided, and three new ones were formed, namely, Troy,
   Indiana, and Alabama, making in all twenty-two. For these reasons, on
   the twenty-second day of the session, two additional bishops, namely,
   James Osgood Andrew, and John Emory, were elected, the former by a vote
   of one hundred and forty, out of two hundred and twenty-three, the
   whole number of voters, and the latter by a vote of one hundred and
   twenty-five. Both having a constitutional majority on the first
   balloting, they were declared duly elected, and on the 25th they were
   consecrated in the usual form, by prayer and imposition of the hands of
   Bishops McKendree, Roberts, Soule, and Hedding.

   Another important regulation was made at this General Conference. When
   the delegated General Conference was created in 1808, the number of
   delegates was limited to not more than one to every five, nor less than
   one to every seven members, and according to the proviso, neither this
   nor any other restrictive regulation could be altered except "upon the
   joint recommendation of all the annual conferences," and then by "a
   vote of two-thirds of the General Conference succeeding." As, however,
   the number of delegates had so increased that the General Conference of
   1824 felt it to be burdensome both to themselves and others for so many
   to assemble together every fourth year, a recommendation had been sent
   the rounds of the annual conferences, requesting them to empower the
   General Conference of 1828 to diminish the number of delegates. This
   recommendation passed all the annual conferences except the
   Philadelphia; and as it required all the conferences to concur before
   the alteration could be made by the General Conference, the measure was
   defeated by the nonoccurrence of this single annual conference. It was
   thus that we all began to feel the pressure of the yoke which had been
   imposed upon us by the General Conference of 1808, by which we were
   compelled to submit to the burden until permitted to relieve ourselves
   by the concurrence of all the conferences in the Union. This unwise
   provision put it completely in the power of a very small minority to
   rule the whole body, on any question arising out of the restrictive
   rules. From such a grievous yoke, "which neither we nor our fathers
   were able to bear," the General Conference of 1828 made an effort to
   break loose by passing the following resolution: --

   "Resolved, That this General Conference respectfully suggest to the
   several annual conferences the propriety of recommending to the next
   General Conference, so to alter and amend the rules of our Discipline
   by which the General Conference is restricted in its powers to make
   rules and regulations for the Church, commonly called the restrictive
   rules, as to make the proviso, at the close of the said restrictive
   rules, No. 6, read thus: --

   "Provided, nevertheless, that upon the concurrent recommendation of
   three-fourths of all the annual conferences who shall be present and
   vote on such recommendation, then a majority of two-thirds of the
   General Conference succeeding shall suffice to alter any of such
   regulations, except the first. And, also,

   "Whenever such alteration or alterations shall have first been
   recommended by two-thirds of the General Conference, so soon as
   three-fourths of the members of the annual conferences shall have
   concurred, as aforesaid, with such recommendation, such alteration or
   alterations shall take effect."

   This recommendation had been submitted to the several annual
   conferences, and had obtained a constitutional majority of all the
   voters. Accordingly it came legitimately before this General Conference
   to alter the proviso, and then to recommend to the several annual
   conferences to authorize the lessening the number of delegates, and
   both of these powers were exercised. Without going into a detail of all
   the circumstances which led to the result, it is sufficient to say,
   that the proviso, which had held us at bay for so long a time, was so
   altered on the recommendation of the General Conference of 1832, and
   the constitutional vote of the annual conferences, subsequently, as to
   read as follows: --

   "Provided, nevertheless, that upon the concurrent recommendation of
   three-fourths of all the members of the several annual conferences, who
   shall be present and vote on such recommendation, then a majority of
   two-thirds of the General Conference succeeding shall suffice to alter
   any of the above restrictions, excepting the first article and also,
   whenever such alteration or alterations shall have been first
   recommended by two-thirds of the General Conference, so soon as
   three-fourths of the members of all the annual conferences shall have
   concurred as aforesaid, such alteration or alterations shall take
   effect."

   And then the number of delegates was to be graduated as follows: --

   "They shall not allow of more than one representative for every
   fourteen members of the annual conference, nor allow of a less number
   than one for every thirty: provided, nevertheless, that when there
   shall be in any annual conference a fraction of two-thirds the number
   which shall be fixed for the ratio of representation, such annual
   conference shall be entitled to an additional delegate for such
   fraction; and provided, also, that no conference shall be denied the
   privilege of two delegates."

   It will be perceived that a motion may now be made by either the
   General Conference or the annual conferences, for an alteration in any
   of the restrictive regulations except the first, and that, as it
   requires to be seconded by the other, and concurred in by a majority of
   three-fourths of the voters in the annual conferences, or two-thirds of
   the General Conference, to make it obligatory, the rights of each are
   secured, and the voices of all are heard. And as this new regulation
   was made for the purpose of obviating the prohibitory character of the
   old proviso, which amounted in fact to almost a total and absolute
   withholding of all power from the General Conference ever to make any
   alteration, however imperative the necessity might appear, it seems
   preposterous to give such an interpretation to the language of the
   present proviso, as to involve us in the very same dilemma as that from
   which it was designed, and therefore made and adopted for the express
   purpose of delivering us! Such an interpretation involves the framers
   of this proviso in the most inexcusable of all blunders -- a fault from
   which their acknowledged abilities and known integrity must for ever
   exempt them. We had been laboring under the galling yoke of this severe
   restriction for eight years, struggling the whole time to free
   ourselves from its iron bondage, and then securing our freedom, as we
   were simple enough to believe, by a substitute, when lo and behold,
   when we come to test it by actual experiment, it proves to be the same
   galling yoke still! An absurdity this too glaring to be admitted.

   Notwithstanding all that had been done for the relief and support of
   our worn-out preachers, widows, and orphans, they were still but poorly
   provided for, and hence the following additional regulation was made
   respecting the manner in which their just and pressing claims might be
   met: --

   "It shall be the duty of each annual conference to take measures, from
   year to year, to raise moneys in every circuit and station within its
   bounds, for the relief of its necessitous, superannuated, supernumerary
   ministers, widows, and orphans. And the conference shall appoint a
   committee to estimate the several sums necessary to be allowed for the
   extra expenses of such necessitous claimants, who shall be paid in
   proportion to the estimate made and the moneys received."

   The following was also enacted in reference to those therein mentioned,
   who reside beyond the bounds of their respective conferences: --

   "Every superannuated preacher who may reside without the bounds of the
   conference of which he is a member; shall annually forward to his
   conference a certificate of his character and ministerial conduct,
   together with an account of the number and circumstances of his family,
   signed by the presiding elder of his district, or the preacher in
   charge of his circuit or station, within whose bounds he may reside,
   without which the conference shall not be required to allow his claim."

   Provision had already been made for the appointment of preachers as
   teachers, professors, or presidents of academies and colleges under our
   own control and patronage. This conference extended the authority to
   the bishops for other colleges, in the following language: --

   "Resolved, That the superintendents be authorized, whenever requested
   by an annual conference to do it, to appoint a preacher to a college
   not under our direction, and to continue him in the same manner as at
   the institutions which we patronize.

   It seems that a practice had prevailed to some extent, whenever a
   preacher wished to attend to some temporal business for his own
   convenience, to be left, at his own request, without any regular
   appointment for a year, less or more. This had been found to be
   accompanied with so many difficulties, that the bishops felt it their
   duty to call the attention of the conference to the subject, and its
   consideration resulted in the adoption of the following: --

   "Resolved, That it is inconsistent with the spirit and interest of the
   itinerancy system to leave effective men without appointments at their
   own request."

   The following was also passed, fixing the responsibility of those
   preachers who might be appointed traveling agents for any literary or
   other institution, as already authorized by existing regulations: --

   "Resolved, That in all cases where agents are appointed, their names
   shall be attached to some district; and in case of any complaint, they
   shall be held responsible to the presiding elder of said district."

   It appears that a difference of opinion prevailed among the bishops
   respecting the meaning of the last resolution in the report of the
   committee on the episcopacy, which said, that it was considered
   "inexpedient to require each of the bishop's to travel throughout the
   whole of their extensive charge, during the recess of the General
   Conference, and therefore recommend them to make such an apportionment
   of the work among themselves as shall best suit their own convenience,
   and in their judgment most effectually promote the general good." It
   appears that some of the bishops were in favor of districting the work
   for the four years, and this was also the opinion of some of the
   delegates, each one confining his labors to his particular charge until
   the next General Conference, and so understood the above item in the
   report, while others contended that this matter was left to be
   regulated as the bishops themselves might judge proper. To settle this
   question, the bishops submitted to the conference the following
   queries: --

   "The bishops, being desirous of understanding with clearness and
   certainty the resolution passed by the General Conference at its
   present session, in relation to the episcopal visitations of the annual
   conferences, in the course of the ensuing four years, beg the favor of
   a vote of the conference, without debate, in answer to the following
   question, viz. -- Was it the intention of the General Conference, by
   the resolution above alluded to, simply to relieve the bishops from the
   influences of the resolution passed at the last General Conference on
   the same subject, and to leave them now at liberty, on their joint and
   several responsibility, to make such arrangements among themselves, for
   the entire administration, and for the visitations of the annual
   conferences, as they shall judge most conducive to the general good;
   and without designing to give direction or advice whether it be or be
   not expedient for each of the bishops in the course of the four years
   to visit each of the annual conferences, should they themselves find it
   convenient and practicable, and judge it for the general good so to
   do?"

   And it is added in the journal, "The conference voted an answer to the
   above question in the affirmative."

   The following resolution in relation to preachers admitted into an
   annual conference, and not ordained at the time, was passed, and
   should, therefore, I think, be considered as a standing rule, though it
   was not incorporated in the Discipline: --

   "Provided always, that when a preacher shall have passed his
   examination, and been admitted into full connection, and elected to
   deacon's office, but fails of his ordination through the absence of the
   bishop, his eligibility to the office of an elder shall run from the
   time of his election to the office of a deacon."

   Having completed their work, read and improved of their journal, the
   conference was adjourned with singing and prayer, and the apostolic
   benediction, late on Monday evening, May 28th, 1832, to meet again in
   Cincinnati, May 1, 1836.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 12

    From the close of the General Conference of 1832 to the beginning of the
    General Conference of 1836

   We had now six bishops, and twenty-two annual conferences to be
   attended in the course of twelve months. But as the health of Bishop
   McKendree was fast declining, no dependence could be placed on him for
   effective service, and accordingly the General Conference, as we have
   seen, released him from that responsibility. The effective labor,
   therefore, devolved upon the remaining five bishops, who accordingly
   had each four conferences and a fraction to attend every year, besides
   the duty of ranging through their respective districts of labor -- as
   far and as frequently as practicable.

   The unanimity and energy with which the late General Conference entered
   into the missionary cause, gave it a new impulse, and inspired its
   friends with courage to persevere in their exertions to urge it
   forward.

   Liberia had, for several years, been selected by the managers of our
   Missionary Society as a suitable place for missionary enterprise, and
   much had been said and written in favor of sending laborers into that
   distant and destitute field. Hitherto, however, the bishops had not
   been able to select such a man for the work as they considered
   suitable. Some had offered and been rejected, and those who were
   considered best qualified, were unwilling to go. At the late General
   Conference the subject was pressed upon its attention with renewed
   zeal, and the bishops were then, particularly by a committee from the
   Young Men's Missionary Society of New York, who pledged money for its
   support., to use their influence to send one missionary or more to this
   inviting field of labor.

   That the reader may understand the high demands which this place had
   upon the exertions and benevolence of our Church, for a supply of its
   spiritual wants, the following particulars respecting the settlement,
   and present state and prospects of Liberia are given.

   Slavery in the United States may be considered the remote, and
   Christian philanthropy the proximate, cause of establishing the colony
   in Africa, now known as Liberia, under the auspices of the American
   Colonization Society. This society was formed in 1816, by some
   benevolent individuals, with a view to transport to Africa such free
   people of color from the United States as might consent to emigrate,
   and establish them as a colony, with all the rights and privileges of
   freemen. Though at first the society was viewed with suspicion by some,
   fearing it was designed chiefly to rivet the chains of slavery yet
   tighter on the slave, by removing the free colored people out of the
   land; yet as its character was gradually developed, the public
   confidence was acquired, and its friends and supporters were daily
   increased. The first experiment, however, to establish a colony on the
   coast of Africa proved unpropitious. The society was unfortunate in the
   selection of the site for this important colony. This was at the mouth
   of the Sherbro river, which separates the country of Sierra Leone from
   the Grain coast, on the western shores of Africa, latitude seven north,
   in the province of Guiana. The country is generally flat, exposed to
   the most intense heat from October to March, when violent and almost
   uninterrupted rains descend until the month of June, when the heat
   again commences and continues until July, and this is followed by rain
   until October. An atmosphere created by such physical causes must be
   extremely unhealthy to either Europeans or Americans, and so it proved
   in the present instance.

   In 1818, a number of emigrants sailed from the port of New York, in the
   ship Elizabeth, accompanied by that eminent philanthropist and
   Christian minister, the Rev. Mr. Bacon, whose commendable zeal in the
   cause of African colonization led him to embark in this hazardous
   undertaking, as the principal agent of the society. Many of these
   voluntary exiles from their country were truly pious, some of whom were
   members of our Church. The fate of this infant colony is well known.
   The place selected, as before said, for their residence proved
   insalubrious, and the poisonous malaria soon swept them from the face
   of the earth and among the dead was the pious and self sacrificing
   Bacon himself. This spread a temporary gloom over the prospects of this
   society, and furnished its enemies with renewed arguments against the
   enterprise. Opposition, however, awakened new energies in its behalf,
   and led to more vigorous measures to insure its success. New resources
   were called into existence, men and means were multiplied, and a more
   powerful pulsation was felt in the American community in favor of the
   sons and daughters of Africa.

   To avoid the results of the former experiment, another and a more
   salubrious site was selected for the colony in contemplation. In 1821
   the society purchased of the native chiefs a district of country on the
   western coast of Africa, two hundred and eighty miles in length, and
   from twenty to thirty miles in breadth, on the Grain coast, in about
   six degrees north latitude, including the cape of Montserado. A site
   for a town was laid out between the Mesurado and St. Paul's rivers,
   both of which empty into the Montserado bay, which opens into the
   Atlantic Ocean. Here a settlement was commenced under favorable
   circumstances, and the town was called, in honor of the popular chief
   magistrate who then occupied the presidential chair, Monrovia. These
   emigrants were accompanied and headed by the pious and lamented Ashman,
   who finally fell a victim to his zeal in striving to build up a colony
   in this place.

   The prosperity which attended this second attempt at African
   colonization, strengthened and fortified the hearts of its friends and
   patrons, at the same time that it disarmed its opponents of many of
   their arguments against the enterprise. Hence it was patronized by some
   of the most benevolent spirits of the age, by most of the
   ecclesiastical bodies in the Union, and by many of the state
   legislatures, and therefore seemed to promise a most happy issue. The
   colonists were generally happy and contented, and invited their
   brethren in America to come over and join them. Hence many masters
   liberated their slaves on condition of their emigrating to Liberia, and
   others, already free, accompanied them to this home of their fathers.

   Nor were the churches inattentive to these movements. Even foreigners
   were attracted by the spirit of Christian philanthropy to this place,
   and several Swiss missionaries had already laid their bones in the soil
   of Liberia, while attempting to convey to the inhabitants the glad
   tidings of salvation.

   As before said, our Missionary Society had not been an indifferent
   spectator to the spiritual wants of these people. They had gone from
   our shores; many of them were members of our Church, some local
   preachers of reputable standing; and they all sent a cry to us for
   help. The subject had been before the General Conference from time to
   time, and the board of managers had passed resolutions at several
   different times in favor of establishing a mission in Liberia. At
   length our hopes were realized by the offering of the Rev. Melville B.
   Cox, at the late General Conference, as a missionary to Africa, and his
   services were accepted by the bishops. After making the needful
   preparation, on the 6th of October, 1832, Mr. Cox set sail in the ship
   Jupiter, from Norfolk, Va., and after a long and tedious voyage, in
   which he stopped at St. Jago, the Cape of Good hope, and at Sierra
   Leone, he arrived in Liberia on the 8th of March, 1833, and was most
   cordially received by the acting governor, Mr. Williams, who was a
   member of our Church, and a local preacher of reputable character in
   the colony.

   The heart of brother Cox seemed to be set upon Liberia from the hour of
   his appointment, and he accordingly records his great joy at finding
   himself safely landed upon its shores, and was much delighted at the
   prospect before him. But alas! he scarcely had time to mature his plans
   for future usefulness, before the fatal malaria of the place infused
   its poison into his system, and he soon fell a victim to the ravages of
   the African fever.

   That he was eminently qualified for his station, so far as mental and
   spiritual attainments are concerned, is abundantly attested by his
   intimate friends, and by the monuments of his talents and piety which
   he has left behind. I say so far as mental and spiritual attainments
   are concerned, for his physical constitution had been much weakened by
   disease before he embarked on this mission, and he was, therefore, by
   no means able to withstand the shocks of an African climate.

   But though he thus fell a martyr to the work of introducing the gospel
   into that part of Africa, yet he laid the foundation for a missionary
   establishment in Liberia, on which his successors have reared a noble
   superstructure, to the glory of the God of missions. The letters which
   he transmitted to the managers, describing the state and prospects of
   the colony, were of such an encouraging character, that a new impulse
   was given to the holy cause in which he had embarked, and inspired its
   friends with renewed zeal to prosecute it with more vigorous exertions.
   And the inspiring language of Cox to a friend on the eve of his
   departure for Liberia, operated as a charm upon the hearts of all who
   were engaged in this work. Being asked what should be written upon his
   tombstone, should he die in Africa, he replied, Let thousands fall
   before Africa be given up!" This noble declaration when repeated to the
   congregation at time his funeral discourse was preached in the John
   Street church thrilled through every heart, and no doubt inspired
   others to enter the ranks which had been weakened by the death of Cox.

   Though his death occurred in 1833, it may be as well to say all that is
   necessary of brother Cox in this place. On his arrival in Liberia, he
   set himself immediately at work, of preparing for preaching the gospel
   to the colonists, and establishing a church according to the
   regulations of the Methodist discipline. He was much aided and cheered
   in his work by the Rev. Mr. Pinney, a Presbyterian minister, who had
   preceded him in the service of the American Colonization Society, as
   the governor of the colony. Finding missionary premises at Monrovia,
   prepared by the Swiss missionaries before mentioned, but which were now
   vacated by their death, Mr. Cox made a purchase of them for five
   hundred dollars, which was afterward sanctioned by the board of
   managers. The house he occupied both for domestic purposes and for
   holding meetings.

   It has been already remarked that there were in Liberia members of our
   Church, and others, who, though not of our communion, held to our
   doctrines, and dissented only on some points of Church polity. These
   were convened by Mr. Cox to when he presented his credentials, and he
   was nearly unanimously acknowledged in his proper character, and on the
   ninth day of April, 1833, the following articles of agreement were
   adopted as the basis of their future action: --

   "Whereas the Methodist Church in Liberia, West Africa, is yet in its
   infancy, poor and in need of aid, inexperienced and in need of counsel;
   and whereas, by our direction a correspondence was opened with the
   Young Men's Missionary Society of New York, and a missionary desired to
   be sent over to our help from the Methodist Episcopal Church in the
   United States of America, which we ever wish to acknowledge as our
   parent church; -- and whereas the said Methodist Episcopal Church has
   kindly sent to our aid a man whom they have adjudged to be fitted for
   the work, therefore: --

   Resolved,
    1. That we resign the superintendency of all our churches in Liberia
       to the care of the said missionary, and that we will do all in our
       power to aid him in promoting the work of God among ourselves, and
       in extending the interests of his mission among those around us.
    2. That we will adopt the "Articles of Religion," the "General Rules,"
       and the moral discipline in general of the Methodist Episcopal
       Church in the United States of America; and that we will follow its
       'spiritual" and "temporal economy," both to the letter and the
       spirit, as far as our changed circumstances will possibly allow us
       so to do.
    3. That, though we regret exceedingly that the said missionary has not
       come out properly authorized to ordain and set apart others to the
       office of deacons and elders in the church of God, we will
       nevertheless patiently wait until Providence shall bring us this
       great blessing, and that hereafter none of us will administer the
       sacraments unless we have been, or until we shall have been
       properly authorized so to do by the regular episcopacy of the
       parent Church in America.
    4. That we acknowledge the authority of the General Conference of the
       said Methodist Episcopal Church and that, considering our isolated
       situation, the wide distance between us and them, and the rapid
       accession that we confidently hope will attend the growth of our
       ministry here, we desire, as soon as may be, to be acknowledged by
       it as one of its annual conferences but that we will leave it
       entirely with the General Conference to say whether we shall be
       considered as a missionary station, as an annual conference, or as
       an independent Methodist Episcopal church in Africa.
    5. That in view of the hazard of life which always must attend a
       change of our climate for another -- of the mortality which has
       attended most of the white missionaries who have nobly come to our
       aid, and of the fact that we have not in our church a single
       regularly ordained colored elder in the colony, we earnestly
       request any one of our bishops, and they are hereby requested, to
       ordain to the offices of deacon and elder our brother, A. D.
       Williams; a man whom we judge to be well qualified for said
       offices, and who has been duly elected to these offices by our
       conference, and who, moreover, has been well acclimated and a long
       resident in the colony.
    6. That, in view of the great responsibility of the ministerial
       office, and of the loud and increasing calls for constant labor in
       the churches and among the pagans around us, we will, as soon and
       as fast as the wants of our families will justify it, leave the
       service of tables, and give ourselves wholly to the work of the
       ministry."

   The reasons for the third article. In the above agreement are, that
   some of the colored preachers in Liberia had taken upon themselves the
   right of administering the ordinances without having been regularly
   ordained for that work. Unwilling at first to relinquish the exercise
   of this right, and Mr. Cox refusing to acknowledge it, or to recognize
   them as regularly ordained ministers, there was danger at the interest
   of unhappy collision among the few who were desirous of worshipping God
   in the spirit, and of building up a pure church in Liberia. This
   breach, however, was thus prevented, as all, both preachers and people,
   set their names to the above articles of agreement. On beholding this
   happy result of their proceedings, Mr. Cox exclaimed, with pious
   gratitude, "The Lord has done it -- the Lord has done it -- Satan is
   disappointed, and the church of God triumphs."

   Having thus arranged matters to the mutual satisfaction of all
   concerned, Mr. Cox set himself to work in the most ardent manner for
   the enlargement of the field of labor in different parts of the colony.
   On the 9th of March, he held at Caldwell the first camp meeting ever
   attended on the continent of Africa; called the brethren together for
   mutual consultation and prayer; appointed days of fasting and
   thanksgiving, and planned several missions in other places contiguous
   to Monrovia and finally on the 6th of April he opened a sabbath school,
   consisting of seventy children.

   These active labors, however, were destined soon to be interrupted, for
   on the 12th of April he was seized with the African fever, which raged
   to such a degree that he was soon so prostrated, that for twelve days
   he was confined to his bed. And, although he so far recovered from this
   severe attack as to be able to walk around his room, and to record in
   his journal his uninterrupted peace with God, and his firm hope of
   eternal life, yet he soon suffered a relapse, which, from the violence
   of its character, cut off all hopes of recovery. He lingered in great
   pain and weakness, sometimes reviving, and then again sinking, until
   the 21st of July, 1833, when he sunk into the arms of death, in the
   full hope of immortality, aged thirty-three years.

   This sketch of his proceedings fully shows the predominant disposition
   of his mind, and evinces the most ardent spirit of devotion to the best
   of all causes. From the moment he had consecrated himself to this
   mission, his whole soul seemed to be absorbed in the contemplation of
   Africa, and he bent all his energies to make his mission prosperous.
   Aided as he was by the managers if the Missionary Society, and cheered
   on by the prayers and benedictions of the Church, he threw himself into
   the arms of divine Providence, determining to hazard all upon the altar
   of his God, whether for life or death, if he could only be the honored
   instrument of planting the gospel in the soil of Africa. At a
   missionary meeting held in the city of New York, on the eve of his
   departure, he remarked, in substance, that having embarked in this
   enterprise, the thought of treading upon the shores of Africa, even
   though it might be at the sacrifice of his life, was the most sweet and
   delightful of any thing else he could possibly contemplate. In this
   self-sacrificing spirit, he went -- he fought -- he sickened -- he
   died. And in his death, so peaceful and triumphant, he reared a
   monument in Monrovia which has apprised all future travelers to that
   sacred spot, that the founder of the Methodist missions in Western
   Africa "counted all things but loss, for the excellency of the
   knowledge of Jesus Christ," and for the rewards of a life devoted to so
   holy and glorious a cause.

   In Melville B. Cox were united a firmness of purpose, with a meekness
   of disposition and amiability of manners. which at once endeared him to
   his friends, and commanded the respect and confidence of all who knew
   him. Nor were his talents small. "The Sketches of Western Africa,"
   which he wrote, show the pen of a ready writer, and a mind accustomed
   to close and accurate observation. These, united with genuine, deep
   piety, and a disposition naturally amiable, and rendered much more mild
   and meek by the refining influence of divine grace, qualified him to be
   eminently useful in that department of labor which he had chosen for
   himself, and which was evidently designated to him by the Head of the
   church.

   While therefore his mortal remains repose upon the soil of Africa, his
   friends may comfort themselves with the reflection that his soul,
   purified by the fire of the Holy Spirit, is now reaping the ample
   reward of his labors and sacrifices in the paradise of God. And though
   he fell an early sacrifice to the cause of missions, his bones have but
   fattened the soil in which they were entombed, and animated many a
   weary missionary to diligence and perseverance in his work of faith and
   labor of love.

   Through the influence of the Rev. Mr. Spaulding, who succeeded brother
   Cox as a missionary to Africa, some generous individuals in Boston
   contributed a sum for the purpose of erecting a monument over his
   grave. This was transported to Monrovia, and there it stands, with the
   following inscription engraven on three sides, in the words prepared by
   Mr. Spaulding: --

   To the Memory of the Rev. MELVILLE B. COX, the first Missionary from
   the Methodist Episcopal Church in the United States to Liberia, Western
   Africa. He arrived in Monrovia on the 9th of March, 1833, where, having
   organized a branch of the same Church, he died in the triumphs of the
   Christian faith on the 21st of July of the same year, aged 33 years. He
   was a truly amiable man, a devout Christian, and an able and successful
   minister of Jesus Christ.

   Another important mission was established this year at Green Bay, about
   five hundred miles from the city of Detroit, in Brown county, in the
   state of Michigan. This spacious bay is on the west side of Lake
   Michigan, and the country was inhabited chiefly by Indians, though the
   United States had established here a military post, and an Indian
   agency. To this place a number of the converted Indians of the Oneida
   tribe had removed, and they were very desirous of having the gospel
   preached to them and to the neighboring tribes; the enterprise was also
   highly favored by the United States government, particularly by then
   agent, Mr. Schoolcraft, who resided there.

   Good impressions had been already made upon the minds of some of the
   Indians through the labors of John Sunday, who had been raised up from
   Heathenism to a preacher of righteousness during the great revival of
   religion among the aborigines of Upper Canada. He, and some of his
   brethren, had traveled into the country bordering on Lake Huron, had
   visited Machinaw, and the neighboring villages, and preached to their
   native brethren with great power and success, and a considerable number
   of these degraded people had been brought to the knowledge of the
   truth. The good work thus begun, had attracted the attention of many of
   the Indians in that region of country, and as they were accustomed to
   wander about from place to place in their hunting excursions, those who
   embraced the gospel went from tribe to tribe, and told their brethren
   "what great things the Lord had done for them," and they also believed
   unto eternal life. In this way the work of reformation spread among the
   several tribes; and though the Indians in the territory around Green
   Bay were separated some distance from the immediate scene of John
   Sunday's labors, yet, by the means already suggested, they had received
   the impressions of truth, and were in some measure prepared to welcome
   the missionary of the cross.

   The Rev. John Clark, of the New York conference, was appointed a
   missionary to this region of country. He was received with much
   affection and respect by Mr. Schoolcraft, by the inhabitants generally,
   and more especially by those converted natives who had removed from the
   Oneida mission in the western part of the state of New York. he
   therefore entered upon his work with a fair prospect of success, and
   laid his plans for establishing schools by erecting houses, and
   employing teachers, as well as fixing regular appointments for
   preaching. And though the mission has not resulted in the conversion of
   many of the natives, it is to be hoped that a foundation has been laid,
   which, by addressing gospel truth directly to the understanding and
   heart, may be productive of their salvation.

   Several other missions were commenced this year in the bounds of the
   Illinois conference, in the new settlements which were filling up with
   great rapidity. Among these were Rock Island, in Adams county, South
   Bend, Chicago, Fort Clark, Macoopin, and Fort Wayne. A mission was also
   established this year in the bounds of the Tennessee conference, in
   Madison and Limestone counties, for the special benefit of the people
   of color. All these new fields of labor were cultivated with success,
   however unpromising they might have been in the beginning.

   Somerset and Port Carbon, in the bounds of the Philadelphia conference,
   embracing destitute settlements which could not be supplied in the
   ordinary way, were blessed with missionary labor, and supported by the
   Philadelphia C. M. Society. An effort was also made to establish
   preaching at West Point, where the military school is located, in the
   state of New York, and which is quite remote from any circuit, by means
   of missionary labor. It did not, however, prove successful.

   The work in general throughout the bound of the several annual
   conferences, both on the older circuits and stations, and on the
   mission, was in a prosperous state, and the spirit of revival, and of
   liberality in support of our various institutions, was evidently rising
   and prevailing more and more.

   For the last two years, through the instrumentality of protracted
   meetings, there had been a powerful revival in the city of New York.
   This work commenced in the Allen Street church, and spread more or less
   in the different congregations in the city; but its most powerful
   effects were felt and seen in the church in Allen Street, where the
   meetings were continued for upward of forty days, and in the evenings
   for nearly three months; so that the "revival in Allen Street" became
   notorious all over the country, and the increase during the two past
   years was not less than one thousand four hundred. This extension of
   the work created the necessity of having an additional number of
   churches, which eventuated, in the course of a few years, in the
   erection of seven, making in the whole twelve, in two of which the
   slips were rented, and three of the old ones were rebuilt.

   Our preachers and people more generally began to feel the necessity of
   building larger and more commodious houses of worship, and of providing
   parsonages for the married preachers, as well as of contributing more
   liberally for the support of our infant colleges, missions, and Sunday
   schools. Indeed, such had been the hallowed an happy influence of these
   institutions thus far, that opposition to them was mainly disarmed of
   its power, and success spoke loudly in their behalf.

   Thirteen preachers had died during the last year, one hundred and
   forty-three were returned superannuated, and seventy-eight
   supernumerary; sixty-three had located, two had withdrawn, and three
   been expelled.

   Among those whose death are recorded, are two among the oldest
   preachers in the traveling ministry, namely, Lemuel Green, of the
   Philadelphia, and William Phoebus, of the New York conference.

   The former, Lemuel Green, was born in Maryland, about fourteen miles
   from the city of Baltimore, in the year 1751. When about twenty-five
   years of age, in the year 1776, while war was raging in our country, he
   was made a partaker of justification by faith in Jesus Christ, and
   immediately attached himself to a Methodist society. At that time the
   Methodists were but few, numbering only four thousand nine hundred and
   twenty-one, and there were but twenty-four preachers. At what time he
   commenced preaching we have no means of ascertaining; but in 1783 we
   find his name on the Minutes of conference, and he was stationed on the
   Yadkin circuit, and in 1785 we find him in the Allegheny circuit, at
   that time a new region of country, but rapidly filling up with
   inhabitants. he was, therefore, among the pioneers of Methodism in that
   new country, and he continued his labors in various places, sometimes
   filling the office of presiding elder, until 1800, when he located, and
   settled in the city of Philadelphia, and entered into mercantile
   business, by which means he acquired considerable wealth. While in this
   relation he continued to preach occasionally, generally every Sabbath,
   and by his example to aid the cause of religion. His heart and house
   were ever open to receive his brethren, and he always made them welcome
   to his hospitable table.

   In 1823 he was readmitted into the Philadelphia conference in the
   relation of a supernumerary, in which he continued until his death,
   which was peaceful and triumphant. His preaching is said to have been
   characterized by clearness and soundness, and attended with the
   energies of the holy Spirit. Had he continued exclusively devoted to
   the work of the ministry, instead of departing from it "to serve
   tables," he doubtless would have shone much brighter, and diffused his
   light much more extensively among his fellow-men. But having become the
   head of a family, and hence feeling the pressure so common to itinerant
   ministers in those days, arising from the scanty support afforded them,
   he thought it his duty to exchange a traveling for a located ministry;
   and though he acquired a competency for a season, yet, by adverse
   circumstances, he was, a few years before his death, reduced to
   poverty, so that his declining days were overcast with temporal
   affliction. But whether in prosperity or adversity, he maintained his
   integrity, and bowed submissively to the will of his heavenly Father,
   exemplifying the virtues of humility and patience in an eminent degree.

   This short record is made as a memento of that Christian friendship and
   fellowship which the writer enjoyed with his deceased brother, and in
   the hope of sharing with him in the blessedness of immortality and
   eternal life.

   William Phoebus was also a native of Maryland, and was born in Somerset
   county, in the month of August, 1754. Though the exact time and means
   of his conversion are unknown to us, yet it appears from the record
   that he was brought to the knowledge of the truth in the early days of
   Methodism, became a member of its society and in 1783 he was admitted
   on trial in the traveling ministry. His first appointment was on
   Frederick circuit and in 1784 he attended the Christmas conference,
   when the Church was organized under the superintendence of Coke and
   Asbury, and the direction of Wesley.

   After this he traveled in various places, sometimes contending with the
   hardships and difficulties of the new settlements in Green Briar, and
   other places no less rugged and destitute, where he accredited himself
   as a "good soldier of Jesus Christ," fighting the battles of the Lord,
   and conquering souls by the power of gospel truth. In this good work he
   continued until the year 1798, when he located, and entered upon the
   practice of physic, in the city of New York, preaching, in the mean
   time, generally every sabbath, in the pulpits, with good effect.

   He continued in this local sphere of action until 1806, when he was
   readmitted into the New York conference, and was stationed in the city
   of Albany. Thence he was removed in 1808 to Charleston South Carolina,
   and in 1811 was returned to the city of New York. From that time he
   continued to fill various stations until the year 1821, when he was
   returned a supernumerary, and in 1824 a superannuated preacher, in
   which relation he continued until his death, which occurred at his
   residence, in the city of New York, November 9, 1831.

   Though a man of great integrity of character, and strongly attached to
   the Church of his choice, and a lover of the itinerancy, he pleaded the
   necessity of the circumstances in which he was placed for his partial
   locations. Having entered into the marriage state about the year 1791,
   while traveling on Long Island, he soon found, as he thought, such
   difficulties besetting his path as an itinerant minister, as to justify
   him in restricting the sphere of his ministerial labors, that he might
   more effectually provide for himself and his own household." These
   difficulties arose out of a want of adequate means of support, the lack
   of parsonages to accommodate his family, and the being dissatisfied,
   whether with or without reason, as he frequently affirmed with the
   office of presiding elder. Though it is believed that most of those who
   took this step did it unadvisedly, yet it is manifest that they had
   many arguments in its justification, arising out of the causes already
   enumerated; and the Church by this neglect toward her servants,
   incurred a fearful responsibility from which, however, she has been for
   some time endeavoring to relieve herself by a more liberal course in
   this respect.

   Dr. Phoebus, for so he was called from his having been in the practice
   of physic, had acquired a large stock of useful information from his
   various studies and general intercourse with mankind. He lacked,
   however, that systematic arrangement of knowledge, which characterizes
   a mind that has been more early imbued with classical studies, and was
   therefore distinguished by certain eccentricities in his public
   administrations, conveying instruction more by detached sentences than
   by a chain of consecutive reasoning, or discoursing in a regular
   didactic manner. His style, however, was plain and perspicuous, his
   manner solemn and impressive, and he evinced on all occasions a mind
   familiar with the holy Scriptures, and deeply devoted to his work. He
   delighted much in the study of old authors, in examining the primitive
   records of the church, in analyzing the different modern systems of
   church order and government, and comparing them one with another, and
   with the primitive model. Having formed some acquaintance with the
   original languages in which the Scriptures of truth were written, he
   was extremely fond of deciphering the radical import of the sacred
   text, and thence sifting out the exact scope and design of the writer.

   His veneration for antiquity led him, we think, into the error of
   undervaluing the discoveries of modern days and of treating with too
   much neglect the improvements in the various departments of science and
   of theological knowledge. Hence a criticism by Clarke, or Benson, or
   even Wesley, whom he venerated as the greatest of modern divines, was
   not treated by Dr. Phoebus with half the deference as if it were made
   by some of the older divines, such as Poole, Henry, or Gill and the
   reasoning of a Reid or a Stewart would be rejected if contradicted by
   Locke. He never could pardon Dr. Adam Clarke for his ingenious
   speculations on the character of the serpent, or for his rejection of
   the eternal Sonship of Jesus Christ and the antipathy he imbibed
   against this learned, pious, and useful commentator, seemed to unfit
   him for a due appreciation of his merits in other respects, as one of
   the most profound expositors of God's sacred word. He, indeed, claimed
   the liberty of thinking for himself on all subjects, and perhaps in the
   exercise of this noble independence of mind, the birthright of every
   intelligent being, he sometimes manifested too little deference to
   others for his own benefit. Hence an air of dogmatism obtruded itself
   in the social circle which wounded the feelings of others, without
   exalting, in their estimation, the value of his own aphorisms and
   opinions.

   He was a great admirer of Baxter. From his voluminous and pious
   writings he had treasured up many sayings, with which he endeavored to
   fortify his own positions, whenever assailed by an opponent; while
   Wesley and Fletcher furnished him with argument, in time of need, to
   defend experimental, practical, and polemical divinity. Being thus
   furnished with knowledge from various sources, and having a fund of
   anecdote at command, which he had treasured up from various reading and
   extensive intercourse with mankind, his conversation was always
   instructive and lively, and his judgment on topics of importance was
   listened to with becoming deference, by his friends in the ministry, as
   well as by others who sought his instructions. And those who were
   intimate with him were generally careful how they provoked a
   controversy on those subjects with which he was familiar, lest they
   might be reduced to a mortifying defeat in entering the lists with one
   who well understood how to foil an adversary, or who could not easily
   brook a contradiction.

   He held in suitable contempt those artificial decorations with which
   some young men were wont to adorn themselves, and all those tricks of
   oratory by which they attempted to gain a momentary and popular
   applause. Being asked by a friend "how it was that some preachers who
   seemed to have not much weight of character, and but a slender title to
   the merits ascribed to them by their fond admirers, gained so much
   attention," he replied with an air of contempt not easily forgotten or
   imitated, "Pugh! If I were to pull off my old boot, and throw it up
   into the air, and cry, hurrah hurrah! I should soon collect around me a
   more numerous crowd than any man in the city."

   He had a deep insight into the human character, and hence was not
   easily imposed upon by the artful and designing. This enabled him to
   manage difficulties which occurred between brethren in the Church to
   great advantage, and to bring them to an amicable adjustment. In regard
   to all such things he was "the wise man who keepeth the matter till
   afterward," never uttering his opinions to the disparagement of either
   party before the subject of dispute had been fully investigated.

   It cannot be said that he was a popular preacher, in the common
   acceptation of that term, though he certainly commanded the respectful
   attention of the more weighty part of the community. A reason for his
   want of general popularity may be found rather in the dry and
   monotonous manner of his preaching than in the want of the depth and
   solidity of his matter. He often dealt, both in his private
   conversation and public addresses, in pointed apothegms [a terse saying
   or maxim] and short enigmas, not easily comprehended by the mass and
   often perplexing even those who were among the more thoughtful and
   deeply read.

   As an instance of his enigmatical manner of speaking, the following may
   be mentioned: -- At the conference of 1823, when addressing his
   brethren on the improbability of his being able to serve the Church
   much longer, he remarked, that the lease of his house had expired, and
   therefore he could not tell how soon he might be called to remove, as
   he was not certain that he could procure a renewal of his lease for any
   particular length of time; hence he could not pledge himself for any
   special service in the ministry."

   On hearing this, an aged minister, and one by no means deficient in
   mental sagacity, said to the writer of this, I thought the doctor owned
   the house in which he lives but it seems he was under a mistake, as he
   says that the time of his lease is run out." To this it was replied,
   "You do not understand him. He speaks in parables. He is now threescore
   years and ten, the common age God has allotted to man, and, therefore,
   cannot calculate on living much longer at most, and even that little
   time must be considered as an act of God's grace, over and above what
   he usually grants to men." This, indeed, was his meaning from his own
   subsequent explanation.

   These remarks apply to him more appropriately at an advanced stage of
   his ministry than in his younger days, as it is asserted by those who
   heard him at that period that he was ardent, vigorous and often very
   fluent in his addresses to the multitude, deep and searching in his
   appeals to the conscience. He was certainly successful in those days in
   enlarging the kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ.

   He always manifested the deepest reverence whenever the name of the
   Supreme Being was introduced in conversation. At all times, when he had
   occasion to mention the name of the Saviour of the world, he would do
   it by a gentle inclination of the head, and if covered, by lifting the
   hat, and coupling with it the qualifying term, adorable thus, "the
   adorable" Saviour, or, "The adorable" Jesus -- thereby acknowledging
   the divinity of his character, and his profound reverence for his
   supreme Godhead. Indeed, all his discourses were richly interlarded
   with the names, the offices, the atoning merits, and the interceding
   work of Jesus Christ making him, as he justly ought, the alpha and
   omega of all his sermons, and as the only foundation of man's hope, and
   medium of access and reconciliation to God. He thus very properly
   considered the "adorable" Jesus as "the light of the world," the divine
   "Sun" whose effulgence reflected light upon the types and shadows, the
   sacrifices and prophecies of the Old dispensation, and whose rays
   penetrated the gloom of moral darkness, and opened up to the sinner the
   only sure path to immortality and eternal life.

   Though this certainly was not a peculiarity of Dr. Phoebus, as every
   true minister of the gospel must make "Jesus Christ and him crucified,"
   the beginning and ending of his discourses, and the only medium of
   reconciliation to God, yet in the doctor it seemed ever to be his
   peculiar delight and his studied aim to hold up Christ most prominently
   before his hearers, in all the glories of his character, and in all the
   endearing relations he held to God and man as the REDEEMER OF THE
   WORLD.

   The position which he occupied sometimes exposed him to the shafts of
   enemies. His apparent eccentricities provoked the ridicule of some,
   while his good sense, varied knowledge, and equanimity of temper,
   enabled him to repel their assaults with good effect, and to bear the
   sneering scoffs of fools with exemplary patience. And though on some
   occasions he may have returned the repartee with an air of severity
   calculated to provoke the feeling of hostility, yet he knew well how to
   disarm an adversary by the gentler rebukes of love, and the
   blandishments of fraternal regards. In all these respects the fear and
   love of God were eminently exemplified, and the dignity of the
   Christian minister generally maintained.

   Dr. Phoebus lived to a good old age. After having served the Church as
   a minister for about forty-eight years, eight of which as a located
   preacher, he fell asleep in Jesus, in the seventy-eighth year of his
   age, in the midst of his friends, and in the full hope of eternal life.
   He retained his mental faculties to the last, and on his dying bed
   discoursed in an edifying manner upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and
   the prospect he had, through him, of everlasting life. Patience in
   suffering, and submission to the divine will, were remarkably
   exemplified in the midst of his bodily pains, while he gradually and
   peacefully sunk into the arms of death. A short time before he died, he
   quoted the words of St. James, "Let patience have its perfect work,
   that ye may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing," and commented upon
   them with much apparent pleasure, and with great clearness of
   apprehension, exhibiting, at the same time, a lively exposition of the
   meaning of those expressive words in his struggles with his last enemy.

   Having thus filled up the measure of his days, "as a ripe shock of
   corn," he was gathered into the garner of God, to enjoy the rewards of
   his labors and sufferings in the world above.

   After recording the death of those two aged veterans of the cross of
   Christ, we may be allowed to add that of a young minister of the
   sanctuary, who, though less distinguished for his long services in the
   church militant, was still more eminently characterized by the
   brilliancy of his talents, and his attainments in literature and
   science, and equally so in the depth of his piety. I allude to
   Nathaniel Porter, a member of the Philadelphia conference.

   He was a native of Worcester, Mass., and was born in the year 1800.
   When about nineteen years of age he was made a partaker of
   justification by faith in Jesus Christ, and became a member of our
   Church. The Wesleyan Seminary had just been established in the city of
   New York, and as one object of it was to give an education to pious
   young men whom we had reason to believe God had called to preach,
   brother Porter, soon after his conversion, entered as a student in this
   seminary, where he made rapid advancement in the knowledge of the Latin
   and Greek languages, and in mathematics, giving evidence, in the mean
   time, of his deep piety, and exercising his gifts occasionally in the
   pulpit, after having received license as a local preacher. In the
   spring of 1823 he was received on trial in the New York conference, and
   he soon gave satisfactory evidence of his call to the work of the
   ministry, and of his qualification for the faithful and successful
   discharge of its duties.

   But as our brethren of the Genesee conference had resolved upon
   establishing an academy at Cazenovia, at the urgent request of the
   trustees of that infant institution, brother Porter was transferred to
   that conference, and appointed principal of the Cazenovia Academy. He
   entered upon his duties with great ardor and diligence, and succeeded
   to the satisfaction of all concerned, rising very high in the
   estimation of the people as an accomplished teacher, as an able
   minister of the New Testament, and as a deeply pious man. Such,
   however, was the character of the duties he had to perform, and the
   assiduous manner in which he applied himself to his vocation, that at
   the end of two years he found his health declining, and was obliged,
   with much reluctance to himself and the friends of the academy, to
   resign his office, and seek to reinvigorate his constitution by a
   cessation from labor, and a residence in a milder climate. He
   accordingly spent some time in the city of Baltimore, where he
   measurably regained his health, so that in 1828 he was transferred to
   the New York conference, and was stationed in Poultney, in the state of
   Vermont. There his labors were highly appreciated and greatly blessed.
   This cold climate, however, not agreeing with his feeble constitution,
   he was, in 1829, removed to the Philadelphia conference, and stationed
   in Morristown, New Jersey. In this place there had been a remarkable
   revival of religion for the past year, and brother Porter entered upon
   his labors with all that ardor of soul for which he was eminently
   distinguished, and with an ability which the times peculiarly called
   for in the defense of Methodist doctrine and usages. Here he felt
   himself compelled, by the force of circumstances, to buckle on the
   armor of a polemic, for the peculiarities of Methodism were assailed
   with much ingenuity and force of argument by the Presbyterian minister
   of the place, the Rev. Mr. Barnes, who had espoused the New School
   divinity, and arrayed himself in this new armor with a view,
   apparently, to put down the Methodism which had made, and which was
   still making, such powerful inroads into his parish.

   With a view to sustain himself in this spiritual warfare, and to defend
   the doctrines, discipline, and usages which he believed to be
   Scripture, brother Porter wrote and published a pamphlet, in which he
   showed himself to be "a workman that needed not to be ashamed, rightly
   dividing the word of truth." Through the influence of his labors, this
   revival, which had commenced under Methodist preaching, the Rev. Mr.
   Atwood being stationed there at the time, was kept up, and the cause
   amply defended against its assailants, and he had the happiness of
   rejoicing over the conversion of souls, and the building up of
   believers "in their most holy faith."

   The next year he was stationed in Newark, New Jersey, where he closed
   his labors and life in the peaceful triumph of faith, and the firm hope
   of an eternal inheritance. His death indeed had long been anticipated
   by his friend, as he had been gradually wasting away with lingering
   consumption, whose insidious attacks, though fatal in the estimation of
   all who saw him, flattered him with the deceptive hope of regaining his
   health. But when at length he was compelled to resign his hope as
   delusive, he calmly submitted to the mandate of his rightful Sovereign,
   and looked forward with a believing eye to the issue of his struggles,
   as an entrance, through the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, into the
   everlasting kingdom of God.

   Thus lived and thus died, Nathaniel Porter, a young minister of eminent
   endowments, whose piety and talents gave promising indications, had he
   lived to a mature age, of future usefulness to the Church of his
   choice. But,

   Nipt by the wind's untimely blast, Parch'd by the sun's directer ray,
   The momentary glories waste, The short-lived beauties die away."

   So, indeed, died away the beauties, and faded the glories of our
   beloved brother ere he had attained that maturity of experience and
   usefulness in knowledge which might have exhibited him as a "master
   workman" in the "building of God." And in his death we are called upon
   to adore in solemn submission, the inscrutable ways of divine
   knowledge, in thus taking from his Church one of its most promising
   sons in his youthful days and in the midst of his usefulness, with high
   hopes of future eminence. But the wisdom of God shines not less
   conspicuously in its actings when the hopes of men are disappointed
   than it does in unfolding plans in conformity to their pious wishes and
   holy aspirations. Nor does the grace of God appear less powerful and
   energetic in ripening the early fruits of its creation, than in
   sustaining others for a series of years amid the toils, the sufferings,
   and useful pursuits of life.

   Brother Porter was certainly a young man of more than ordinary talents
   and attainments. Though his early education was not thorough, yet his
   attainments in literature and general knowledge were rapid and
   constantly improving, and the more meritorious because they were
   chiefly the fruits of his own industry, after he was brought to the
   knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus. Feeling it to be his duty to
   devote himself to the work of the ministry, and trembling under an
   apprehension that he might enter upon this work without due
   preparation, he applied himself with all his might to the acquirement
   of useful knowledge, that he might be able to read, compare, and judge
   for himself in the things pertaining to the kingdom of God. And the
   short time he remained a student in the Wesleyan Seminary, under the
   tuition of the Rev. John M. Smith, by an assiduous attention to his
   studies, he laid the foundation for his future usefulness, as a sound
   scholar, and as an able minister of the New Testament. The manner,
   also, with which he afterward pursued his studies, in the midst of the
   active duties of his stations, as principal of the Cazenovia Academy,
   and then as an itinerant minister, evinced the unquenchable thirst of
   his soul for the acquisition of knowledge, and the practicability of
   attaining it even while discharging other indispensable duties.

   With a mind thus stored with various sorts of knowledge, and a heart
   deeply imbued with the Spirit of Christ, brother Porter went forth into
   the vineyard of his Lord, thoroughly furnished unto every good work.
   Nor was he less distinguished for his meekness and humility than for
   his learning and science. This was manifest from the deference he had
   to his seniors in the ministry, from the trembling manner in which he
   arose to express his opinions and from the diffidence he manifested in
   the decision of his own mind yet he exemplified the perfect
   compatibility of uniting, in the same mind and heart, meekness and
   firmness, diffidence and decision; for no man was more determined in
   his purpose, or more persevering in his work, when convinced of truth
   and duty, than was Nathaniel Porter; nothing, indeed, could turn him
   aside from a straight forward course in the pursuit of good, when
   convinced of the right way and means to attain it. These commendable
   virtues shone out in his life, and exhibited him as a worthy by example
   for the imitation of those who may come after him.

   In conducting the controversy which his situation called him to manage,
   he exhibited at once great clearness of perception, acuteness of
   intellect, and comprehensiveness of argument, united with an ardent
   love of the truth, and a firmness of purpose in its defense. But in all
   his actions, whether in the pulpit, the use of his pen, or in his more
   private intercourse in society, the love of God and man appeared to be
   the predominant principle of his heart, and he breathed it out in
   accents of charity toward his fellow-men. If at any time there appeared
   a tartness in his expression, it was because he thought the honor of
   truth was insulted in a manner which fully justified the severity to
   which he reluctantly yielded. And though he exhibited evidences that he
   belonged to human beings, of whom it must be often said, "The spirit is
   willing, but the flesh is weak," yet he has left behind him no less
   convincing proofs of his unreserved devotion to the best of all causes,
   and of his preparedness to "enter into the joy of his Lord."

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 472,364; Last Year: 437,024;
   Increase: 35,340 -- Colored This Year: 73,817; Last Year: 71,589;
   Increase: 2,228 -- Indians This Year: 2,412; Last Year: 4,501;
   Decrease: 2,089 [4] -- Total This Year: 548,593; Last Year: 513,114 --
   Increase: 35,479 -- Preachers This Year: 2,200; Last Year: 2,010;
   Increase: 190.

  1833

   The work of God this year was generally very prosperous. The agitations
   which resulted from the radical controversy had generally ceased, both
   institutions had been successfully defended against their rude
   assailants, and hence all went forward with alacrity and delight in the
   discharge of their respective duties. In addition to the ordinary means
   used for the promotion of the cause of Christ, the "protracted
   meetings" contributed much, for they were now very generally adopted
   throughout our bounds; and the circuits and stations, particularly in
   the older parts of our work, were brought into more compact order, so
   that pastoral duties could be more conveniently performed. But that
   which contributed still more to enlarge our borders, more especially in
   places before unoccupied by our ministry, and in the frontier
   settlements, was the energetic action of the Missionary Society.

   A new mission was opened this year in the bounds of the Pittsburgh
   conference, called Braddock's Field, in consequence of its embracing a
   tract of country comprehending the place where Braddock suffered such a
   disastrous defeat from his own headstrong and imprudent valor, and the
   impetuous onset of his savage foes. A warfare of a different character
   was now commenced upon the people by the missionary of the cross, and
   so successfully was it prosecuted, that in 1834 not less than one
   hundred and fifty were returned as belonging to the Church, and the
   next year it was numbered with the regular circuits, supporting itself
   and contributing its quota for the support of others still more
   destitute.

   Within the bounds of the Mississippi conference several new places were
   occupied as missionary ground, and they were generally cultivated with
   encouraging success. The La Fourche mission, in the neighborhood of New
   Orleans, was undertaken chiefly for the benefit of the slave
   population, though the whites shared in the labors of the missionary.
   In 1834 there were returned on this circuit sixty-two members, eleven
   whites, and fifty-one colored.

   There was an extensive tract of country, thinly populated, among the
   bayous and swamps bordering upon the banks of the Mississippi river,
   for whose spiritual benefit a mission was this year established. Into
   this unhealthy climate, the missionary, desirous only to save as many
   souls as possible, entered in the name of the Lord, and succeeded in
   calling the attention of the people to the things of eternity, and in
   forming several flourishing classes.

   In the bounds of the Alabama conference the Taladega mission was
   commenced under favorable auspices, there being one hundred and
   fourteen members returned the first year, and the next two hundred and
   eighty-six. Noxabe, including a destitute population in the frontiers
   of Tuscaloosa district, was also brought under spiritual culture this
   year, with some degree of success.

   In the state of Maine the Mattanawcook and Houlton mission, embracing a
   new and destitute population, was successfully established there being
   returned not less than seventy souls in Church membership in 1834.

   The constant and rapid emigration to the west, as well as to the
   southwest rendered it indispensable, that the people might be supplied
   with the ordinances of religion, to enlarge the boundaries of our work
   in proportion to the increasing extent of our settlements. And the
   chief points of attraction in the west at this time were the states of
   Illinois and Michigan. Hence to supply them with the gospel of Jesus
   Christ, the Peoria, Fort Edwards, Henderson, and Blue river missions
   were established this year and by an inspection of the Minutes for the
   subsequent years, it will be found that all these places have yielded a
   rich harvest of souls as the reward of our labors; that they have not
   only supported their own institutions, but have contributed to send the
   gospel still further into the more remote settlements of the far west.

   The Upper Wabash, Kalamazoo, and La Porte missions, included within the
   bounds of the Indiana conference, and embracing the frontier
   settlements in the state of Indiana, had been, as before mentioned,
   also recently established, and the labor of those men of God to whom
   the oversight was committed were accompanied by the Spirit of God, as
   was manifested in the awakening and conversion of sinners. These, like
   the others before mentioned, have prospered abundantly, and are
   ministering to their own and the wants of others, regular circuits
   having been established, and churches erected to the honor and for the
   worship of Almighty God.

   The encouraging success which had attended the labors of our preachers
   among the slave and free black population of the south, stimulated our
   brethren in the southwest to imitate their example by opening missions
   for the special benefit of this class of people. Hence, at the last
   session of the Tennessee conference, the African mission, embracing the
   colored population of Nashville and its vicinity, was commenced; a
   regular four weeks' circuit was formed, and the good work was
   prosecuted with such success, that in 1834 there were reported eight
   hundred and nineteen Church members.

   It should be remarked that these domestic missions, as they have been
   called, to distinguish them from the aboriginal and foreign missions,
   differ in nothing from the ordinary new circuits, only in their
   receiving a support, whether in part or in whole, from the funds of the
   Missionary Society; for as soon as they become able to support
   themselves, they are struck from the list of missions, and supplied in
   the usual way. By this wise policy, we have been enabled continually
   and gradually to enlarge both our regular work and the number of
   missionary stations, with comparatively a small amount of money,
   considering the extent of our field of labor. And that this had a happy
   effect upon the missionary cause and religion generally, is manifest
   from the fact that this year the funds of the society had increased
   about seven thousand dollars over what they were last year, and that
   they have gone on increasing from that day to this.

   This year two other colleges were founded under the patronage of our
   Church, the one in Carlisle, and the other in Meadville, in the state
   of Pennsylvania. For want of patronage they had both gone down in the
   hands of those who had established them at first, and were conveyed
   gratuitously to our Church, on condition that an attempt should be made
   to resuscitate them and give them a permanent existence.

   The first, located in the town of Carlisle, Cumberland county, Pa.,
   called Dickinson College, was founded by the Presbyterians, and was
   incorporated by the state in 1783. Its location is pleasant and
   healthy, and its property, at the time of its transfer to the present
   board of trustees, including the lot, buildings and apparatus, was
   estimated to be worth about $40,000. The Baltimore and Philadelphia
   conferences took it under their patronage, appointed agents to collect
   funds for its endowment, and called the Rev. J P. Durbin, then editor
   of the Christian Advocate and Journal, to its presidency. Having
   procured about $45,000 in donations and subscriptions, the college was
   opened for students in the summer of 1834 under favorable
   circumstances. It has thus far continued to answer the expectations of
   its founders and patrons, not only by imparting sound learning to its
   pupils, but also in blessing its youth with the principles, experience,
   and practice of Christianity. It has a law and preparatory school
   attached to it, and is daily acquiring more and more the confidence of
   the public. It has a charter from the state, and an annuity of $1,000.

   The Allegheny College is located in Meadville, Crawford county, a very
   thriving village on French Creek, three hundred and thirty-four miles
   northwest of Philadelphia. This institution received its first charter
   from the state in 1815, but for want of adequate support, it was
   suffered to languish and die in the hands of its former patrons and
   supporters. With a view to its resuscitation, the entire premises were
   given to the Methodist Episcopal Church, and the Pittsburgh and Erie
   conferences took it under their patronage. The Rev. Dr. Ruter, who had
   retired from the presidency of Augusta College in Kentucky, was
   appointed the first president of this institution, and it went into
   operation this year under his direction, with promising hopes of
   success. It has continued, though sometimes embarrassed for want of
   more ample funds, to bless the youth intrusted to its care with its
   wholesome instructions, and many of them have dated their conversion to
   God in this seat of learning and religion. It is said that i ts library
   is by far the largest and best of any in the western country, and its
   buildings were ample and in excellent order. Though Dr. Ruter retired
   from its presidency in 1836, it has gone on prosperously under his
   successor, the Rev. H. J. Clark.

   Another academy had been established at Lima, Livingston county, N. Y.,
   under the patronge of the Genesee conference, and Dr. Samuel Luckey was
   appointed the principal, and professor of moral science. It has
   prospered abundantly from that day to this, and exerted a most salutary
   influence upon the youth intrusted to its care, and upon the Methodists
   of the Church generally, in that region of the country.

   Sixteen preachers had died in peace during the past year; seventy-two
   were located, eighty-nine returned supernumerary, one hundred and
   sixty-eight superarannuated, four expelled, and two had withdrawn.

   Much might be said in favor of all those whose deaths are recorded, as
   men of God, who had devoted themselves to his service, and ended their
   labors and days in the full assurance of hope. But as there was nothing
   special to distinguish them from others of a similar grade and
   character, it is thought not expedient to fill these pages with a mere
   repetition of what may be said of every good and evangelical minister.
   Of one, however, I feel it a duty to make honorable mention, because he
   was a young man possessed of some peculiar excellences and traits of
   character, worthy of remembering and imitating.

   John M. Smith was the son of an old member of the Church in the city of
   New York, long distinguished as one of the most devoted and active
   trustees, class leaders, and sabbath school superintendents, as well as
   an indefatigable laborer at our camp meetings. Those who live in the
   city of New York, or its vicinity, will readily recognize, in this
   allusion to the father of John M. Smith, Joseph Smith, recently gone to
   his rest in heaven, whose active labors for the good of the Church will
   long be remembered by his surviving brethren with gratitude and
   fraternal affection.

   His son John was born in the town of Brooklyn, N.Y., October 10, 1795,
   and in his fifteenth year was brought to the knowledge of the truth as
   it is in Jesus, while a student in Columbia College. Notwithstanding he
   was surrounded with all the gayeties of the city, and the daily
   temptations to vain amusements by his connection with thoughtless young
   men in the college, he maintained the purity of his Christian character
   through his college course, and graduated with honor to himself, and to
   the satisfaction of his friends. On leaving college he entered upon the
   study of physic, intending to devote himself to the practice of the
   healing art. Being, however, soon impressed that it was his duty to
   call sinners to repentance, he relinquished that design, and entered
   upon the duties of a traveling preacher in 1817, and was stationed on
   Jamaica circuit, on Long Island, as a helper to Dr. William Phoebus, an
   old and intimate friend of his father. He continued in the work of an
   itinerant preacher, in which he gave evidence of deep piety, chastened
   zeal, and useful talents, until in the month of September, 1820, he was
   elected by the New York conference principal of the Wesleyan Seminary,
   in the city of New York, in which he continued until that institution
   was removed to White Plains, of which he also took the oversight. From
   this he was transferred, in May, 1832, to the Wesleyan University, as
   professor of languages. He entered upon the duties of his professorship
   with great ardor of mind, and promising hopes of distinguished
   usefulness; but alas! his days were soon cut off, for he died on the
   27th day of the following December, aged thirty-seven years, two
   months, and seventeen days.

   Mr. Smith was a diligent and successful student. In addition to the
   prescribed course of studies in the college, and this was by no means
   superficial, and the progress be made in the science of medicine, he
   acquired the knowledge of the Hebrew, French, and Spanish languages,
   was a proficient in botany, and other useful branches of polite
   literature. He appeared, indeed, to possess a peculiar aptitude of mind
   to acquire the knowledge of languages, both ancient and modern, of the
   dead and the living, for he studied them thoroughly, and could read and
   translate them with ease and accuracy.

   As a preacher he was sound and systematical, arranging all his
   discourses with great accuracy and in regular order, this being
   characteristic of his mind. Habituated from his youth to pursuing all
   his studies in consecutive order, nothing was done slovenly or
   negligently, but every thing had its appropriate place, and was made to
   suit the place it was designed to occupy. When you heard him preach,
   you could hardly avoid the impression, that his sermons partook of the
   character of scientific arrangement, and were the result of much
   thought and previous preparation, and they were delivered in language
   plain, elegant, and energetic, without any superfluous ornament, or the
   artificial graces of oratory. In this respect he seems to have taken
   Wesley for a model, an exemplar worthy the imitation of all who wish
   simply to do good to their fellow-men, by preaching the gospel of the
   Son of God. Instead, therefore, of aping the foppery of those who seek
   to gain a temporary applause by the sparklings of wit, or the mere
   flights of oratory, he seemed to "study to show himself approved of
   God," and to penetrate the heart by the plain truths of the gospel,
   expressed in language which the learned could not condemn, and which
   the illiterate common-sense hearer might understand, feel, and
   appreciate. For style and manner, therefore, brother Smith may be held
   up as an example for those who aim, as all should, to be useful,
   instead of affecting to be great.

   His mind was enlightened with various sorts of knowledge, and his heart
   "seasoned with grace;" meek, modest, and diffident, he appeared in the
   circle of his friends to "take the lowest seat," at the same time that
   others considered him as "worthy of double honor." Here the grace of
   humility shone out in all his word and actions, and set off the other
   qualities of his mind to the greatest advantage.

   But with all these qualifications, he was not considered a great
   preacher. Many who were far inferior to him in learning and science,
   who understood no other language than their mother tongue, and who went
   out into the field of itinerancy from the common avocation of life, far
   outshone him as preachers of the gospel, and much exceeded him in
   winning souls to Christ. Though greatly beloved by all who knew him,
   for the urbanity of his manners, the meekness of his mind, the
   gentleness of his deportment, and highly esteemed by those who were
   acquainted with his attainments, with his worth of character as a man
   of learning and sound judgment, yet there were those, as before said,
   who could claim none of these literary advantages nor scientific
   attainments, who rose higher than he in popular favor, and were more
   eminently distinguished as able ministers of the New Testament.

   May not this be accounted for from the diversity of his studies and
   duties? While the others we have alluded to were men of one work, and
   hence gave their individual attention to their high and holy calling,
   Mr. Smith's mind was occupied with a great variety of subjects, more
   especially after he commenced the duties of a teacher, and could not
   therefore give himself "wholly to these things." Hence, while some
   shine out brilliantly on one subject, or rise high above their fellows
   in the exhibition of some peculiar excellence, we behold the graces
   clustering around him in the sweetest harmony, balancing one another,
   and each lending to the other the benefit of its strength and beauty.
   Instead, therefore, of overwhelming you suddenly with the effulgence of
   light on a favorite topic, he gently enlightened your mind with the
   radiations of truth, which fell upon your understanding and heart like
   the orient beams from the morning sun, and softly insinuated themselves
   into your affections, drawing them almost imperceptibly toward Jesus
   Christ, as the source and center of all blessedness. These things gave
   a polish and a finish to his character, uniting those graces which
   eminently fitted him to act with becoming dignity and usefulness in the
   various walks of life in which he was called to move and to exercise
   his gifts.

   He has left, therefore, a sweet odor behind him, which it is hoped will
   invite others to follow his track, and profit by the brightness of his
   example.

   By one of those providences which it is more easy to acknowledge and
   adore than it is to comprehend, his father was much reduced in the
   decline of life in his worldly circumstances, and the son was called to
   share in the father's misfortunes. This compelled him to observe that
   rigid economy which induced some to suspect him of an unjustifiable
   penuriousness in his temporal matters, not duly considering that
   economy, in such a case, may become as much a duty as it is to be
   liberal in our gifts under more favorable circumstances. This
   affliction, however, he bore with Christian fortitude and submission
   and while it became a means of lessening his pecuniary resources, it no
   doubt tended to wean his affections from terrestrial, and to fix them
   more permanently on celestial objects.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 519,196; Last Year: 472,364;
   Increase: 46,832 -- Colored This Year: 78,293; Last Year: 73,817;
   Increase: 4,476 -- Indians This Year: 2,247; Last Year: 2,412;
   Decrease: 165 -- Total This Year: 599,736; Last Year: 548,593 --
   Increase: 51,143 -- Preachers This Year: 2,400; Last Year: 2,200;
   Increase: 200. [5]

   The reader will perceive that, while the aggregate increase this year
   is unusually large, the revivals having been very general and powerful
   during the past year, there was a decrease of one hundred and sixty
   five among the aboriginal converts. This was owing chiefly to the
   continual agitations and troubles arising out of their removal west of
   the Mississippi. For, though our missionaries did all in their power to
   keep them together, and to preserve them from backsliding from God, and
   even went with the immigrating parties to their new abodes, yet the
   distractions introduced into their councils, together with the
   embarrassments and such things attendant upon their removal, created a
   most deleterious influence upon their religious character and
   enjoyments.

  1834

   We have heretofore noticed the improvements that were gradually making
   in building churches and parsonages in many parts of our work. The
   enlargement of our borders on every hand, and the increase of
   membership in the other circuits and stations, generally created an
   ability in our brethren and friends to supply the means to furnish
   accommodations for the people and their preachers and the necessity for
   these things, together with the urgent calls from the pulpit and the
   press, particularly in the columns of the Christian Advocate and
   Journal, excited them to activity in the discharge of these duties.
   Hence churches more commodious and central than heretofore were erected
   and erecting, parsonage homes built or rebuilt, and partially
   furnished; by which means the difficulties and expenses of removing
   were very much lessened, and the congregations became more numerous and
   permanent. It will be seen, therefore, that our increase this year and
   last was unusually large, and the missionary work went on most
   delightfully and prosperously, the whole being aided by protracted
   meetings, missionary anniversaries, and prayer meetings. These things,
   by diminishing the inducement to desist from traveling, lessened the
   number of locations.

   We have already noticed the commencement of the Liberian mission, its
   incipient prospects, and its disastrous results upon the life of the
   missionary, the Rev. Melville B. Cox. but, though he had thus fallen a
   martyr to his work upon that distant and desolate shore, others were
   found to fill his place. At the call of brother Cox, and of the
   Missionary Society the Rev. Mssrs. Rufus Spaulding and Samuel O.
   Wright, with their wives, and Miss Sophronia Farrington, a female
   teacher, volunteered their services for this hazardous enterprise, and
   were accordingly appointed by the proper authorities of the society in
   1833. While waiting for an opportunity to embark, the missionaries
   traveled as extensively as possible through different parts of the
   country, held missionary meetings, and thus contributed much to awaken
   and to diffuse the missionary spirit among the people. At length they
   set sail from Norfolk, Va., on the sixth day of November, 1833, and
   landed in Monrovia on the first day of January, 1834. They were
   received by the brethren with great cordiality, who hailed them welcome
   to their shores, bidding them "God speed" with all their hearts. They
   immediately entered upon their work with energy, and a most inviting
   prospect of success, the fields before them appearing already "ripe for
   the harvest." But alas! they, too, were destined soon to feel the
   corroding effects of an African climate; for amidst the plans of
   usefulness which they had in contemplation, and the active discharge of
   the arduous duties of their station, on the 9th of February brother
   Spaulding was seized violently with the fever, and the rest of the
   mission family were soon prostrated with the same disease, to some of
   whom it proved most fatal. On the first day of March, when so far
   recovered from his first attack as to be able to write, he says,
   "Sister Wright is dead! She left us on the morning of the fourth
   ultimo, and we have no doubt but that she is in heaven, while we are
   left to suffer yet longer on earth."

   Brother Wright soon followed his beloved wife to the eternal world. He
   survived the first attack, and was so far restored as to be able to
   walk about, read, and write, and probably through premature exertion
   brought on a relapse, which soon terminated fatally, and his mortal
   remains sleep beside those of his wife on the shore of Africa; the
   bones of Cox having first sanctified the soil.

   Nothing daunted, however, by these disasters with death thickening
   around them, and staring them in the face, the survivors persevered in
   their work believing that Africa would yet be redeemed. Miss Farrington
   especially, though much enfeebled by disease, manifested all the
   heroism of a martyr: having laid her soul upon the altar of her God,
   she seemed determined to brave every danger rather than relinquish the
   work in which she had engaged. But who can resist the course of events?
   Such were the corroding effects of the malarian fever, and so frequent
   and violent were its attacks, that brother Spaulding and his wife found
   themselves so much reduced, as to be unable to pursue their calling;
   and having but little prospect of regaining their health in Liberia,
   they resolved, as the only alternative left to their choice, to return
   to the United States. This they accordingly did, leaving, however,
   behind them evidences of their piety and zeal, and much to be hoped for
   as the result of future laborers. Under another date we shall endeavor
   to give a consecutive account of the progress of this mission, from the
   time it was committed to the oversight of brother Seys, the present
   superintendent of the mission.

   Another very important mission was commenced about this time. This was
   the Flat Head, or Oregon mission.

   That our readers may understand the character of this mission, it is
   necessary that they should know something of the situation and state of
   the country in which it was established.

   The vast territory now known as the Oregon, in which the present
   mission is located, was but little known before it was visited by Lewis
   and Clarke in the year 1805, under a commission from the United States
   government. With immense labor and no little privation, they penetrated
   the wilderness west of the Missouri river, crossed the Rocky Mountains,
   and descended the Columbia river to its mouth, or where it discharges
   itself into the Pacific ocean, in about the forty-sixth degree of north
   latitude. It is true that the mouth of this noble river had been
   entered by Captain Gray, of Boston, Mass., in the ship Columbus. Having
   been the first modern navigator who entered the river, hitherto
   distinguished as the Oregon, or River of the West, Capt. Gray called it
   the Columbia, after the name of the ship in which he entered its mouth.

   This extensive territory lies west of the Rocky mountains a high ridge
   stretching through the western part of North America, from the frozen
   ocean to Mexico, where it is connected with the Cordilleras, or Andes,
   which continue their course from the isthmus of Panama to the straits
   of Magellan. From its eastern boundaries on the Rocky mountains, the
   Oregon territory extends to the Pacific ocean west, and from the
   Russian and British dominions on the north to the northern line of
   Mexico and California, in about the forty-first degree of north
   latitude. This entire country is claimed by the United States, though
   its exact limits have not yet been ascertained and settled by the
   respective governments who claim jurisdiction over these western
   regions.

   The Hudson Bay Company, incorporated in 1670 for the purpose of
   carrying on the fur trade at Hudson's Bay, had extended their trading
   posts to the Columbia river, and had established a depot at Fort
   Vancouver, which is about one hundred miles from the mouth of the
   Columbia, a very fertile region of country. Here the governor of the
   company resides, the public store is located, and it is the center of
   trade in all that region of country. A large farm, belonging to the
   company, is under cultivation, and they have plenty of horses and
   cattle for domestic uses, and every thing is in a nourishing condition.
   This company is supposed to be extremely rich, having accumulated their
   property by the immense profits accruing from the fur trade which is
   carried on extensively with the Indians.

   The company, however, instead of improving the moral condition of the
   natives, have exerted an opposite influence, unless it may be
   indirectly, by opening the way for the introduction of the gospel, and
   the arts of civilized life. Many of the agents and clerks connected
   with this establishment have been in the habit of marrying, some of
   them but temporarily, with the native females, and at the termination
   of their service of leaving them and their children to all the miseries
   of a semi-barbarous state, and to the poverty and wretchedness
   consequent upon their want of industry, and their great aversion to
   agricultural pursuits. Hence, the vices of licentiousness, of
   intemperance, and domestic feuds and quarrels, superadded to their
   heathenish practices, had made their condition even worse than it was
   in their state of entire barbarism; while most of the half-breeds grow
   up in a state of heathen ignorance, irreligion, and immorality.

   In 1811 John Jacob Astor, Esq., of the city of New York, commenced a
   trading establishment near the mouth of the Columbia river, and the
   fort which was erected was called, in honor of its founder, Astoria.
   But the war between Great Britain and the United States commencing soon
   after, through the timidity or unfaithfulness of the agents employed by
   Mr. Astor, the entire establishment was sold for a trifling
   consideration to the Hudson Bay Company, and the project of the North
   American Fur Company was abandoned.

   With the exception of a few white men introduced into the country by
   these trading establishments, the whole territory was in the occupancy
   of the native tribes, who roamed at large, living upon the fruits of
   hunting and fishing, and the trade they carried on with the Hudson Bay
   Company, and some few American traders, who casually visited these
   regions either for the sake of gain, or from a roving disposition.
   These consisted of a great number of small, insulated tribes, who, in
   addition to their sufferings from poverty and idleness, were almost
   perpetually annoying each other by war and bloodshedding. The whole
   number of the Indians inhabiting this dreary region has been variously
   estimated, from sixty to one hundred and fifty thousand; probably the
   latter is nearest the truth.

   Those who live on the shore of the Pacific, and along the banks of the
   Columbia river know the great Falls, have become very much deteriorated
   in their physical and moral condition by their proximity to and
   intercourse with the trading establishment and other white people who
   have occasionally visited the country, more especially by the
   introduction of intoxicating liquors, and those evils growing out of a
   promiscuous intercourse of the sexes. These sad fruits of that state of
   civilization which is unaccompanied with the blessings of pure
   religion, fix a fearful responsibility upon the white population who
   have made inroads upon the Indian settlements, and they present one of
   the strongest barriers against the entrance of the gospel by the
   missionaries of Jesus Christ. We shall see, however, in the progress of
   this, as well as in the other aboriginal missions which have been
   conducted under the auspices of our Society, that this and other
   impediments have been overcome by the power of gospel truth, and even
   these heathen, debased and corrupted as they were, have been given to
   Christ for an inheritance. This seems, indeed to have been "the set
   time" for God to visit these outcasts of men with the renovating power
   his religion, by those means which, while they confound the wisdom of
   the wise, plainly show the wisdom of God, and the power of God.

   And although the consequences above mentioned followed the introduction
   of the trading establishments in Oregon, and the intermixture of white
   men among the natives, yet may we not trace the workings of benignant
   Providence in opening the way, that the voice of God's messengers might
   be heard in this wilderness, "crying, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
   make his paths straight, that he Himself may enter among them and make
   them a people for his glory! The perilous journey of McKenzie, from
   Montreal, and the subsequent one of Lewis and Clarke, though undertaken
   under the patronage of their respective governments for political
   purposes, for enlarging the boundaries of geographical knowledge, and
   the benefits of trade, were no doubt rendered subservient to God's
   designs of mercy toward these wandering sons of the forest. Even the
   "axe and the saw," in the hands of men, may be so used as to answer the
   ends of divine wisdom and love toward the human race.

   The truth of these remarks we may see exemplified in the events
   connected with the Oregon mission. These we shall now more particularly
   endeavor to present to the reader. Among the various tribes inhabiting
   this territory, one was distinguished by the name of "Flat Heads,"
   because they flattened their heads in the manner presented in the
   following likeness. [graphic not included with the electronic edition
   -- DVM]

   The circumstances which led to the establishment of the Oregon, first
   called the Flat Head, mission, were as follows: It seems that two of
   the Indians belonging to the Flat Head tribe had received an education
   at a school in the city of Montreal, then elder the charge of Roman
   Catholic priests. After the return of these youths to their tribe, they
   endeavored, according to the dim light they had, to instruct their
   heathen brethren in the truths of Christianity. This imperfect
   instruction, mixed, as it was, with the superstitious notions of the
   Roman Catholic Church, awakened a spirit of inquiry among the Indians,
   and a great desire to know something more respecting the God of the
   Christians. This desire was afterward much increased by the
   conversation of a white man who had penetrated into their country, and
   was present at one of those religious ceremonies which they
   scrupulously perform at stated times and in which they exhibit no
   little of their heathenish folly and ignorance of spiritual and divine
   things. This man, after attentively observing their manner of worship,
   told them that they were wrong in their notions of the Supreme Being
   and of their modes of conducting religious services, -- that there were
   a people who lived toward the "rising sun" who had the knowledge of the
   true God, which they received from a book he had given them.

   On receiving this information, they convened a council to deliberate
   upon the propriety of sending a deputation to the people of whom they
   had heard, for the purpose of obtaining a more accurate knowledge of
   these things. This consultation resulted in dispatching four of their
   principal men on a journey over the Rocky mountains, to make the
   needful inquiries. After traveling about three thousand miles, they
   arrived at St. Louis, and were introduced to General Clarke, the Indian
   agent, and the colleague of Lewis in his tour of observation over the
   Rocky mountains to the north Pacific. They immediately unfolded to him
   the object of their mission, and he gave them such information as he
   was able respecting the birth, works, character, doctrine, death, and
   resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, together with the objects he
   designed to accomplish by coming into the world, and other such
   Scriptural information as he thought might answer their inquiries.

   The general facts being communicated to the world through the Christian
   Advocate and Journal, in the number for March 1, 1833, accompanied with
   a facsimile of the head of a Flat Head Indian, a most lively sensation
   was produced in the Christian community, and a great interest excited
   in behalf of these wanderers of the desert, who had manifested such an
   eager desire to become acquainted with the God of the Christians as to
   travel through a wilderness of about three thousand miles for the sole
   purpose of realizing the object of their desire. And the interest
   became yet more intense when it was ascertained that two of these noble
   chiefs had fallen victims to death in St. Louis, in consequence, it was
   supposed, of the change of climate and mode of living to which they
   were subjected while they were upon the very threshold of obtaining the
   object of their pursuit.

   Soon after the announcement of these facts to the public, the
   excitement was raised still higher by a most touching appeal, made
   through the columns of the Advocate, by the late Dr. Fisk, whose soul
   ever burned intensely in the cause of missions, and who exerted himself
   in every possible way to help it forward. In this spirited appeal he
   inquired whether there were any young ministers who were willing to
   devote themselves to this work -- to brave the dangers of the
   wilderness -- to submit to the privations and sacrifices of a
   missionary among those Indians, and at the same time to reap the
   rewards of such an undertaking! This call was soon answered by two
   young men, brought up in Lower Canada, one of whom had been partially
   educated at the Wilbraham Academy, and they had both recently entered
   the traveling ministry. Having been inured to hardships from their
   youth, and now giving evidence of their piety and call to the Christian
   ministry, their services were accepted by the proper authorities of the
   Church, and Jason and Daniel Lee, uncle and nephew, were appointed
   missionaries for the Oregon territory, and they immediately set about
   preparing themselves for their journey across the Rocky mountains. As
   it was desirous to have a school teacher accompany them on the mission,
   Cyrus Shepard, a young man of deep piety and competent talents,
   volunteered his services, and was accepted by the board of managers.

   On the eve of the departure of Mr. Lee and his companions, it was
   ascertained that Captain Wythe, who had before visited that country on
   a trading expedition was about to return with a large company by the
   way of St. Louis, over land to the Columbia river. This seemed another
   providential indication in favor of the mission, and Mr. Lee, in
   conformity to the advice of the board of languages, embraced the
   earliest opportunity for an interview with Captain Wythe and it
   resulted in an arrangement to accompany him in his journey over the
   Rocky mountains; in the mean time sending his heavy baggage, consisting
   of some farming and domestic utensils, clothing, &c., by way of the
   Sandwich islands. [Hawaiian Islands -- DVM]

   The projection of this important mission had a most happy effect upon
   the missionary cause generally. As the entire funds of the society, up
   to this time, had not exceeded eighteen thousand dollars a year and as
   this mission must necessarily cost considerable, with a view to augment
   the pecuniary resources of the society, a loud and urgent call was
   made, through the columns of the Christian Advocate and Journal, on the
   friends of missions to "come up to the help of the Lord" in this
   emergency; and to assist in this benevolent work, the Messrs. Lees were
   instructed, while remaining in the civilized world, to travel as
   extensively as possible, hold missionary meetings, and take up
   collections; and the "Flat Head" mission, as it was then called, seemed
   to possess a charm, around which clustered the warm affections of all
   the friends of the missionary enterprise, and special donations for the
   "Flat Heads" were sent to the treasury with most cheering and
   delightful liberality and avidity. As an evidence of the beneficial
   result of these movements, the amount of available funds had risen, in
   1834, from $17,097.05, the sum raised in 1833, to $35,700.15. So true
   is it that those who aim at great things, if they do not fully realize
   their hopes, will yet accomplish much.

   Being thus cheered on by their friends, buoyed up by the prayers of God
   people, and animated by the prospect of speedily planting the standard
   of the cross for the first time in that distant and desolate part of
   our continent, the company left St. Louis, Missouri, on the 10th of
   April, on horse back intending to make their first stopping place for
   recruiting their stores, and taking their final leave of civilized
   society at Liberty, about three hundred miles from St. Louis. Here they
   were joined by Capt. Wythe and his company, whence they started for the
   wilderness about the first of May, 1834. In their company were two
   Indian youths, one of the Flat Head tribe, about thirteen years of age,
   and the other of the Pierced Nose Indians, about twenty-one years of
   age, both of whom were brought, at their request, from beyond the Rocky
   mountains, by Captain Wythe, in a former journey through their country.
   They had expressed a wish to be conducted to the abodes of white
   people, with a view to become instructed in their language and modes of
   living. While here they had made considerable progress in learning, and
   were now taken back by Captain Wythe to assist him as interpreters in
   his intercourse with the Indians.

   The distance from St. Louis, by the most direct route, was estimated to
   be about two thousand three hundred miles; but in consequence of the
   zig-zag course they were obliged to make, to shun steep mountains, and
   to cross livers, &c., it was not much short of three thousand miles,
   which, by traveling at the rate of twenty miles a day, would require
   one hundred and fifty days to reach the place of their destination.

   In this tedious journey, after exhausting the stock of provisions they
   were enabled to carry with them on packhorses, they were obliged to
   live chiefly on buffalo meat, which they procured by hunting the
   buffalo on the extensive prairies east of the Rocky mountains, in which
   fatiguing work the missionaries had to share equally with the rest of
   the company. They, however finally arrived in safety, and without any
   serious accident, though not without much suffering from hunger, and
   other incidents of traversing a wilderness infested with ferocious
   savages, beasts of prey, and in many places, particularly on the
   treeless plains, from the scorching beams of a summer sun, to the place
   of their destination. On arriving at the country of the Flat heads,
   about which so much had been said and written, they found them to be
   few in number, and these few of such a migratory character that they
   concluded it best to select some other place as the center of
   missionary operations. They therefore proceeded on to Fort Vancouver,
   the principal depot of the Hudson Bay Company, where they arrived in
   the month of September 1834. They were received and treated with great
   kindness and hospitality by Dr. McLaughlin, the company's agent, and
   governor of the colony. On sabbath, the 28th of September, brother
   Jason Lee preached the first sermon ever delivered in that part of the
   country, to a very attentive audience, composed of whites, half-breeds,
   and Indians, who listened with much apparent interest to the truths of
   the gospel.

   With a view to recruit their exhausted strength after such a toilsome
   journey, and to collect all the information they could respecting the
   state of the country, and particularly the most eligible situation for
   commencing the mission, they remained at Fort Vancouver and its
   vicinity for several weeks, and on the 14th of December brother Lee
   preached a second time, after which he baptized four adults and fifteen
   children. This was a solemn and deeply interesting season, being the
   first time this holy ordinance was ever administered in the Oregon
   territory, and therefore seemed like the opening of their commission as
   Christian missionaries in heathen lands.

   It was a high gratification to Mr. Lee and his worthy companions, to
   find themselves so hospitably entertained and respectfully treated by
   Dr. McLaughlin and his associates. And after collecting all the
   information they could from them and others respecting the state of the
   country, and particularly the aboriginal tribes by whom it was
   inhabited, they finally concluded it to be most advisable to locate the
   missionary establishment on the Williamette river, about twenty-five
   miles from its junction with the Columbia, and sixty from where the
   latter empties its waters into the Pacific ocean. Here they found a
   small settlement of white people, composed of French voyagers, who had
   been in the service of the Hudson Bay Company, and some Americans from
   the United States, who had wandered into that distant region. Many of
   them had married native females, and their children were growing up in
   heathenish ignorance and immorality, while the parents themselves were
   fast assimilating to a state of barbarism.

   Being entirely dependent upon their own exertion for accommodations and
   a livelihood, the missionaries were compelled to go to work with their
   own hands, and fell the trees of the forest, and prepare the ground for
   cultivation, and they soon succeeded in erecting a log house thirty-two
   by eighteen feet, one story and a half in height. They then proceeded
   to the cultivation of a farm, plowing, and sowing grain and such
   vegetables as they could procure for culinary purposes. On examination
   they found that they and selected a healthy place, and fertile soil,
   which promised abundantly to reward the labor of their hands. Having
   procured these temporary accommodations, they commenced a course of
   religious instructions among the people and as soon as practicable
   opened a school for the instruction of the youth, and all things seemed
   to promise a happy result.

   At the request of the head of department at Fort Vancouver, brother
   Shepard was left there in charge of a school which had been commenced
   two years before by a Mr. Ball, whose letters concerning the state of
   the country had been published and read with interest, but who had
   discontinued his services as a teacher of youth. The school consisted
   chiefly of half-breeds, collected from the vicinity of the fort, and
   the children of those belonging to the company. These, together with
   two Japanese youth to whom he imparted instruction in the evenings,
   soon made encouraging improvement in reading, writing, grammar and a
   few in geography and the first principles of mathematics. The labors of
   brother Shepard, therefore, were of the most useful character, and were
   highly appreciated by those concerned.

   The information contained in this sketch of the state of things in
   Oregon having been communicated to the Missionary Society, and the
   prospects arising from these incipient steps toward establishing the
   mission, and the crying wants of the many heathen in that wild region,
   induced the board of managers, and the bishops, to adopt measures to
   send, as speedily as possible, a reinforcement to the mission.
   Accordingly a physician and blacksmith, with their wives and children,
   a carpenter, a single man, and three female teachers, in all thirteen,
   including the children and domestics, were selected for the mission,
   and they sailed from Boston in the month of August, 1836, by the way of
   the Sandwich islands. With these was sent a quantity of household
   furniture, about twenty boxes of clothing of various sorts and sizes,
   valued at not less than two thousand dollars, and also agricultural,
   mechanical, and surgical instruments, as well as an ample supply of
   medicine.

   This family arrived in June at the Sandwich islands, where they were
   treated with great kindness and hospitality by the missionaries of the
   American Board, and after waiting some time for a passage, they set
   sail, and finally arrived at the mission house on the Williamette about
   the last of May, 1837, where they were hailed with great delight by
   those already on the spot. They had the unspeakable satisfaction of
   finding the two Lees in health, and pursuing their work with unexampled
   diligence, and great success. They had succeeded in procuring the
   confidence and affection of the natives, and the other settlers in the
   neighborhood; had a large farm under cultivation, and in addition to
   the log house before mentioned, erected a convenient home for preaching
   and for teaching the school, consisting of three rooms, well arranged,
   though but indifferently furnished. To the superintendence of this
   school, Mr. Shepard had been removed from Fort Vancouver, that he might
   more properly fulfill the object of his appointment as a missionary
   teacher among the heathen of Oregon. And before the arrival of the
   last-mentioned family, having no females attached to the mission, the
   brethren were compelled not only to raise their own provisions by
   cultivating the ground, but also to work for themselves, to make and
   mend their own clothes, and for the children committed to their care,
   as well as to be their own doctors and nurses. From a part of these
   onerous duties they were glad to be relieved by the arrival and timely
   services of the females attached to the last family, to one of whom,
   Miss Maria Ann Pittman, of the city of New York, a young lady of
   eminent piety and respectable attainments, Mr. Jason Lee was married
   soon after her arrival and she soon became no less useful to the
   mission generally than she was every way agreeable and happy in her
   conjugal relation, though she lived but a short time to adorn her
   profession, and to comfort her husband in his labors and sacrifices.

   Being convinced, from the representations made to the board by brother
   Lee, that more help was needed to carry on the mission with energy and
   success, measures were adopted to send two additional missionaries, and
   accordingly, on the 24th of January, 1837, the Rev. David Leslie, wife
   and three children, and the Rev. H. K. W. Perkins, accompanied by a
   pious young lady as a teacher, sailed from Boston, in the brig Peru,
   for the Sandwich islands, whence they found a passage in a short time
   to the mouth of the Columbia, where they arrived in safety after a
   voyage of about ten months. They immediately entered upon their work,
   and soon found the blessing of God upon their efforts.

   Before their arrival, however, brother Lee, with a view to furnish the
   farm with stock, had sent, in conjunction with others who had united in
   the enterprise, to California, and purchased about six hundred head of
   domestic cattle, oxen and cows, about five hundred of which they had
   driven through a wilderness of nearly six hundred miles, the rest
   having perished or strayed away on the journey. This, though attended
   with great labor and hardships, enabled them to stock the farm with
   milk cows for the use of the missionary family, and with oxen for
   plowing, carting, etc., and to provide for replenishing themselves with
   all necessary food hereafter, as well as to keep up such an ample stock
   of cattle as their means of sustaining them and their accumulating
   wants might warrant and require.

   But a more important achievement than even this had been effected. A
   project was formed by some individuals who had recently become
   domiciled in the settlement, to set up a distillery. Knowing that if
   this succeeded, all their efforts for the moral renovation and
   religious instruction of the people would be unavailing, Mr. Lee set
   himself to work to prevent the project from being carried into
   execution. He called the people together, and gave them an address on
   the evil effects of intemperance, and proposed the formation of a
   temperance society, under a pledge of total abstinence from all
   intoxicating liquors as a beverage, which the people almost unanimously
   signed and as the gentlemen concerned had already expended some money
   in preparing for their contemplated establishment, the same people who
   had joined the temperance society subscribed more than a sufficient
   amount to remunerate him for their pecuniary loss, at the same time
   presenting an earnest, but respectful remonstrance against their
   project, urging the mischief it must, if carried into operation, bring
   upon the infant settlement. This had the desired effect. The distillery
   was abandoned; and, greatly to their honor its projectors politely
   declined the proffered remuneration, and heartily united with the
   others in the cause of temperance.

   By this means a foundation was laid for the future well-being and
   prosperity of this little colony, and very soon God bore testimony to
   the zealous efforts of his servants, by pouring out his Spirit upon the
   people. The work commenced among the children in the school, and
   extended to the adults in the settlement, including some of the
   different nations, French, English, Americans, half-breeds, and
   Indians, who were grouped together in the village, molding their hearts
   into the image of Christ, and filling them with love to God and one
   another. Upward of forty were the subjects of this glorious work. This
   was most cheering to the missionaries, and as an evidence of their
   gratitude to God, they formed themselves into a missionary society and
   three hundred and forty-eight dollars were subscribed toward the
   support of the cause. This was a glorious beginning, being the
   "first-fruits" of a more plenteous harvest which they hoped yet to reap
   from among the heathen of that land of darkness and desolation.

   Several other new places were occupied this year, chiefly west of the
   Allegheny mountains, under the auspices of the Missionary Society.
   Smethport and Sinnamahoning, in the bounds of the Pittsburgh
   conference, were successfully cultivated; and King's River, in the
   Missouri conference. In the northwestern section of the Indiana
   conference, the Tippecanoe and Eel River, the Mississinewa and Maumee
   missions were commenced among the scattered settlements in that new and
   thriving country. Point Rock, in the bounds of the Tennessee
   conference, and Yalo Bush and Tallahatche missions, in the Mississippi
   conference, were commenced this year, and prosecuted with success.
   Several additional missions were also begun for the special benefit of
   the slaves in the neighborhood of New Orleans, and on the cotton
   plantations in the bounds of the Georgia and South Carolina
   conferences, which have proved highly beneficial to that class of our
   population.

   As the lands formerly occupied by the Cherokee Indians were filling up
   rapidly by white people, that they might not be allowed to grow into a
   community destitute of the gospel, four missions were established in
   this territory, and they returned the next year four hundred and seven
   members of the Church. Mattawoman mission, in the Baltimore conference,
   embraced a population not hitherto supplied in the regular way, and one
   hundred and fifty-four members were returned in 1835, one hundred and
   nine of whom were colored.

   The Philadelphia Conference Missionary Society, in addition to
   assisting largely in support of the aboriginal missions by the
   appropriation of its funds, exerted itself efficiently to supply
   destitute places within its own bounds, and Southwark, in the vicinity
   of Philadelphia, was added to those heretofore undertaken and supported
   by this society, and one hundred and fifty-eight members were returned
   the next year as the fruit of the labor bestowed upon it by the
   missionary.

   The successful manner in which these new fields of labor were
   cultivated, together with the prosperous state of the work generally,
   tended to enlarge the sphere of our usefulness, as well as to increase
   the number of preachers and members. It was evident, also, that the
   ministry was improving in learning and general knowledge, and
   consequently in usefulness and respectability, while the continuance of
   the revivals was sure indication that they were not retrograding in
   piety and zeal.

   Another college was founded this year in Lebanon, Illinois, under the
   patronage of the Illinois conference. It has gone on prosperously from
   that day to this, being under the presidency of a graduate of the
   Wesleyan University, a son of one of the old preachers of the New
   England conference, the Rev. Joseph A. Merrill. This institution is
   exerting an improving and hallowing influence on the present generation
   of that new and growing country, by calling into action their
   intellectual resources, and it promises stability and usefulness under
   the superintendence and patronage of its zealous friends and
   supporters.

   The academies already established, now amounting to about twenty, were
   in successful operation, and becoming prolific feeders to the higher
   seminaries of learning. These all, no doubt, were exerting a most
   salutary influence upon our community, and tended to create among our
   people generally a more just appreciation of sanctified learning, and
   useful, scientific improvement.

   A controversy had arisen in the course of this year respecting the
   collections which had been ordered by the General Conference, and were
   therefore recognized by the Discipline of the Church, which were made
   for specific purposes: such as for the support of the ministry, for
   missionary objects, etc. It seems, that some boards of trustees claimed
   the right, by virtue of their corporate powers, to take possession of
   all the moneys which might be collected in the churches, whether in the
   classes or otherwise, whether for specific objects or in the ordinary
   way, and appropriate them as they pleased. It was at once seen, that if
   this claim were yielded to the trustees, our discipline, providing for
   a board of stewards and their duties, would be rendered entirely
   nugatory, and the collections made for missionary or any other specific
   object, might be diverted from their original purposes, and applied as
   the common revenues of the Church.

   In opposition to this claim, it was pleaded, --
    1. That the constitution, both of the general and state governments,
       secured to religious denominations all their peculiar rights and
       privileges, both as it related to doctrine, rites, ceremonies, and
       practice, whether this practice relates to moral, religious, or
       pecuniary matters, provided only that they do not contravene any
       law of the state, or are not guilty of licentiousness. On this
       broad principle of constitutional right, it was contended that
       those peculiarities growing out of the Church economy were
       recognized by legal enactments, and we were therefore protected by
       the strong arm of law in the peaceable exercise of all our rights,
       privileges, and usages.
    2. Hence it followed, that no board of trustees could be authorized,
       even were such a disposition manifested by any state legislature,
       to trample upon the discipline of their own Church, to nullify a
       regulation or usage peculiar to their own denomination, if for no
       other reason than because it would be empowering trustees to defeat
       the object of their appointment, which was not to annihilate, but
       to support the institutions of their Church.
    3. Inasmuch, therefore, as our Discipline had provided for the
       appointment of stewards, to whom all Class money and quarterly
       collections were to be intrusted, as well as the alms of the Church
       for the benefit of the poor, the trustees had no right of control
       over such collections, because they were made for specific objects,
       pointed out and prescribed by the Discipline, namely, the support
       of the ministry and the poor.
    4. And as to moneys raised for missionary purposes, as it was always
       notified when collections or subscriptions were taken, that they
       were designed for that specific object, and the people gave
       accordingly, no board of trustees, nor any other person or persons
       had a right to appropriate them for any other than the objects for
       which they were given.
    5. The duties of trustees were specific and well defined, and they did
       not, in either the Discipline or the law of the state, include the
       receiving or appropriating the moneys so collected, but they
       related altogether to the temporalities of the Church, the taking
       care of the real and personal estate by means of money raised for
       that object alone, and so specified in the Discipline of their
       Church, and the law of the land.

   These plain, common-sense views, however did not satisfy those
   individuals who had set up the claim contended for; and to put the
   matter at rest, the questions were submitted to two eminent lawyers in
   the city of New York. Their opinion, given entirely independent of each
   other, the one not knowing that the other had been consulted, was as
   follows, which put an end to the controversy. Lawyer Jay, a son of the
   late eminent Governor Jay, after stating the questions at issue, and
   assigning sundry reasons for his opinions, decided as follows: --

   "The stewards, after paying the allowance to the preachers, send the
   surplus to the annual conference. Other collections and subscriptions
   are directed or authorized, but in all cases the money raised is
   subject to one or other of the conferences, and generally is to pass
   through the hands of the stewards.

   "Now, the moneys thus collected are not the property of the corporation
   in this city. The money, before it was contributed, certainly did not
   belong to that corporation, nor has it been given it.

   "The corporation are trustees only for the congregations who meet in
   their churches. The money has been given for the use of all the
   congregations under the jurisdiction of the conference.

   "The stewards who have received it are not officers of the corporation,
   which can neither appoint nor remove them, nor call them to account.
   But the trustees or corporation may, if they please, solicit
   subscriptions or make collections for the purpose of defraying their
   debt or the interest due upon it.

   "The money thus raised will be under their own exclusive management,
   and the clergy will have no control over it.

   "The only question, then, which requires further consideration, is,
   whether the corporation can prohibit the collections directed by the
   book of Discipline from being made in their churches? I think they
   cannot.

   "The act of 1784, under which the Methodist Episcopal Church in this
   city is incorporated, is its charter, which is not altered by the act
   of 1813. The eleventh section has been already explained. By the act of
   1784, the trustees are authorized to take possession of all property
   already belonging to the society; to purchase and acquire other
   property; to lease and improve land; to erect meeting houses, parsonage
   houses, school houses, and other buildings for the use of the society;
   to make rules for managing the temporal concerns of the congregation;
   to have the sole ordering of payments of the moneys belonging to the
   congregation; to appoint a clerk, treasurer, and collector; to regulate
   the renting of pews, and the fees for burials, and all other matters
   touching the temporal concerns of the congregation.

   "These temporal concerns relate only to the property vested in the
   corporation.

   "The right of the incorporated trustees to forbid the collections (if
   they possess it) must be derived from the right of property. Being the
   owners of the meeting houses it may be thought that they are authorized
   to control the use of them, and either to prohibit the preachers from
   entering them, or to admit them under such conditions as the trustees
   shall see fit to prescribe. And is would be true if they held the
   meeting houses for their personal benefit but they hold them, as their
   name imports, as trustees. What, then, is the nature of the trust?

   "In the first organization of the Methodist society by Mr. Wesley, he
   established it as a principle, that the preachers should be independent
   of the people; for that, as well as for other reasons, he permitted
   none of them to be stationary, or to derive their support from any
   contract made with particular congregations and he framed the system of
   collections to defray expenses. In this state Methodism was introduced
   into America, and at the time when the law of 1784 was passed, the
   ministers were appointed and paid as they are at present. The design of
   that act was, not to alter the doctrine, discipline, or worship of any
   denomination but, on the contrary, to sustain such doctrine,
   discipline, and worship, by enabling each congregation to manage its
   property through the agency of a corporation, instead of managing it as
   they had previously done, through the less convenient agency of private
   trustees.

   "By the act of 1784, the incorporated trustees have certain powers
   granted to them -- and these powers cannot be exercised by the
   conferences. But the trustees themselves must exercise them so as not
   to defeat the very end and purpose of their incorporation.

   "They cannot exclude from their meeting houses the preachers appointed
   in the manner prescribed by the constitution of their Church, nor
   impose upon them conditions inconsistent with it.

   "I do not mean to say that the conference have unlimited authority. But
   I am of opinion that, in directing their preachers to solicit from the
   liberality of their hearers the accustomed contributions, without which
   their system could not subsist, they have not exceeded their proper
   limits, and that the trustees ought not to resist them.

   "My answers to the questions proposed to me are as follows: --
    1. The religious societies incorporated under the law of 1784 are to
       be governed by that law, and not by the act of 1813.

   "The eleventh section has been already explained.
    1. The framers of the discipline of a church can make no rule contrary
       to the law of the land. Such a rule would be a dead letter. But I
       do not think that the rules in question concerning collections are
       of that nature.
    2. With respect to the third question, I understand that previous to
       the year 1820 the trustees acted as stewards, and received and paid
       over the money raised by collections, in the manner prescribed in
       the book of Discipline, and that in 1820 they consented that other
       stewards might be appointed, which was done accordingly. This act
       of the trustees would not abridge the legal rights of their
       successors, and therefore has no influence on my opinion in
       relation to the other questions.
    3. No law gives to the trustees the control of the collections made in
       the classes.

   "Revenue is the produce of taxes, &c., or the rents and profits of real
   or personal estate. In a loose sense, it may denote income of any kind.
   But in no sense can the voluntary contributions of individuals for the
   general benefit of all the clergy and institutions of a church be
   considered as the revenue of any particular congregation or
   corporation."

   To the two following questions he says, "I answer in the negative, for
   reasons already sufficiently explained." These are the questions: --
    1. Does the law make it obligatory on the trustees to take the
       voluntary contributions made in the congregations and classes which
       the Discipline assigns to the stewards for specific purposes?
    2. Can the trustees, by virtue of their corporate powers, compel the
       stewards to relinquish the voluntary contributions made in the
       congregations and classes in opposition to their official duties,
       as defined in the Discipline?"

   The other attorney, no less eminent than Mr. Jay for his sound legal
   knowledge, David B. Ogden, returned the following answers: --

   "My opinion has been requested by some of the members of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church in this city upon the following questions: --

   "First. Are religious societies incorporated under the law of 1784 to
   be governed by that law, or by the act subsequently passed in 1813? If
   by the former, what construction is to be put upon the eleventh section
   of that act?

   "Second. Have the framers of a discipline of a church the right to
   ordain provisions which are contrary to the laws of incorporation; and
   is the discipline in such a case a dead letter?

   "Third. Does the fact that the society submitted to the appointment of
   stewards to take charge of part of its funds in 1820, prevent the
   present board of trustees from assuming the duties enjoined upon them
   by statute?

   "Fourth. The funds collected in classes are devoted to the use of the
   ministry. Will the fourth section of the act of 1813, giving to the
   trustees the control of the temporal concerns and revenues of the
   Church, include such collections in the classes?

   "Fifth. Are voluntary contributions to be considered as revenues of a
   church? And have the trustees the power to prevent collections in
   churches under their charge by others, without their consent?

   "Sixth. Does the law make it obligatory on the trustees to take the
   voluntary contributions made in the congregations and classes which the
   discipline assigns to the stewards for specific purposes?

   "Seventh. Can the trustees, by virtue of their corporate powers, compel
   the stewards to relinquish the voluntary contributions made in the
   congregations in opposition to their official duties, as defined in the
   Discipline?

   "I give the answers to them, which are according to the best of my
   judgment.

   "First. As to the first question there can be no doubt. The powers of
   this religious society as a corporation being derived wholly under the
   act of 1784, the corporate powers are under that act, and to be looked
   for in it only.

   "The object of the incorporation is to enable the society to held
   property, and to hold it down to their successors, to sue and be sued,
   and in effect to give it a personal power, or the power of holding
   property, of suing and being sued as if it was an individual. The law
   never intended further to interfere with the society, but to leave its
   doctrine, its discipline, and form of worship untouched. These are
   considered as matters with which the law has nothing to do. This is
   what the legislature intended to declare by the eleventh section of the
   act.

   "Second. The framers of the discipline of a church certainly have no
   power to ordain provisions contrary to the law of the incorporation.
   They have no right to say that the property of the corporation shall
   not vest in the trustees under the law in whom the law has vested it,
   but shall vest in some other persons -- any such ordinance would be
   absolutely void.

   "Third. I think the trustees are bound to take charge of all the
   temporalities of the church, and if they have omitted to do so
   heretofore, they are bound to do it now.

   "Fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh questions --

   "The answer to these questions must depend upon one and the same
   principle.

   "The trustees are to possess and enjoy all the temporalities of the
   society, by which I understand all its real and personal property: I do
   not think money raised in the congregations for special and particular
   purposes as forming any part of the property of the Church or society.
   Suppose a collection made for the use of the Orphan Asylum, for
   instance; it seems to me that the money raised by such a contribution
   is the property of the Orphan Asylum, and not of the trustees of the
   religious society by which it is raised.

   "What collections are to be made in the churches, and for what purposes
   they may be made, seem to me to be matters with which trustees have
   nothing to do, but belong to those who manage what is called in these
   questions "the discipline" of the society. If moneys are raised by
   contribution, or in any other way, as part of the general property of
   the society, the trustees take them, as a matter of course, for the use
   of the society. But moneys raised for special purposes must be held for
   the use of those purposes by those in whose hands the discipline of the
   church chooses to place them. I do not think the act of incorporation
   intended or can in any way affect those moneys. This matter must depend
   upon those who manage and control the discipline of the Church."

   These decisions had a very happy influence upon the Church, as they
   tended to set the mooted question at rest, and to confine the
   litigating parties to their appropriate duties, without attempting any
   longer to interfere with each other.

   Sixty-eight preachers had located the last year, seventy-five were
   returned supernumerary, one hundred and sixty-seven superannuated, and
   thirty-four had died.

   Among those who exchanged the scenes of labor and employment in this
   world for the rest and pleasures of the next, were two of our eminent
   preachers, who had labored long with an unblemished reputation to build
   up the walls of our Zion.

   Barnabas McHenry, of the Kentucky conference, entered the traveling
   ministry in 1787, only three years after the organization of our
   Church. He will be long remembered in the west, the scene of his
   youthful labors, as the pious and diligent servant of the people, to
   many of whom he was indeed a messenger of peace and good will. And
   though he was compelled, in consequence of debility brought on by
   excessive labors and sufferings, to intermit his itinerant ministry
   from 1796 to 1819, yet he again entered the work, to which he devoted
   himself as an effective preacher only two years, when he was returned
   superannuated.

   It is said that he lived for several years in the enjoyment of "perfect
   love," giving evidence of it by the tempers of his mind, and the
   deportment of his life. To the doctrines and discipline of the Church
   of his choice he adhered with a firm and commendable tenacity, making
   them the subjects of his private meditation and public advocacy, and,
   withal, feeling their solemn and saving efficacy upon his mind and
   heart.

   He finally ended his days in peace, and, we trust, rests from his
   labors."

   Seely Bunn, of the Baltimore conference, was a native of Poughkeepsie,
   N. Y., and was born August 1, 1765. After the family settled in Henley
   county, Virginia, in the twenty-fourth year of his age, he was made a
   partaker of justifying grace, and in 1792 entered the field of
   itinerant preaching.

   In these early days of Methodism in this county, he partook of his
   quota of obloquy and privations, more especially when engaged in
   carrying the gospel into the new settlements, where accommodations were
   coarse and poor, and the work of a traveling preacher laborious and
   fatiguing. In traversing the wildernesses of the west, from one new
   settlement to another he was often exposed to savage cruelty, had
   frequently to sleep in the woods, exposed to the pelting storms, to
   hunger and cold, and all those privations incident to the state of the
   country, and to the life of a Methodist itinerant. But in the midst of
   all, his soul was borne up by the promises and presence of God, and by
   seeing the fruit of his labors in the awakening and conversion of
   sinners.

   In this good work he continued until 1814, when he was compelled, from
   debility, to take a superannuated relation. He bore his afflictions
   with exemplary patience, and finally departed in peace and triumph in
   the full prospect of entering into life eternal.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 553.134; Last Year: 519,196;
   Increase: 33,938 -- Colored This Year: 83,156; Last Year: 78,293;
   Increase: 4,863 -- Indians This Year: 2,494; Last Year: 2,247;
   Increase: 247 -- Total This Year: 638,784; Last Year: 599,736 --
   Increase: 39,048 -- Preachers This Year: 2,625; Last Year: 2,400;
   Increase: 225.

  1835

   The General Conference of 1832 recommended to the bishops and the
   managers of our Missionary Society South America as a proper field for
   missionary enterprise; and with a view to ascertain the state of things
   more accurately from personal observation, that some person should be
   sent to explore the accessible parts of the country, and report on the
   prospect and feasibility of establishing missions among the people in
   that populous region.

   It is well known that from the time of the conquest of this country by
   the Portuguese and Spaniards, the Roman Catholic religion had been
   established by law, and had, therefore, incorporated itself into all
   the civil institutions and regulation of the country nor was it less
   intolerant toward Protestants than it was cruel toward the natives at
   the time of its conquest over their liberties and independence. After,
   however, the liberation of the provinces from the dominion of Spain and
   Portugal, a more tolerant spirit was gradually diffusing itself through
   the community, and it was hoped that the time had arrived when, by the
   use of suitable means, an impression might be made, at least upon some
   minds, favorable to the propagation of a purer form of Christianity.

   South America, at this time, was divided into no less than nine
   distinct governments, the largest of which is the empire of Brazil,
   belonging to the Portuguese; while Guiana belonged to the English,
   Dutch, and French; and Patagotna is possessed by the aborigines; the
   remaining republics though wrested from the domination of the kingdom
   of Spain, were under Spanish rule and government. But though the
   several colonies had succeeded, after various struggles and sanguinary
   conflicts, to emancipate themselves from foreign dominion, they were
   yet in an unsettled state, and much harassed with intestine divisions
   and civil commotions, one party succeeding another often after bloody
   contests, in supreme power and influence. Since their disenthralment,
   however, from the potentates of Europe, many foreigners from Great
   Britain, Germany, France, and the United States, had settled in some of
   the principal cities, for the purposes of trade and commerce, and were
   supposed to be accessible to Protestant ministers; and being near
   neighbors to us, inhabiting a part of the American continent, and
   assimilating their civil institutions, as nearly as their circumstances
   would seem to allow to those of the United States, it was thought to be
   our duty to make an effort to establish our religious institutions in
   that country.

   To this were much encouraged soon after the adjournment of the last
   General Conference, by a letter received from a Christian gentleman, a
   member of our Church, who had resided for some time at Buenos Ayres, in
   which we were informed that he had succeeded in forming a small class,
   and that they were quite desirous of having a missionary of our
   denomination sent among them. His letter was submitted to the board of
   managers, and after due deliberation, it was most heartily recommended
   to the bishops to select some suitable person and send him on a
   missionary tour to South America, making Rio de Janeiro and Buenos
   Ayres the chief points of observation. Accordingly Bishop Andrew
   appointed the Rev. Fountain B. Pitts, of the Tennessee conference, for
   this important service, and after traveling through various parts of
   the country, holding missionary meetings and taking up collections, he
   set sail in the month of July, 1835, for his place of destination. He
   visited Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Ayres, Monte Video, and several other
   places, and was generally received, more particularly by the English
   and American residents, with great affection and respect, and the
   object of his mission was highly appreciated. Brother Pitts wrote that
   he found a few pious persons both in Rio do Janeiro and Buenos Ayres,
   to whom he preached with lively satisfaction, and was much encouraged
   with the prospect of establishing missions in both these cities, and
   probably also in other places of less note. These encouraging
   representations led to other measures of a mole important and permanent
   character, which with be noticed hereafter.

   The unusual peace and harmony prevailing in our ranks for the five
   years past, and the zeal exemplified by ministers and people for the
   promotion of the cause of God by the ordinary means of the gospel; as
   well as by institutions of learning, sabbath schools, and the
   distribution of Bibles and tracts building churches and parsonages
   seemed to awaken new energies, and to call forth the resources of the
   Church in a much more liberal manner than heretofore for the extension
   of the work on every hand, but more particularly by means of missionary
   labors. We did not know, indeed, how much could be done until the trial
   was made. And the several institutions above alluded to, instead of
   weakening one another, acted reciprocally upon each other; the one
   tending to excite the other to more vigorous action, and all uniting to
   produce the most salutary and happy results. This was seen in every
   department of our extended work, and the truth of the inspired
   declaration was exemplified by every days experience, "He that deviseth
   liberal things, by liberal things shall he stand," and "he that
   watereth shall be watered again."

   In the same proportion that we enlarged the sphere of our operations
   for the conversion of the world, did the means accumulate for carrying
   on our work; and by inducing all to contribute something, none were
   oppressed, while each one felt that he had an interest in the general
   came he was aiding to support. By means of these appliances the field
   of missionary labor especially, both in the new countries and the
   hitherto unoccupied places in the older settlements, were constantly
   supplied with gospel ordinances, the vigorous action of the heart of
   the Church sending out, through these main arteries, the life-blood to
   every limb and member of the spiritual body, and they in return, by a
   lively exercise of their functions, sending it back to the center, thus
   keeping up that constant circulation which is essentially the health
   and growth of the entire system.

   Hence, while a number of the places heretofore supported by the
   Missionary Society had so far prospered as to be taken among the
   regular circuits, new ones were this year established and prosecuted
   with vigor and success. Brazderville, High's River, and Smithport, in
   the bounds of the Pittsburgh conference, and Ripley, Port Washington,
   Thenton, Calhoun, Cold Water, and Saganaw, under the patronage of the
   Ohio conference, were all established this year, and the men of God who
   were sent to these places had the happiness to rejoice over sinners
   converted to God. Highland, Litchfield, Mount Pleasant, Barbersville,
   Manchester, and Pikesville, with in the bounds of the Kentucky
   conference embraced new tracts of country, hitherto unsupplied with the
   gospel of Jesus Christ, and they amply repaid the labor bestowed upon
   them.

   But the mot extensive field was spread out within the bound of the
   Illinois conference, as the streams of emigrants were flowing into that
   state about this time with great rapidity in addition to the missions
   before mentioned undertaken by the Rev. John Clark, the Menominee was
   opened for the benefit of a tribe of Indians in the neighborhood of
   Green Bay the Milwaukee and Rock River, both of which extended far into
   the northwestern boundaries of that conference, besides various others,
   as Alton, Flat Branch, Pecan, Quincy, Knoxville, Iowa, Peoria, Bureau,
   and Ottowa; all of which embraced newly settled territories, fast
   rising in strength and importance, and the most of them have so
   prospered, that they have been taken into the regular work, are
   supporting their own institutions, and contributing to aid others.

   But to carry the blessings of the gospel still further into the western
   regions, the Rev. Alfred Brunson was appointed to explore the country,
   and ascertain the feasibility of establishing missions among the Indian
   tribes on the upper waters of the Mississippi, and in the neighborhood
   of St. Peters, where the Sioux and Fox Indians have their habitations.
   Into these wild regions he penetrated, sometimes paddling his canoe
   over lakes and on the rivers, at other times wending his way through
   the trackless deserts or wide-spread prairies, on horseback, sleeping
   on the ground or in log cabins, with a view of conveying to these
   destitute people the blessings of salvation. He was generally received
   favorably by the few white people who had preceded him, by the agents
   of the government, and by the Indians, though he encountered some
   difficulties among the latter in consequence of wars which they were
   waging against each other. He finally settled at Prairie du Chien, at
   the confluence of the Wisconsin and Mississippi rivers, making it the
   center of missionary operations in the various settlements just then
   forming in that new country, and among the Indian tribes in the
   neighborhood. Several missions were begun, and though they have not
   been attended with which immediate fruit, when compared with our other
   Indian missions, yet it is hoped that a foundation has been thus laid
   for the future salvation of these people, and that the ordinances of
   religion, and religion itself, shall grow up with the growth of the
   settlements. As a means of accomplishing this very desirable object,
   schools were opened for the instruction of youth, and the good will of
   several chiefs was conciliated, who manifested a disposition to
   cooperate with the missionaries in striving to improve the condition of
   their people.

   In the bounds of the Holston conference a missionary district was
   formed called Newton, in which there were no less than eight missions,
   employing nine preachers, including an Indian interpreter by the name
   of J. Fields, who had been converted to the Christian faith, and was
   now engaged in promoting the cause among his brethren, the Cherokees,
   of whom seven hundred and fifty-two were members of the Church. These
   several missions, though spread over a thinly settled country, were
   greatly blessed of God, as they returned the next year six hundred and
   sixty-five Church members.

   The Henpeth mission, for the benefit of the colored population,
   Mountain, Holly Fork, and Centreville missions, established by the
   Tennessee conference, were commenced this year, and prosecuted with
   vigor and success.

   Several new missions were begun this year in the bounds of the
   Mississippi conference, mostly for the benefit of the colored people,
   and they have been a means of conferring invaluable blessings upon
   them. And in the new territories embraced in the Alabama conference, in
   addition to those heretofore mentioned, the Nanny Warrior, Canebrake,
   Clayton, Lime Creek, Uchee, and Will's Creek, were this year brought
   under spiritual culture by means of missionary labor, and they have
   yielded an abundant harvest as the reward of our exertions.

   The work was also enlarged in the same means, chiefly for the salvation
   of the slaves on the rice and cotton plantations, in the bounds of the
   Georgia and South Carolina conferences, much to the gratification of
   the masters, and to the joy of the slaves, who were brought to the
   knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus. Some others, in the older
   conferences, were undertaken, with various degrees of success and
   perhaps, in some instances, these domestic missions were increasing
   faster than our means would justify, though it as perfectly within the
   original scope and design of the Missionary Society to fill up, as far
   as practicable, every vacant place where the people were either too
   poor, or too indifferent to their spiritual interests, to provide for
   themselves. And that these exertions resulted highly favorable to the
   cause of Christ, has been abundantly manifested from the pleasing fact,
   that whole districts, and even annual conferences, have been raised up
   by means of these labors; and in the old and populous town of Worcester
   Mass., in which we had no standing until it was occupied as mission
   ground in the year 1831, we have now a society of upward of four
   hundred members and Worcester is the seat of the New England conference
   for 1841. Such results speak volumes in favor of the policy pursued by
   the Missionary Society. Indeed, nearly every new circuit was now formed
   under its auspices, by which the preacher was relieved from suffering,
   and the people from pecuniary burdens. Thus the more wealthy and older
   societies were blessed with the privilege of helping the poorer, and
   all in their men were contributing something for the general good.

   Thirty-four preachers had died during the past year, eighty-nine
   located, one hundred and nineteen were returned supernumerary, one
   hundred and fifty superannuated, six had been expelled and two had
   withdrawn.

   The Church was this year called to mourn over the death of two of her
   bishops, namely, William McKendree, the senior, and John Emory, the
   junior bishop, both of whom had filled their office with dignity and
   usefulness, the one for about twenty-seven years, and the other only
   about two years and six months.

   Of the former, Bishop McKendree, we have already spoken when giving an
   account of his election in 1808. Of his early history, therefore, and
   of his labors in the ministry up to the time he entered upon the duties
   of the episcopal office, it is needless to say any thing here and
   nothing more than a sketch of his character and of his subsequent
   labors will now be attempted, nor indeed could more be accomplished, as
   the public have not yet been gratified with any published account of
   his life and death, except what is contained in his funeral sermon by
   Bishop Soule.

   From the time of his entrance upon the arduous duties of his office
   until his death, he labored most assiduously to fulfill his high trust
   in such a manner as to preserve the unity, the purity, and integrity of
   the Church, and thereby to promote the cause of God among his
   fellow-men. In some of the first years of his labors as an itinerating
   superintendent of the Methodist Episcopal Church, he was in the habit
   of traveling from one end of the continent to the other on horseback,
   frequently exposed to the hardships and privations incident to the new
   countries, and to the fatigues of preaching every day, besides giving
   attention to the numerous calls arising out of his official relation to
   the Church. His perpetual labor so wore upon his constitution, which
   had indeed been severely tried by his great exertions in the western
   country previous to his election, that even at the end of four years,
   when he was deprived of the able counsel and services of Bishop Asbury,
   he was scarcely adequate to the duties of his station. He, however, so
   far recovered as to pursue his calling with his accustomed diligence
   and fervor until the General Conference of 1820, when he was released
   from the responsibility of discharging regularly the duties of a
   general superintendent; but only "so far as his health would prudently
   admit of it," he was affectionately requested to "exercise his
   episcopal functions and superintending care." In conformity with this
   request, he moved from one annual conference to another, as his
   strength would permit, presiding in the conferences occasionally,
   assisted in stationing the preachers, and gave his counsel on all
   matters pertaining to the welfare of the Church. Such, however, was the
   character of his complaints, a rheumatic affection, with frequent
   attacks of the asthma, attended with great prostration of strength,
   that he traveled often with great pain, passed sleepless nights and
   wearisome days; but be was borne up by a consciousness of the divine
   approbation, cheered by the affectionate greetings of his friends, and
   the prospect of that ample reward which awaited him in another world.

   After the close of the General Conference of 1824, his constitution
   seemed to rally, and he went forward in the discharge of his duties
   with greater ease and cheerfulness, traveling extensively, preaching
   often at the conferences, attending camp and Quarterly meetings, and
   everywhere exhibiting an example of patience, diligence, and fortitude
   to all who beheld his perseverance in the work assigned him. To those
   unacquainted with the peculiar work of an itinerating superintendent of
   the Methodist Episcopal Church, it might seem strange that a man
   enfeebled by disease, oppressed by an accumulation of cares and labors,
   should, nevertheless, constantly move about from one part of the
   continent to another, cross and recross the Allegheny mountains,
   descend the valleys of the eastern rivers, preach to a few hearers in
   log cabins, to thousands under the foliage of the trees at camp
   meetings, and then visit the populous cities and villages, and make the
   pulpits sound with the voice of mercy and glad tidings. Yet such was
   the mode of life of Bishop McKendree. Habit had, indeed, rendered it
   necessary to life and comfort. So much so, that the very thought of
   being confined to one place was painful, and whenever such an event
   seemed inevitable, you might see the strugglings of a soul anxious to
   avert what he considered a calamity.

   At the General Conference of 1828, which was held in Pittsburgh, Pa.,
   though unable to preside, he was present in some of its sittings, and
   assisted by his counsel in those difficult questions which were then
   agitated, and finally adjusted in the manner heretofore related. To a
   man ever active to the interests of the Church, and who had devoted
   more than forty years of his best energies to promote its welfare,
   sharing alike in its weal or woe, it must have been highly gratifying
   to behold the issue of that convulsive struggle which so long agitated
   our Zion, and which, at one time, threatened a dissolution of its
   union. Bishop McKendree lived to see the portentous storm, which had
   been gathering in the heavens for about eight years, pass off without
   material injury, and to beheld peace and harmony serenely pervade the
   horizon, illuminated as it was by the mild beams from the "Sun of
   righteousness" which now shone out with renewed splendor upon the
   spacious fields which were whitening for the harvest.

   From this time to the General Conference of 1832, which assembled that
   year in the city of Philadelphia, he continued his itinerary tours,
   often in the midst of such debility that he had to be assisted in and
   out of his carriage by his faithful traveling companion, through
   various parts of the continent, mostly in the south and west,
   enlivening the hearts of his friends by his cheerful submission to the
   divine will amidst the pains and afflictions of life, and receiving
   every favor showed him by the smile of gratitude and the embrace of
   paternal affection. At this conference he seemed to be tottering under
   the infirmities of age, and withering under the corroding influence of
   protracted disease, while his soul exerted its wonted energies in
   devising or approving of plans for the prosperity of the Church. Like a
   patriarch in the midst of his family, with his head silvered over by
   the frost of seventy-five winters and a countenance beaming with
   intelligence and good will, he delivered his valedictory remarks, which
   are remembered with lively emotions. Rising from his seat to take his
   departure from the conference the day before it adjourned he halted for
   a moment, leaning upon his staff; with faltering lips, but with eyes
   swimming in tears, he said, "My brethren and children, love one
   another. Let all things be done without strife or vainglory, and strive
   to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bonds of peace." He then spread
   forth his trembling hands, and lifting his eyes toward the heavens,
   pronounced with faltering and affectionate accents the apostolic
   benediction.

   This was his last interview with the delegates of the annual
   conferences in General Conference assembled, for a the next General
   Conference in 1836 his funeral sermon was preached by one of his
   surviving colleagues, Bishop Soule, who had attended him much for
   several of the last years of his life. He gives the following account
   of the last hours of Bishop McKendree: --

   "In the spring of 1834 he returned to Nashville, visited and preached
   in different places through the summer, and in the fall attended the
   Tennessee conference. He preached for the last time in the new church
   in Nashville, on Sabbath, the 23d of November, 1834. Here ended the
   pulpit labors of this venerable minister of the gospel of Jesus Christ,
   who had traveled and preached for almost half a century. Here that
   penetrating, yet pleasant voice, which had been heard with delight by
   listening thousands, in almost all the populous cities of these United
   States, and which had sounded forth the glad tidings of salvation in
   the cabins of the poor on the remote frontiers, or to numerous
   multitudes gathered together in the forests of the western territories,
   and which savage tribes had heard proclaiming to them the unsearchable
   riches of Christ, died away to be heard no more. Here he finished the
   ministration of the words of eternal life, and closed his public
   testimony for the truth of the revelation of God. In the latter part of
   December he removed from Nashville to his brother's, which was his last
   travel. From this time it was obvious that he was gradually sinking to
   the repose of the tomb. But he had one more conflict before the warfare
   was accomplished. From the time that Bishop McKendree became unable to
   perform the entire effective work of a general superintendent of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church, his mind was frequently deeply exercised
   with the apprehension that he might become unprofitable in the vineyard
   of his Lord. And it would seem as if he sometimes thought nothing was
   done, unless he could compass the whole work, as he had been accustomed
   to do in the days of his strength and vigor. He had for many years
   moved with the foremost in activity and perseverance, and the idea of
   following in the rear, and being left behind, was painful to him, and
   frequently drew tears from his eyes. And this sentiment often led him
   to exertions and labors far beyond his strength. This fear that he
   should outlive his usefulness in the Church of God, and become
   unprofitable to his fellow-creatures, was the last afflicting exercise
   of mind through which he passed; and from this he was speedily and
   happily delivered by the prayer of faith. He sunk patiently and sweetly
   into all his heavenly Fathers will, and waited in lively hope and
   abiding peace for the hour of his departure. The inward conflict had
   ceased; his confidence in God was unshaken; faith, strong and
   unwavering stretched across the Jordan of death, and surveyed the
   heavenly country. With such sentiments, and in such a peaceful and
   happy frame of mind, the dying McKendree proclaimed in his last hours,
   All is Well.' In this emphatical sentence he comprehended what St. Paul
   expressed in view of his departure from the world and exaltation to an
   eternal inheritance: For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of
   my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
   course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
   crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give
   me at that day.' The last connected sentences which ever dropped from
   the lips of this aged and devoted servant of God, who for almost half a
   century had made Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and today, and for
   ever, the end of his conversation, were All is well for time, or for
   eternity. I live by faith in the Son of God. For me to live is Christ;
   to die is gain.

   "Not a cloud doth arise to darken my skies, Or hide for a moment my
   Lord from my eyes." '

   In this calm and triumphant state of mind he continued till he sweetly
   'slept in Jesus,' at 5 o'clock, P. M., March 5th, 1835, in the
   seventy-eight year of his age."

   Thus closed the life and labors of this man of God. And though his
   death had been anticipated by his friends for some time, yet it seemed
   to create a vacancy in the Church not easily to be filled. He had gone
   in and out among us as a general superintendent for about twenty-seven
   years, as the immediate successor of the venerated Asbury, with whom he
   had labored as a colleague for about eight years, and from whose
   example of devotion and diligence he had learned the art of government,
   as well as the necessity of an active and vigilant oversight of the
   entire Church.

   A brief sketch of his character will close what we have to say
   respecting him. And,
    1. Bishop McKendree gave unequivocal evidence of deep piety, and of a
       mind and heart thoroughly imbued with gospel truth. This evidence
       is found in his entire life, in his words and actions.
    2. Having devoted the early days of his ministry chiefly to the new
       countries west of the Alleghenies, he had neither the time nor the
       means of acquiring much information from the study of books, though
       it was evident that he had stored his understanding with a variety
       of the most useful branches of knowledge for a minister of Jesus
       Christ. Had he been favored with the opportunity of a thorough
       education in his youth, and pursued the path of science in after
       years, he might have shone in the galaxy of literature and science;
       for he had an understanding sufficiently strong and acute to enable
       him to grapple with any subject within the range of the human
       intellect, and equal to the acquirement of any branch of human
       knowledge.

   This was evident to all who were intimate with him and could duly
   appreciate his worth His mind, indeed, was capable of the nicest
   distinctions, of the most critical researches, and of the widest
   expansion. How often did he, by a well-timed and pointed remark,
   unravel the sophistry of the sciolist and confound the pedantic
   pretender to wisdom and science! As if by a sudden inspiration of
   thought, he could make a ray of light flash upon a subject, and then
   render that clear and intelligible which before was obscure and
   perplexed. It was once remarked by a preacher of no mean attainments,
   who was on intimate terms with the bishop, that he had often felt
   himself mortified and chagrined, when, endeavoring to let him into the
   secret of something of importance, he found that the bishop was already
   in possession of the facts in the case, and could therefore give more
   information than the other could impart.

   His constant intercourse with all sorts of company in his various
   peregrinations through the country, enabled him to treasure up much
   useful knowledge from actual observation, and to suit himself, with an
   admirable adaptation, to the variety of classes and circumstances of
   the people with whom he came in contact. This also gave him a clear
   insight into the human character, and a comprehensive view of that
   character in all its variety of shades and distinctions. And though he
   did not "affect the gentleman" by an apish imitation of the fopperies
   of fashion, he was easy and polite in his manners, while he at all
   times maintained the dignity and gravity of the Christian minister. His
   perfect knowledge of the human character enabled him to wield with good
   effect the weapon of truth, and to apply it with admirable facility and
   exactness to the various cases which came up for consideration.

   3.  As a preacher of the gospel he was plain and pointed, and his
   sermons consisted chiefly in explaining and enforcing experimental and
   practical godliness. Though possessed of a mind extremely acute, which,
   had he been trained to metaphysical researches, would have been
   competent to the most abstruse subjects, yet he seldom entertained an
   audience with dry and monotonous disquisitions, but entered directly
   into the heart, laid open the secret springs of human action, and
   applied the truths of God's word to the understanding and conscience
   with powerful effect.

   There was, indeed, great variety in the character of his sermons.
   Though he seldom failed to "make out what he took in hand," yet he
   sometimes sunk rather below mediocrity, while at other times he soared,
   and expanded, and astonished you with irradiations of light, and with
   the power and eloquence with which he delivered the tremendous truths
   of God. On these occasions, assisted, as he most evidently was, by the
   Holy Spirit, he would carry you away with him on the eagle wings of
   truth, and then, having gently seated you on its firm foundation, melt
   you into the tenderest emotions by the sweet and gentle accents of
   affectionate entreaty, which poured from his ups in the most pathetic
   streams of gospel simplicity, truth, and love.

   It was a sermon of this character which he preached before the General
   Conference in 1808, a few days previous to his election to the
   episcopal office, and which, no doubt, contributed much to his
   elevation to the station, more especially by securing the votes of
   those who were not personally acquainted with him. To give as fair a
   representation of this sermon and its effects as I am able, I will
   simply relate what passed in my own mind on that occasion.

   It was the first General Conference I had ever attended, and the name
   of William McKendree was unknown to me, and I believe also to many
   other junior members of the conference. He was appointed to preach in
   the Light Street church on sabbath morning. The house was crowded with
   people in every part, above and below, eager to hear the stranger and
   among others most of the members of the General Conference were
   present, besides a number of colored people, who occupied a second
   gallery in the front end or the church. Bishop McKendree entered the
   pulpit at the hour for commencing the services, clothed in very coarse
   and homely garments, which he had worn in the woods of the west; and
   after singing, he kneeled in prayer. As was often the case with him
   when he commenced his prayer, he seemed to falter in his speech,
   clipping some of his words at the end, and hanging upon a syllable as
   if it were difficult for him to pronounce the word. I looked at him not
   without some feelings of distrust, thinking to myself, "I wonder what
   awkward backwoodsman they have put into the pulpit this morning, to
   disgrace us with his mawkish manners and uncouth phraseology." This
   feeling of distrust did not forsake me until some minutes after he had
   announced his text, which contained the following words: -- "For the
   hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black; astonishment
   hath taken hold on me. Is there no balm in Gilead; is there no
   physician there? Why, then, is not the health of the daughter of my
   people recovered?" Jer. viii, 21, 22.

   His introduction appeared tame, his sentences broken and disjointed,
   and his elocution very defective. He at length introduced his main
   subject, which was to show the spiritual disease of the Jewish church,
   and of the human family generally; and then he entered upon his second
   proposition, which was to analyze the feelings which such a state of
   things awakened in the souls of God's faithful ambassadors; but when he
   came to speak of the blessed effects, upon the heart, of the balm which
   God had provided for the "healing of the nations," he seemed to enter
   fully into the element in which his soul delighted to move and have its
   being, and he soon carried the whole congregation away with him into
   the regions of experimental religion.

   Remarking upon the objections which some would make to the expression
   of the feeling realized by a person fully restored to health by an
   application of the "sovereign balm for every wound," he referred to the
   shouts of applause so often heard upon our national jubilee, in
   commemoration of our emancipation from political thraldom, and then
   said, "How much more cause has an immortal soul to rejoice and give
   glory to God for its spiritual deliverance from the bondage of sin!"
   This was spoken with such an emphasis, with a soul overflowing with the
   most hallowed and exalted feelings, that it was like the sudden
   bursting of a cloud surcharged with water, and the congregation was
   instantly overwhelmed with a shower of divine grace from the upper
   world. At first sudden shrieks, as of persons in distress, were heard
   in different parts of the house; then shouts of praise, and in every
   direction sobs and groans, and eyes overflowing with tears, while many
   were prostrated upon the floor, or lay helpless upon the seats. A very
   large, athletic-looking preacher, who was sitting by my side, suddenly
   fell upon his seat as if pierced by a bullet; and I felt my heart
   melting under sensations which I could not well resist.

   After this sudden shower the clouds were disparted, and the Sun of
   righteousness shone out most serenely and delightfully, producing upon
   all present a consciousness of the divine approbation; and when the
   preacher descended from the pulpit, all were filled with admiration of
   his talents, and were ready to "magnify the grace of God in him," as a
   chosen messenger of good tidings to the lost, saying in their hearts,
   "This is the man whom God delights to honor." "This sermon," Bishop
   Asbury was heard to exclaim, "will make him a bishop."

   This was a mighty effort, without any effort at all -- for all seemed
   artless, simple, plain, and energetic, without any attempt at display
   or studied design to produce effect. An attempt, therefore, to imitate
   it would be a greater failure than has been my essay to describe it,
   and it would unquestionably very much lower the man's character who
   should hazard the attempt, unless when under the influence of
   corresponding feelings and circumstances.

   It has been already remarked, that sometimes he fell below himself,
   when his mind appeared to be barren and unfruitful. Though this was the
   case, yet he always exhibited the powers of a "master workman," even
   when these powers seemed to be cramped apparently for want of some
   internal energy to put them in vigorous motion, and make them play with
   ease and effect. But what added much to the force of the truths which
   he uttered, was his commanding appearance, the gravity of his demeanor,
   the sprightliness of his manner, the fire which shot from an eye which
   bespoke kindness and intelligence, and the natural gracefulness of his
   action in the pulpit. His voice was clear and musical, and the words
   which dropped from his lips fell upon the ear with delight, producing a
   harmony between the outward voice and the inward sensation.

   His rhetoric was faulty. Either from an impediment in his speech, or
   from a habit induced from early usage, as before hinted, he would
   sometimes hang upon an unaccented syllable, as in the use of the word
   continually, on the penultima he would rest thus, al -- ly, as if
   unable to add the final syllable to the word. At other times he would
   clip a word in the middle or end, and leave it half enounced probably
   from some imperfection in the organs of speech. These however, are
   little things, like black specks in a diamond, which set off its
   beauties by contrast and were lost sight of whenever he so entered into
   his subject as he generally did, as to make you forget every thing but
   the truth he uttered, and the God he proclaimed.

   There was also, at times, the appearance of affectation in his manner,
   and the modulation of his voice, which detracted, so far as it was
   apparent, from the reverence one wishes to feel for an ambassador of
   the Most High. Those, however, who may have observed this defect, --
   and it is certainly a great defect wherever it is discovered, -- may
   have misjudged and taken that for art which arose mostly from the
   variety of emotions produced by the ebbings and flowings of a full
   heart, and the several aspects of the subjects occupying the speakers
   mind and tongue.

   But whatever defects the eye of candid criticism might detect in Bishop
   McKendree as a public speaker, or as a sermonizer, judging from the
   rules of strict propriety, take him all in all as a preacher of
   righteousness, sent of God to instruct mankind in the pure and sublime
   doctrines of the gospel, he was a star of the first magnitude, and as
   such he diffused the hallowing and mellowing light of divine truth all
   around him wherever he went, and whenever he preached. In the west
   especially, whence he returned surrounded with a halo of glory which
   had been gathering around his character for several years, in the midst
   of the shakings and tremblings produced by the camp and other meetings,
   thousands could say that his preaching was not with the enticing words
   of man's wisdom, "but in power, and in much assurance, and in the Holy
   Ghost." Nor were his labors in the pulpit unappreciated in the Atlantic
   states, after he passed through them in the character of a general
   superintendent, and had an opportunity to show himself to his brethren
   "as a workman that needed not to be ashamed." His zeal rose with the
   dignity of his subject, and his mind expanded as he ranged through the
   spacious and prolific field of theological truth, while he chained and
   charmed his hearers with the melody of his voice, and penetrated their
   hearts by the energy with which he spoke in the name of God, and the
   directness of his appeals to the understanding and conscience. Such was
   Bishop McKendree in the pulpit.

   4.  He was an ardent friend and active promoter of all the institutions
   of the Church. When the Missionary Society was formed, he entered
   immediately into its spirit and design, gave it his hearty support, and
   defended its objects both by word of mouth and by his pen, as well as
   by liberal contributions. And after our aboriginal missions were begun
   with so much success, he visited them personally, preached to the
   natives, and held interviews with the chiefs and counselors with a view
   to obviate difficulties, and promote their welfare in every way within
   his power.

   5.  Let us now view him as a ruler in the Church. As has been already
   seen, he constantly set an example to his brethren in the ministry of
   unreserved devotion to the cause in which he was engaged, and of
   indefatigable labor, so long as his strength would sustain him, in the
   pursuit of good. This enabled him to silence the clamors of such as
   might be tempted to believe that in the exercise of his executive
   powers as the president of a conference, he was guilty of laying
   burdens upon others which he was unwilling to bear himself; and the
   writer of this article had frequent opportunities, during the five
   years in which he held the office of presiding elder under Bishop
   McKendree's administration, as well as at other times, to watch his
   proceedings, and though sometimes so placed as to have strong
   temptations to find just cause of censure, yet truth compels me to say,
   that I believe he was always actuated by the purest motives, and an
   enlightened desire to act impartially in all cases which came before
   him for decision. Whatever partialities he might feel for one in
   preference to another, arising out of personal friendship or otherwise,
   there is good reason to believe that he never willingly allowed these
   things to bias his judgment in the execution of his trust, or in the
   distribution of the preachers to their several stations and tasks. And
   who that understands any thing of the complicated machinery of
   Methodism but must know the extreme delicacy and perplexing difficulty
   of fixing so many men, some old and infirm, some young and
   inexperienced, others of mature age, judgment, knowledge, and
   influence, in their several stations, so as to meet, as nearly and
   justly as may be, the claims of all, and not disappoint the
   expectations of any, either among preachers or people! Such a man must
   be more than mortal. And hence the assiduity with which a conscientious
   bishop must needs apply himself to this difficult task, even to satisfy
   the dictates of his own judgment.

   During some periods of his administration, Bishop McKendree had to
   encounter no small amount of prejudice, -- I trust honestly engendered
   -- in arising out of the presiding elder question, as he was strongly
   opposed to any innovation in this respect. On this account it was
   thought by some that he was actuated by a love of power, and that he
   sought to sustain himself in his position under the promptings of
   unjustifiable ambition. There was created for a time some uneasiness in
   my own breast, and dissatisfaction in the breasts of those who opposed
   him, which subjected his administration to a severe test, more
   especially in some of the northern conferences. Time, however, and more
   mature reflection, have softened whatever of asperities may have arisen
   out of these conflicting opinions, no doubt honestly entertained on
   both sides, and removed whatever erroneous views may have been imbibed
   regarding either the motives or conduct of Bishop McKendree. Indeed,
   even in the midst of the lengthened and sometimes wire-drawn
   discussions on the subject in controversy, most of those who stood
   opposed to the bishop's theory, whenever they spoke or wrote of him,
   such a strong hold had he upon their affections and veneration, that
   they called him the beloved, or the venerated bishop, for indeed he was
   affectionately loved and truly venerated by all who knew him, and by
   those most who knew him best. And there is little reason now to
   question that the present order of things is best adapted to preserve
   inviolate the unity, usefulness, and energy of the system, however
   heavily it may press upon either the episcopacy or the itinerancy to
   sustain and keep it in harmonious action.

   As a general superintendent, therefore, Bishop McKendree was wise and
   discreet, pure and energetic, infusing into the general system of the
   itinerancy life and activity, and setting such an example to all, both
   preachers and people, as to acquire and maintain their affection and
   confidence.

   6.  Viewed as a man of God, he had many excellences and but few
   defects. He was naturally, as all men of genius are, of a warm
   temperament, his passions were easily moved, and he sometimes
   manifested a severity in his disposition and expressions which
   detracted from the general amiableness and dignity of his character,
   and sometimes wounded the feelings of his friends. Yet with these
   strong feelings to grapple with, self-knowledge was so deep, and grace
   predominated so powerfully, that he generally possessed his soul in
   patience, and even in the midst of conflicting sentiments and
   arguments, he had that perfect command of himself, or control over his
   feelings, that he seldom betrayed any thing inconsistent with the
   Christian bishop, evincing a philosophic gravity which indicated a soul
   calm and serene, while the storm might be raging around him. And with
   the exception of these slight aberrations from perfect equanimity of
   temperament, no one could exceed him in the kind and frank manner in
   which he treated his friends, "rendering to all their due," and making
   every one feel easy and at home in his presence.

   In the social circle he was free and accessible, often enlivening
   conversation with instructive anecdotes illustrative of the topics
   under consideration. In these seasons of relaxation from the severe
   duties of his station, he appeared indeed "gentle and easy to be
   entreated," manifesting a suitable deference to others, frequently
   drawing out their opinions by respectful inquiries, and modestly
   proposing his doubts, that they might be solved. And in all these
   movements he never forgot his obligations as a Christian bishop, often
   taking pains to distinguish between the respect paid to him because the
   Church had honored him with his high office, and what was due to him
   merely as a man, thus throwing upon others the honor which seemed to be
   given to himself. While religious conversations seasoned and sanctified
   these social interviews, they were generally concluded with a few words
   of advice suited to the occasion, and an invocation to God for his
   blessing upon all present.

   7.  When compared with Bishop Asbury, in the performance of his
   official duties in consecrating men to the work of the ministry, the
   contrast was obvious. Though equally fervent, and at times manifesting
   much more of the "unction of the Holy One," yet he fell much below his
   venerable predecessor in the dignity and solemnity of his manner, and
   in the authoritative manner in which he administered the holy
   ordinance. Equally impressed, however, with the imposing obligations of
   the sacred office, and of its weighty responsibilities, he neglected no
   convenient opportunity to impress both the one and the other upon all
   who took upon themselves the vows of their God. And sometimes, under
   the impulse of a sudden inspiration, he would offer up to God a fervent
   intercession for blessings to rest upon them and their labors, and
   conclude with a short and pithy admonition or exhortation suited to the
   occasion.

   8.  In presiding in the conferences, impartiality guided his decisions,
   and he introduced a more orderly manner of doing business than had
   heretofore characterized their proceedings. Bishop Asbury used to say,
   as an apology for the desultory manner in which he sometimes allowed
   the affairs of a conference to be conducted, "I was with you in
   weakness, and at first I had to be president secretary, and almost
   every thing; but now the days of your childhood are passed; you have a
   president who has grown up in the midst of you, and who therefore,
   understands your wants; let him, then, lead you forth as men of mature
   age, under the dictation of those rules of order you may mutually
   devise for youth regulation." In conformity with this patriarchal
   counsel, under the advisement of Bishop McKendree, a set of by-laws
   were introduced and adopted for the more orderly manner of conducting
   the business of an annual conference. This wise arrangement prevented
   the appearance of arbitrary power on the one hand, and the
   irregularities of independent action on the other.

   In the exercise of his prerogatives as president of the conferences, he
   was sometimes called upon to check the forwardness of some, to correct
   the wanderings of others, as well as to encourage all to a just and
   diligent performance of their respective duties. In administering
   admonition or rebuke, he sometimes did it with the keenness of a razor,
   and yet seemingly with the mildness of the dove. I remember, on a
   certain occasion, a young preacher of more confidence than prudence,
   who had left some small business to become an itinerant, was boasting
   of the great sacrifices he had made for the cause, when Bishop
   McKendree checked him by asking, in his peculiarly soft and mild
   manner, "Brother, have you made greater sacrifices than St. Paul
   resolved to do when he said, If meat make my brother to offend, I will
   eat no more meat while the world standeth? Or than those which said, We
   have left all for thy sake?" I need not say, that a sense of shame sat
   on the countenance of this vain boaster.

   But however mild and yielding he might appear in his general
   administration, there were times in which he thought the circumstances
   called for it when he could show all the firmness of a despot without
   any of his haughty and domineering feelings A debate once arose in the
   New York conference respecting electing a man to elders orders, who had
   been a traveling deacon only one year, because he had traveled for
   several years in connection with the Wesleyan conference in England,
   and he was finally elected. In the course of the debate, one of the
   speakers averse to the proposed election pleaded, that if elected, the
   presiding bishop would be compelled to assume the character of a pope,
   and refuse to ordain him. After the question was decided, the bishop
   arose and informed the conference, in mild but firm tones, that with
   all his respect for the decision of conference, he must decline to
   ordain the brother; "But," said he, "in doing this I deny the
   imputation that I assume the character of the pope, for I act according
   to your laws, by which I am forbidden to consecrate a person to the
   office of an elder until he shall have traveled two years as a deacon,
   unless in case of missionaries, and this brother does not appear in the
   character of a missionary. Were I, therefore to ordain him according to
   your vote, I might be impeached at the next General Conference for an
   unconstitutional act, for which I could offer no reasonable excuse.
   Hence it is not an assumption of unauthorized power in imitation of the
   pope of Rome, in defiance of law and order, by which I refuse to comply
   with your request, but it is a deference I feel for constitutional law,
   made and sanctioned by yourselves, and from the infraction of which I
   am bound by my office, alike to protect both you and myself. Repeal
   your law, and make a different regulation, and I will bow to it with
   all readiness; but while the law exists I and bound to obey it, and to
   see that it is obeyed by others."

   This sensible appeal induced the conference to reconsider its vote, and
   the motion to elect was withdrawn. Thus the good sense of the bishop,
   united with such a commendable firmness, saved both him and the
   conference from perpetrating an unconstitutional act.

   9.  He was extremely sensitive, and acutely felt the slightest insult,
   while he would bear it without resentment. His discriminating mind
   enabled him to detect the slightest impropriety in the words or conduct
   of others, whether manifested toward himself or another person; and
   nothing seemed to give him more pain of mind or severe mortification
   than the exhibition of those weaknesses of human nature growing out of
   an ignorance of the common civilities and proprieties of life. To
   these, in his intercourse with his fellow-men, he was strictly
   attentive, considering it as much his duty to treat every person
   according to the claims which age, station, or office might give him,
   as it was to exact similar treatment from others. He thus gave a
   practical comment upon the maxims, "Tribute to whom tribute is due;
   custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor to whom honor." And in
   the discharge of the relative duties of life, he set an example worthy
   the imitation of all, and rebuked especially those uninstructed and
   inexperienced youth, whose raw notions of independence led them to make
   no discrimination between the old and the young, the officer, the
   citizen, the minister and others.

   10.  I need hardly add, that all his actions were the result of a heart
   deeply experienced in the things of God. He lived, indeed, "as seeing
   him who is invisible," and he was most evidently moved forward in the
   discharge of his various duties, whether official or otherwise, under
   the dictation of that Spirit which "searcheth all things, even the deep
   things of God." This directed and sanctified his labors in the best of
   all causes, and gave a beauty and finish to his work in general. Having
   been thus "created anew unto good works," and persevering under the
   influence of those holy feelings which were enlivened and purified by
   the blood of the covenant, he halted not in the day of trial, nor
   ceased his work until his divine Master said, "It is enough: come up
   higher."

   John Emory, the junior bishop, had also taken his departure to another
   world during the year; and his death produced the greater sensation on
   account of the sudden and unexpected manner in which it was brought
   about.

   He was born in the state of Maryland, in the year 1788. He was destined
   by his parents for the profession of the law, and received an education
   accordingly. But God had other work for him to do. At the age of
   seventeen he was made a partaker of justification by faith in Jesus
   Christ, joined the Methodist Episcopal Church, and soon gave evidence
   of those talents by which he was afterward so eminently characterized.
   In the twenty-second year of his age, in the year 1810, he entered the
   traveling ministry in the Philadelphia conference, of which he became,
   in due course of trial, a distinguished member, filling the stations
   assigned him with ability and usefulness Though but a junior member of
   the conference, in 1816 he was elected as a delegate of the General
   Conference of that year, and was an active and intelligent promoter of
   its measures and objects.

   When it was resolved, at the General Conference of 1820, to open a more
   direct intercourse with the Wesleyan Methodist conference in England,
   by a personal interchange of delegates, Mr. Emory was chosen as our
   representative to that elder branch of the Methodist family, and he
   accordingly visited England in that capacity. By his Christian and
   gentlemanly deportment, and the ability with which he conducted the
   mission, he won the affection and esteem of all with whom he had
   intercourse, and brought to an amicable adjustment the perplexing
   difficulties which had arisen in Upper Canada between the two
   connections.

   In 1824 he was elected assistant book agent, and in 1828 the principal.
   While in this station, though his physical strength would not allow
   him, during some portions of the time, to perform much active service,
   yet he was wise in counsel, judicious in his arrangements of plans for
   carrying on that extensive establishment with energy and system, and he
   applied himself with diligence and success to accomplish its benevolent
   objects. But as all these things will doubtless be presented to the
   public in his biography now in press, I need not enter into
   particulars.

   At the end of his term of service in this institution in 1832, he was,
   as has been intimated, elected a bishop of the Methodist Episcopal
   Church. He entered upon the labors of this station with an enlightened
   zeal, attending to its peculiar and onerous duties with diligence, with
   a sound judgment, and a discriminating mind; and had he lived to the
   common age of man, he might have infused into the system a spirit and
   energy highly beneficial to the present and future generations; for he
   was a warm friend and the advocate of all our institutions, those
   peculiarly Methodistic, as well as those relating to education,
   missionary, and Sunday school operations, likewise to the publication
   and circulation of books and general intelligence. But ere he had time
   fully to enter upon his high and holy duties, and to develop the
   energies of his mind upon these momentous subjects, he was suddenly
   called, by one of those mysterious providences not easily solved by
   human intellects, to give an account of his stewardship.

   Early on the morning of Wednesday, December 16, 1835, he left home in a
   one horse carriage, for the purpose of visiting Baltimore on business
   connected with his episcopal office. His horse ran away with him, and
   he was violently thrown from the carriage, and received such a severe
   wound in the head, that he expired about seven o'clock of the same day.
   His death was the more melancholy to his friends because his fall, and
   the wound he received, deprived him of his senses, so that he was
   unable to converse with those who stood around his dying bed, though he
   was heard to respond an amen to one of the many prayers which were
   offered up in his behalf in this hour of trial and affliction. No one
   doubted, however, of his preparedness to meet his fate, and to enter
   into the joy of his Lord. He died in the forty-eighth year of his age.

   Though the Church was thus deprived of the labors of him to whom she
   had awarded one of the highest offices in her gift, ere he had an
   opportunity of fully unfolding his capabilities to serve her interests
   in the capacity of a ruler, yet he had lived long enough to convince
   all with whom he had held intercourse, of the strength of his mind, the
   acuteness of his intellect, and of his ability to defend the doctrines
   and institutions of the Church of his choice. Hence the mournful tones
   of sorrow which were heard almost universally when the news of his
   sudden and unexpected death was announced, and the deep and heartfelt
   grief which was uttered by his surviving friends.

   Bishop Emory possessed an acute and discriminating mind, a sound and
   comprehensive judgment. Having received a thorough education in his
   youth, and devoting some time of his more mature and vigorous days to
   the study of the law, his understanding had become accustomed to close
   thought and accurate research, and he could therefore quickly and
   easily distinguish between truth and error, between right and wrong,
   while his heart forsook the one and cleaved to the other.

   During his connection with the Book Concern he was frequently called
   upon to exert his intellectual powers in defense of what he considered
   to be truth and duty. After he became the principal, in 1828, he
   conducted the editorial department of the Methodist Magazine and
   Quarterly Review, in doing which his abilities as a writer were fully
   tested, and the masterly manner in which he defended the doctrines,
   institutions, and usages of the Church against powerful, and, in some
   instances, malignant assailants, proved his competency to the task
   assigned him, as well as his love of the truth, as developed in the
   articles and General economy of the denomination to which he belonged.
   Though his writings are not numerous, yet they have reared for their
   author a lasting reputation for the accuracy of his researches, for his
   depth of thought, the soundness of his views, and for the conclusive
   manner in which he could wield an argument.

   These same eminent qualities were equally displayed in the pulpit.
   Owing to physical debility, brought on perhaps by too much exertion in
   the early days of his ministry, at some periods of his public life he
   was compelled to remit the regular duties of an itinerant preacher; but
   whenever he did appear before the public as an ambassador of Christ, he
   always evinced a mind thoroughly imbued with his subject, familiar with
   the truth, and well trained to the exercise of its powers in weighing
   evidence and balancing the claims of the various subjects which might
   be presented for consideration. And the acuteness of his intellectual
   powers were in no instances more strikingly illustrated than in his
   capacity to distinguish the nicest shades of truth, to detect the
   smallest intrusions of error, and so to analyze a subject as to view it
   in all its parts, and then so to combine it as to grasp it in his mind
   as one undivided whole.

   It is the easiest thing in the world to generalize, to dogmatize, and
   to denounce in strong terms of disapprobation any supposed error in
   theory and conduct; but it requires a well-informed and a well-balanced
   mind to enter into detail, to discriminate between one thing and
   another, to trace parallels, to mark contrasts or resemblances, and
   when a multitude of subjects come up for consideration, to select the
   best, the most fit, and then to follow out a thought by a regular
   induction of arguments from particular facts. Who may not say that
   truth is preferable to error? -- that the righteous shall be rewarded
   and the wicked punished? All this is easy. But it requires a mind
   accustomed to close thought to ascertain where the truth lies, to
   disentangle it from the knotty threads of error in which it often lies
   concealed, and to place it so plainly, and pointedly, and perspicuously
   before the reader or hearer that it may be seen and felt. Nor does it
   require less assiduity of mind and quickness of perception to trace out
   the windings of the human heart, to detect the characteristics of the
   sinner, to prove him guilty, and then to urge home upon him the
   tremendous consequences of his criminal conduct: yet Bishop Emory was
   fully equal to this task, and much more. He could, with all the ease
   imaginable, fix upon an antagonist the very point in which he erred,
   trace it in all its windings and shiftings, and then bring the whole
   weight of his powerful intellect to bear upon him with a force,
   collected by a regular course of argument, which he could not well
   resist.

   But though thus furnished with material for a sound judgment, he was
   very far from possessing an overwhelming confidence in himself. He was
   in the habit of collecting information from every source within his
   reach, of consulting with his friends on all important occasions, and
   then following the best light afforded him. He did not, therefore,
   imitate those weak but self-confident persons who seem conscious that
   neither their productions nor opinions can bear the light of
   investigation, and therefore thrust that before thousands which they
   seem unwilling to submit to the inspection of a select few. Not so
   Bishop Emory. He generally strove either to strengthen his own opinions
   by the concurrence of others, or to have his errors corrected before
   they should be exposed to the multitude for indiscriminate
   condemnation. And such was his good sense, that he was always ready to
   hearken to all that could be said against as well as in favor of any of
   his positions, and it was by no means difficult to convince a man of
   his discernment of an error, should he have incidentally embraced one.

   His education, refined as it was by the fire of Christianity, taught
   him how to estimate the relative claims of his fellow-men, and to yield
   to each his due, whatever might be his station or character. Though he
   was extremely sensitive, and could quickly perceive the slightest
   aberrations from the rules of strict propriety, he knew equally well
   how to make due allowance for human frailties, and to apologize for
   these faults in others which seemed the unavoidable result of either
   ignorance or inattention. Nor could he retain a spirit of resentment
   toward any man after discovering the slightest emotion of repentance;
   and he was as ready to make atonement for an offense as he was to
   accept it.

   For many years he was the intimate friend, and for some time the
   traveling companion of Bishop McKendree, and I believe one of his most
   confidential advisers. It so happened, however, that in the midst of
   the controversy respecting the appointment and powers of the presiding
   elders, I think in the year 1822, brother Emory felt it his duty to
   call in question some of the positions of the bishop, which he had
   submitted to the annual conferences, and he did it in such a way as to
   wound the delicate feelings of friendship, and for some time thereafter
   an estrangement took the place of their former familiar intercourse.
   This, however, though painful to both, did not destroy mutual
   confidence and respect, a proof that a long intimacy had not detected
   in either any want of Christian integrity; and it is mentioned here
   merely for the purpose of illustrating that trait of character now
   under consideration; for the course of events restored mutual affection
   and confidence long before death introduced the spirits, first of the
   senior, and then, in about nine months, of the junior bishop, to each
   other in that world of glory where all these imperfections are
   remembered only to heighten the efficacy of that atoning blood which
   washes and fits the redeemed to "sing the song of Moses and the Lamb
   for ever and ever."

   The commanding talents of Bishop Emory, and his comprehensive judgment,
   gave him an influential position, more especially after his election to
   the episcopal office, which, had he lived in the faithful discharge of
   its duties, would have been extensively felt, and highly appreciated.
   But that God who "sees the end from the beginning," saw fit to call him
   home ere he had time to immature his plans for future usefulness, and
   he no doubt "rests from his labors," enjoying the rewards of his "work
   of faith and labor of love," in the everlasting kingdom of God.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 566,957; Last Year: 553,134;
   Increase: 13,823 -- Colored This Year: 83,135; Last Year: 83,156;
   Decrease: -- Indians This Year: 2,436; Last Year: 2,494; Decrease: 58
   -- Total This Year: 652,528; Last Year: 638,784 -- Increase: 13,744 --
   Preachers This Year: 2,758; Last Year: 2,625; Increase: 133.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4] It will be perceived that there was [in 1832, not in 1835 shown
   above -- DVM] a decrease among the Indians of 2,089. This was owing to
   the troubles, heretofore noticed, accompanying their removal west of
   the Mississippi.

   [5] There is an error of ten in the increase of preachers in the
   printed Minutes, occurring in the subtraction of the total number of
   superannuated preachers.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 13

    The General Conference of 1836

   This conference assembled in the city of Cincinnati, Ohio, on the first
   of May, 1836, and was composed of the following delegates: --

   New York Conference: Nathan Bangs, Laban Clark, William Jewett, S.
   Martindale, Daniel Ostrander, Phinehas Rice, Marvin Richardson, Peter
   P. Sandford, John B. Stratten, Beverly Waugh.

   New England Conference: Isaac Bonney, Phineas Crandall, Daniel
   Fillmore, Joseph A. Merrill, Orange Scott, Charles Virgin, Daniel Webb.

   Maine Conference: Charles Baker, Moses Hill, John B. Husted, Heman
   Nickerson, William H. Norris, Ezekiel Robinson, George Webber.

   New Hampshire Conference: John F. Adams, Charles D. Cahoon, Schuyler
   Chamberlain, Samuel Kelly, Samuel Norris, Jared Perkins, Elihu Scott,
   Elisha J. Scott, George Storrs.

   Troy Conference: S. D. Ferguson, Buel Goodsell, Noah Levings, Sherman
   Minor, P. C. Oakley, Charles Sherman, Tobias Spicer.

   Oneida Conference: Horace Agard, Elias Bowen, Silas Comfort, George
   Gary, George Lane, Zechariah Paddock, George Peck.

   Genesee Conference: Asa Abel, Glezin Fillmore, Loring Grant, James
   Hemmingway, Wilbur Hoag, Samuel Luckey, Manley Tooker.

   Pittsburgh Conference: Joshua S. Barris, Wesley Browning, Charles
   Elliott, Robert Hopkins, Thomas M. Hudson, Joshua Munroe, Martin Ruter.

   Ohio Conference: William B. Christie, Augustus Eddy, John Ferree, James
   B. Finley, Thomas A. Morris, John F. Power, James Quinn, William H.
   Raper, Le Roy Swormstedt, John F. Wright, David Young, Jacob Young.

   Missouri Conference: Jesse Green Thomas Johnson, George C. Light,
   Andrew Munroe.

   Kentucky Conference: Henry B. Bascom, Benjamin T. Crouch, H. H.
   Kavanaugh, Jonathan Stamper, Edward Stevenson, G. W. Taylor.

   Illinois Conference: Peter Cartwright, Hooper Crews, Simon Peter.

   Mississippi Conference: Benjamin M. Drake John Lane, William Winans.

   Indiana Conference: James Havens, C. W. Ruter, James L. Thompson, Allen
   Wiley.

   Holston Conference: Thomas K. Catlett, David Flemming, Samuel Patton,
   William Patton.

   Tennessee Conference: T. L. Douglass, Alexander L. P. Green, G. W. D.
   Harris, G. T. Henderson, John M. Holland, John B. McFerrin, Robert
   Paine.

   Alabama Conference: F. H. Jones, Robert L. Kinnon, W. Murrah, W. Wier,

   Georgia Conference: Samuel K. Hodges, John Howard, Lovick Pearce,
   Elijah Sinclair,

   South Carolina Conference: Charles Betts, William Capers, Samuel
   Dunwoody, William M. Kennedy, Malcolm M. McPherson, N. Tally.

   Virginia Conference: Moses Brock, Thomas Crowder, John Early, H. G.
   Leigh, James McAden, Abram Penn, Lewis Skidmore, William A. Smith,

   Baltimore Conference: John A. Collins, A. Griffith, D. Steele, N.
   Wilson, John Bear, Samnel Brison, Robert Cadden, John Davis, William
   Hamilton, William Prettyman, S. G. Roszel.

   Philadelphia Conference: David Daily, Manning Force, Solomon Higgins,
   John Lybrand, R. W. Petherbridge, Charles Pitman, Levi Scott, James
   Smith, Jr. Matthew Sorin, Henry White, William A. Wiggins.

   Bishops Roberts, Soule, Hedding, and Andrew were present, and the first
   named opened the conference by reading a portion of the Holy
   Scriptures, singing, and prayer. Thomas H. Douglass was appointed
   secretary, and Thomas F. Sargeant assistant secretary.

   After the conference was organized, the president introduced the Rev.
   William Lord, as a representative from the Wesleyan Methodist
   Conference, and the Rev. William Case, as the representative from the
   Canada conference, when the former delivered the following address from
   the Wesleyan Methodist conference: --

   "To the bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church in the Conferences of
   America.

   "Very Dear Brethren, -- The preachers of our connection, assembled in
   conference, however earnestly engaged in numerous and diversified
   affairs, requiring diligence, vatolofulness, and prudence in council,
   cannot be so pre-occupied with their own most urgent interests as to
   forget that time approaches for the holding of your General Conference
   at we have a confidential agent in the western continent, in the person
   of of the beloved brother, the Rev. William Lord; and that an
   opportunity is thus presented for renewing the affectionate fraternal
   intercourse of the two great families of Wesleyan Methodism.

   On former occasions, the conferences of both connections have alike
   acknowledged the beauty and utility of that unity of faith and love
   which has happily hitherto subsisted between them, and the value of
   reciprocal intercourse by epistles and deputations, as a means of
   cultivating and perpetuating the existing union and brotherhood. By
   taking knowledge of the steady improvement and resistless growth of our
   kindred communities, and giving exercise to the brotherly feelings with
   which we rejoice in each other's welfare and success, we are stimulated
   to love and to good works, and confirmed in the principles and
   affections essential to a catholic spirit. We also perceive in the
   co-existence, the independence, and the kind and intimate
   correspondence of the two great confraternities of the Methodist body,
   a mutual check to evil change in doctrine, discipline, or practice.

   "We sincerely congratulate you on your continued prosperity. The
   increase of your members, -- the extension of your missions among the
   aborigines of the western continent, in regions where you have a whole
   and appropriate sphere of action, the establishment and progress of
   seminaries for your junior preachers, and all the auspicious
   circumstances of your great work, are highly interesting to us as
   partakers of your joy.

   "In reference to the condition and prospects of British Methodism,
   notwithstanding some partial agitations in our societies, we have great
   cause, on the whole, to thank God and take courage. Our numbers in
   Great Britain are nearly the same as at the last conference; but our
   missionary department continues to afford us great encouragement, both
   by actual increase of converts from sin to God, and by openings for
   more extended operations. The experiment, commenced shortly after our
   last conference of a theological institution for the improvement of
   preachers admitted on our list of reserve, is proceeding in a manner
   which promises to exceed our best hopes. In the direction of this, as
   of all our institutions, it is the anxious wish of our body, inspired
   with one unanimous sentiment of conscientious solicitude, to preserve
   and perpetuate sound doctrine, and pure, experimental, and practical
   religion.

   It has already come to your knowledge, as a matter of public notoriety,
   that by the blessing of God on the efforts and influence of our
   connection, and on the combined endeavors of the religious public of
   our beloved country, a great measure for the emancipation of the slaves
   in all the territories of Great Britain was eventually conducted to a
   successful issue in the imperial legislature; and has since been
   carried into practical effect in all the colonies of the empire, with
   various degrees of completeness, but universally with safety and
   advantage, and with results which mightily encourage us to go forward
   in our earnest attempts to enlighten and evangelize the whole
   population to which favorable access is thus freely opened.

   "Our American brethren will doubtless allow us the fraternal liberty to
   express our conviction that great Scriptural principles are opposed to
   the continuance of slavery in a Christian state; that the permission of
   it is one of those deviations from natural equity and evangelical
   purity which call for further deviations to abet and maintain them;
   that it is contrary to the precepts of Christianity, and violates and
   counteracts the principles and obligations by which the gospel urges
   those precepts. We trust that your connection, having already begun to
   resist and condemn this baneful system, will, in its own way, be freely
   and providentially led to such practical steps as shall produce a
   consentaneous opinion, feeling, and purpose among your own people; and
   will then have the glory of leading the public opinion of your great
   and increasing population to such decided views as will result in a
   unanimous rejection of slavery and its social mischiefs, on the ground
   of its repugnancy to the laws of Christ.

   "We rejoice to learn, from various quarters, that in your country, as
   in ours, Wesleyan Methodism is steadily and powerfully diffusing
   Christian knowledge; and this we trust it will still abundantly effect
   by advocating right principles in its periodical publications, as well
   as by the living ministry of the gospel. It will, we trust, he the
   sacred and unalterable purpose and aim of the Methodist societies, on
   both sides of the Atlantic, to maintain uncorruptness of doctrine and
   life, and to offer a free, a full, a present, and an everlasting
   salvation to all people, and to the end of time.

   "Brother Lord is instructed to present to you our warmest Christian
   salutations: he will be able to communicate freely with you concerning
   our affairs; and, we trust, will be brought to you in the fulness of
   the blessing of the gospel of peace.'

   "Of all that we have to express in our communications to you, the best
   is that he is graciously with us, to whom all power is given in heaven
   and in earth, and who is with his disciples always, even to the end of
   the world. We earnestly pray that his presence may go with you through
   the length and breadth of your States, and throughout your western
   wilderness, so that every class and race among your mingled tribes may
   specially know the truth as it is in Jesus. Signed, on behalf and order
   of the conference,

   "Richard Reece, President "Robert Newton, Secretary. "Sheffield, August
   l8th, 1835.

   To this address the conference returned the following answer,
   appointing the Rev. Dr. Fisk, who was then in Europe, our
   representative to the Wesleyan Methodist conference: --

   "Honorable Fathers and Brethren, -- We have had the pleasure of
   receiving, by the hands of your worthy representative, the Rev. William
   Lord, your kind and fraternal salutations, as expressed in the epistle
   with which he was charged, and which has been read n' open conference.
   This, together with the friendly intercourse of brother Lord among us
   on the present interesting occasion, has brought to our recollection
   those hallowed associations by which we have been refreshed in former
   times, by similar tokens of brotherly love and Christian affection.
   Assembled as we are, in our General Conference, is the representatives
   of the twenty-two annual conferences, into which our work, for greater
   convenience and facility in carrying forward the sacred cause in which
   we he engaged, is divided, we embrace this opportunity of expressing
   our unfeigned gratitude to God for what he hath wrought on this vast
   continent by our instrumentality and of our firm and unwavering
   attachment to those doctrines and usages, and to that discipline, by
   which we have ever been distinguished, and which we have received in
   substance from the venerable founder of Methodism.

   But in the midst of these recollections, so holy and consolatory, we
   have the lament the loss by death, since we last assembled, of our
   senior superintendent, the Rev. William McKendree, the brightness of
   whose example, for the many years he went in and out among us shone
   with a steady and cheering light, and whose setting sun reflects upon
   those of us who survive his in the radiance of immortality; of our
   junior superintendent, the Rev. John Emory, whose commanding talents
   and fervent piety gave us reason to hope that he would be rendered a
   great blessing to the Church and the world, but whose sudden and
   unexpected death, while it has deprived us of his services, has
   doubtless transferred him to the brighter regions of eternal day; --
   and the loss of our excellent book establishment by fire in the city of
   New York, by which disastrous event we have lost about two hundred and
   fifty thousand dollars' worth of stock, including printing and binding
   materials, building, etc. And to these losses, which we regard as the
   chastisements of our heavenly Father, we may add, a diminution in the
   number of our communicants, for the last year, of between two and three
   thousand.

   But while these things call for mourning, for 'searchings of heart,'
   for humiliation and prayer, we are by no means discouraged; for though
   thus chastened, we are not in despair, -- though cast down, not
   destroyed. We trust that the God of providence and grace will raise up
   others to fill the places of those who have gone to their reward; and
   furnish means to resume our wonted practice of diffusing abroad
   evangelical principles and holiness through the medium of the press;
   and also pour out his Spirit upon our heritage, and so prosper the
   labor of our hands, that we shall hereafter witness an increase of
   piety and of numbers to our Zion.

   But while our domestic work has thus suffered from these and other
   causes, not necessary now to mention, we rejoice to witness the growing
   prosperity of our missions, both in our own borders, among the
   aborigines of our wildernesses, in the rising Colony of Liberia in
   Western Africa, and in some of the cities of South America. In the
   contemplation of these opening prospects for missionary enterprise, we
   rejoice in being able to record the encouraging fact, that our people
   are cheerfully and promptly pledging a portion of their substance to
   aid us in this great and good work. During the past year our missionary
   fund has been replenished by about twenty-two thousand dollars, over
   and above the amount collected in any one preceding year; and on our
   several missionary stations we have had an accession of upward of four
   thousand to the number of our church members. For these manifest tokens
   of divine approbation upon this department of our work, we desire to be
   thankful to him from whom cometh every good and perfect gift, and to
   make them motives of renewed exertion and persevering efforts in the
   grand missionary cause.

   "In common with sister denominations of Christians in our country, we
   have been less or more agitated with the perplexing question of Negro
   slavery. And, although we receive with respectful deference what you,
   as our elder brethren, have said to us in relation to this question,
   yet we are assured that, from the known prudence by which your body has
   ever been distinguished, had you been as well acquainted with this
   subject as we are -- could you have viewed it in all its aspects, as it
   presents itself to us who are in the midst of it, interwoven as it is
   in many of the state constitutions, and left to their disposal by the
   civil compact which binds us together as a nation, and thus put beyond
   the power of legislation by the general government, as well as the
   control of ecclesiastical bodies, -- could you have critically analyzed
   its various ramifications in our country, so as to have perceived all
   its delicate relations to the Church, to the several states, and to the
   government of the United States, -- we cannot doubt that, while
   expressing your decided disapprobation of the system of slavery itself,
   your tone of sympathy for us would have been deeper and more pathetic.
   While on this subject, it may be pertinent to remark, that of the
   colored population in the southern and southwestern states, there are
   not less than seventy thousand in our Church membership; and that, in
   addition to those who are mingled with our white congregations, we have
   several prosperous missions exclusively for their spiritual benefit,
   which have been, and are still, owned of God, to the conversion of many
   precious souls. On the plantations of the south and southwest our
   devoted missionaries are laboring for the salvation of the slaves,
   catechizing their children, and bringing all within their influence, as
   far as possible, to the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ; and we need
   hardly add, that we shall most gladly avail ourselves, as we have ever
   done, of all the means in our power to promote their best interests.

   Having thus given a brief outline of our present state and future
   prospects, permit us, dear brethren, to congratulate you on the
   continued prosperity of your growing connection. We have witnessed with
   mingled emotions of pleasure and gratitude the extension of your work,
   both at home and abroad, particularly on your foreign missions. In this
   grand work we hope to imitate your pious zeal and, though it may be at
   a respectful distance, to follow your steps until we shall meet on some
   favored spot upon our globe, and salute each other face to face, as the
   servants of Him who claims the heathen for his inheritance, and the
   uttermost parts of the earth for his possession.

   "Although we have no institution, as, you seem to have supposed we
   have, of the character you mention, as existing among yourselves, for
   the education of those of your junior preachers who are not actively
   engaged in the field of labor, yet we are endeavoring, by such means as
   are at our command, to improve our young ministers in the various
   branches of knowledge which are deemed requisite for a successful
   discharge of the functions of their office and we rejoice in being able
   to state, that the cause of general education, in its various branches,
   from the sabbath and common schools up through the academic to the
   collegiate course, has been, and is now, gradually demanding more and
   more of our attention; and hence we hope that our ministry, though none
   of them has been established for their exclusive benefit, will reap a
   proportionate share in the results of these institutions of learning.

   "We have availed ourselves of this early period of our session to
   return to you our Christian salutations, and to bear testimony to the
   prudent and conciliatory manner in which your delegate has thus far
   discharged the trust committed to him, that we might not miss the
   favorable opportunity of employing the agency of our highly respected
   and beloved brother, the Rev. Dr. Fisk, who enjoys our confidence, to
   present to you in person these expressions of our affection and esteem.
   We have therefore requested him to convey to you an assurance of our
   undiminished attachment to the Wesleyan Methodist connection; and to
   ask that, at our next General Conference, we may be favored with a
   representative from your body, whose visit, should it take place, will,
   we doubt not, be reciprocated with the same feelings of brotherly
   affection by which this intercourse has heretofore been characterized.

   "Earnestly praying that he whose goings forth have been from of old,
   from everlasting,' may guide, sanctify, and ever be with both you and
   us, we subscribe ourselves, in behalf of the General Conference of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church, your brethren and servants in our common
   Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

   "R. R. Roberts, [Bishop] "Joshua Soule, [Bishop] "Elijah Hedding,
   [Bishop] "James O. Andrew, [Bishop] "Thomas L. Douglass, Secretary
   Cincinnati, Ohio, May 5th, 16."

   Friday the 6th was observed as a day of solemn fasting and prayer, and
   at eleven o'clock Bishops Roberts and Hedding addressed the conference
   very appropriately and feelingly on the general state of the work of
   God, and on the strict manner in which discipline should be
   administered in order to keep the Church pure from immoral members.
   There was one point especially on which Bishop Hedding insisted with
   emphasis, as devolving a high duty on those to whom the execution of
   discipline was intrusted. He remarked, in substance, that it was the
   practice of some preachers to wait for a formal complaint, containing
   charges and specifications, before they proceeded to the trial of a
   supposed delinquent member. This he considered a defective
   administration. As the minister was held responsible for the state and
   character of the Church, it became his imperative duty, whenever a
   report was in circulation against a member of the Church, to institute
   an inquiry respecting its truth, and if he found reason to believe
   there was just cause of complaint, he was bound to proceed to examine
   and try the case, as the discipline directs, without waiting for a
   formal accusation. Nor is it perceived how a minister can otherwise
   discharge his high trusts so as to give a joyful account to the Judge
   of all of his stewardship.

   On the assembling of the conference a vacancy was perceived,
   accompanied with very mournful sensations, on the bench of bishops, by
   the absence of Bishops McKendree and Emory, whose deaths are recorded
   in the preceding chapter. By a vote of the conference, Bishop Soule was
   requested to preach the funeral discourse of the former, and Bishop
   Roberts of the latter, which, at a proper time, was done, greatly to
   the satisfaction of all who heard them.

   Among other things which came up for consideration before the is
   conference, was the propriety of dissolving our Bible Society. The
   existence of this separate and denominative organization, though it
   answered its purpose for a season, was found not to work advantageously
   either to ourselves or others, and the question of its continuance had
   been mooted both, in and out of the board of managers for some time
   before the meeting of the conference.

   As, however, the constitution of this society was adopted by the
   General Conference, and was therefore considered as a Church
   institution, the managers thought it inadvisable to cease such
   operations without the recommendation of the conference. The
   conference, after due deliberation, recommended to the society a
   dissolution of its existence, and it was, soon after the adjournment of
   the conference, dissolved accordingly, and our brethren and friends
   were advised to unite in carrying forward the objects of the American
   Bible Society. Since that period a harmonious co-operation has been
   effected and carried on between us and the other friend and supporters
   of that great national institution, mutually satisfactory to all
   concerned.

   Several alterations and amendments were made in the Discipline, the
   chief of which we shall mention.

   The rule respecting "laying aside" persons for not meeting in class,
   which had been so interpreted as to allow the acting preachers to drop
   the delinquent without a trial, was so amended as to make it obligatory
   on the parties concerned to allow the accused to be heard in his
   defense before a committee, the same as in other cases of delinquency.

   The correspondence of the Missionary Society had been hitherto carried
   on by one or the other of the brethren connected with the Book Concern;
   but the increase of the business, both of that Concern and of the
   Missionary Society, made the duties of each so onerous, that it was
   found impracticable to unite the two offices any longer without injury
   to one or both. Hence, on the recommendation of the board of managers,
   an article was introduced into the constitution of the Missionary
   Society creating a resident corresponding secretary, who should be
   devoted exclusively to the interests of the society, under the
   direction of the managers. His election was with the General
   Conference.

   The Liberia mission was erected into an annual conference, "possessing
   all the rights, powers, and privileges of other and annual conferences,
   except that of sending delegates to the General Conference, and of
   drawing its annual dividend from the avails of the Book Concern and
   chartered fund."

   The following was added to the section on receiving preachers, and
   their duty: --

   "Whenever a preacher on trial is selected by the bishop for a mission,
   he may, if elected by an annual conference, ordain him a deacon before
   his probation ends, and a missionary employed on a foreign mission may
   be admitted into full connection, if recommended by the superintendent
   of the mission where he labors, without being present at the annual
   conference for examination.

   "At each annual conference, those who are received on trial, or are
   admitted into full connection, shall be asked whether they are willing
   to devote themselves to the missionary work; and a list of the names of
   all those who are willing to do so shall be taken and reported to the
   corresponding secretary of the Missionary Society; and all such shall
   be considered as ready and willing to be employed as missionaries
   whenever called for by either of the bishops.

   "It shall be the duty of all our missionaries, except those who are
   appointed to labor for the benefit of the slaves, to form their
   circuits into auxiliary missionary societies, and to make regular
   quarterly and class collections wherever practicable, and report the
   amount collected every three months, either by indorsing it on their
   drafts, or by transmitting the money to the treasurer of the parent
   society.

   "It shall be the duty of each annual conference to examine strictly
   into the state of the domestic missions within its bounds, and to allow
   none to remain on the list of its missions which, in the judgment of
   the conference, is able to support itself."

   Hoping that the time was not very distant when our missionaries, and
   those under the direction of the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society,
   by the continual enlargement of their respective fields of labor, would
   approximate and even meet each other in Africa, and also among the
   aborigines of America, where we both had missions established, and
   perhaps at no remote period in some portions of Europe and Asia, the
   following paragraph was added to the section on missions: --

   "It shall be the duty of the bishops to instruct all our foreign
   missionaries that, whenever they come in contact with any of the
   missionaries belonging to the Wesleyan Methodist conference, they shall
   not interfere in their respective charges, any farther than to help
   them in their work when requested, but shall, on all occasions,
   cultivate a spirit of friendship and brotherly affection, as brethren
   engaged in the same common cause, namely, the salvation of the world by
   grace through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ."

   For the purpose of meeting the local wants of some sections of our
   country more perfectly by the introduction of periodical literature and
   general intelligence, two additional weekly papers were established,
   and the one which had been commenced at Cincinnati by the book agents,
   on the recommendation of several of the annual conferences, was
   sanctioned and continued, making in all four religious weekly papers,
   besides the Methodist Magazine and Quarterly Review, now authorized by
   the General Conference; namely, one at New York, one at Cincinnati,
   another at Charleston, S. C., and another at Nashville, Tennessee:
   besides these there were published four others, under the patronage of
   annual conferences, namely, Zion's Herald, in Boston, Mass., Maine
   Wesleyan Journal, in Portland, Maine, Virginia Conference Journal, in
   Richmond, Virginia, and the Auburn Banner, issued in Auburn, N. Y.,
   making altogether eight weekly papers devoted to the interests of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church.

   The claims of the brethren in Canada upon a portion of the capital of
   our Book Concern, which had remained hitherto unsettled, were now
   amicably adjusted in accordance with the principles embraced in the
   following articles of agreement: --

   "Whereas, the Canada conference, now in connection with the Wesleyan
   Methodists of Great Britain, was formerly united to, and formed port
   of; the M.. E. Church; and whereas, the union which by mutual consent
   then subsisted, was dissolved at the earnest and repeated solicitations
   of the ministers and members of the Church in Canada, which was
   definitively determined upon by an act of the Canada conference, who
   thereupon and subsequently did form a union with, and become a part of
   the Wesleyan Methodist connection; and whereas, there has been a
   difference of opinion between the M. E. Church and the Canada
   conference in regard to the claim which has been urged by the Canada
   conference, of an interest in, and a portion of, the Methodist Book
   Concern; and whereas the decision of the several annual conferences, to
   whom the subject was referred by the General Conference of 1832, has
   been averse to the claim of the Canada conference, and has thereby
   precluded any further action of the General Conference on the ground of
   claim, as made by the Canada conference; but whereas this General
   Conference cherishes an affectionate remembrance of the Canada
   brethren, and is desirous to manifest its fraternal regard in every
   suitable way; and whereas, the Canada conference did, at its last
   session, appoint its president, the Rev. William Lord, and the Rev.
   Egerton Ryerson, delegates to this General Conference to negotiate its
   claims on the Book Concern, and the Rev. William Case having been duly
   appointed to take the place of Rev. E. Ryerson in the negotiation; and
   whereas, the said Rev. William Lord, president of the Canada
   conference, and the Rev. William Case, have full powers to bring to an
   amicable termination the question pending between the two connections,
   therefore it is hereby declared to be mutually understood and agreed,
   that the following plan shall be considered as an arrangement for the
   full and final adjustment and settlement of the matter at issue between
   the Canada conference and the Methodist Episcopal Church; to wit, The
   agents of the Methodist Book Concern shall furnish to the book steward
   of the Canada conference any of the books which may be issued from its
   press at the following rates, subject to the conditions and provisions
   hereinafter named: --
    1. The general alphabetical catalogue books, whether in sheets or
       bound, shall be sold at forty per cent discount from the retail
       prices, as long as the present discount of one-third shall be made
       to wholesale purchasers, but should the discount be hereafter
       changed to one-fourth, then, in that case, the books sold to the
       book steward of the Canada conference shall be charged at a
       discount of one-third from the retail prices which shall from time
       to time be affixed to them respectively. Provided, that this
       discount shall not apply to such books as may be reduced below the
       usual prices on account of rival publishers; and provided, also,
       that the Canada conference shall give satisfactory security in
       regard to the payment of any debt which may be contracted with the
       Methodist Book Concern, within one year from the time such debt my
       be created. And it is also expressly understood and agreed, that no
       interest shall be demanded or paid on any such debts, unless
       payment shall be delayed beyond the period of cred it before named,
       in which event interest shall be charged and paid, from and after
       the expiration of said credit term. It is also further provided,
       that all books which may be ordered by the book steward of the
       Canada conference shall be at the risk and expense of the said
       conference from the time they shall be forwarded from the Methodist
       Book Concern.
    2. Sunday school books and tracts shall be furnished to the book
       steward of the Canada conference at a premium of eighteen percent,
       to be paid in general catalogue books at retail prices; and it is
       hereby declared to be understood and agreed, that the same
       provisions and conditions are to be adjudged applicable to Sunday
       school books and tracts as have been specified above in regard to
       books generally.
    3. It is understood and agreed, that the privileges herein secured to
       the Canada conference shall be binding o the Methodist Book Concern
       until the first day of May, 1852, next ensuing the present date;
       provided, also, that the said Canada conference shall regularly and
       truly make annual settlements to the satisfaction of the agents of
       the Methodist Book Concern, and not otherwise.
    4. Finally, it is hereby mutually understood and agreed, that the
       foregoing arrangement is considered as a full, and definite, and
       satisfactory adjustment of the question which has arisen between
       the Canada conference and the Methodist Episcopal Church on the
       subject of the Methodist Book Concern.

   "In testimony whereof; the agents of the Methodist Book Concern, and
   the delegates of the Canada conference, have mutually affixed their
   respective signatures, this 18th day of May, 1836, in the city of
   Cincinnati, Ohio. (signed)

   "B. Waugh and T. Mason, Agents. "William Lord, and William Case,
   Delegates from Canada."

   A resolution was then adopted giving discretionary power to the book
   agents and book committee in the city of New York to settle with the
   Canada conference, on such terms as might be mutually satisfactory, all
   debts which were due to the Book Concern by said conference, for books
   sold and unsold; which was, soon after the adjournment of conference,
   done accordingly. Thus was this long-pending question brought to an
   amicable termination, on such terms as to preserve and perpetuate the
   harmony and brotherly affection heretofore subsisting between the two
   connections.

   The episcopal committee, after adverting in affecting terms to the
   death of Bishops McKendree and Emory, reported in favor of electing
   three additional bishops, which, after some debate, was concurred in by
   the conference. Accordingly, on the 23d of May, Beverly Waugh was
   elected on the first balloting by the votes of eighty-five out of one
   hundred and fifty-three, the whole number of votes taken; and Wilbur
   Fisk by a vote of seventy-eight; and, after several ballotings, Thomas
   A. Morris, by a vote of eighty-six.

   On the 27th, Beverly Waugh and Thomas A. Morris were duly consecrated
   to their high and holy office. In the mean time, the bishops were
   requested to consecrate Dr. Wilbur Fisk, who was absent in Europe, as
   soon as practicable after his return, provided he should conclude to
   accept the appointment. He, however, soon after his return to the
   United States, declined the office, and before the next General
   Conference he was called to his reward in another world.

   The action of this General Conference in favor of missions, education,
   and all those institutions designed to aid in the spread of Scriptural
   truth and holiness, exerted a salutary influence upon their respective
   interests, and tended to diffuse them more extensively through the
   community. The reports upon these several subjects were spread before
   the public through the columns of the several papers published under
   the patronage of the Church; but as they recognized no new principle of
   action, it is considered not necessary to insert them here. They
   showed, however, that the conference was more and more earnest in its
   measures to promote sound learning and useful science among the rising
   generation, and to carry forward the work of God by means of missionary
   operations to the greatest possible extent.

   The report of the committee on boundaries, as it was adopted by the
   conference, divided the general work into twenty-eight annual
   conferences, besides the Mission conference in Liberia.

   There was one alteration made in the Discipline at this conference,
   which went to affect the administration very materially, as it lodged
   in an annual conference a tremendous power over its members for good or
   evil, according to the manner in which it might be exercised.

   For several successive General Conferences, the question had been
   mooted, whether an annual conference had legitimate authority to locate
   one of its members without his consent, and the predominant opinion
   seemed to be that no such power existed. The question came up for
   consideration at this time, and a rule was finally passed, giving to an
   annual conference the power to locate one of its members who has
   rendered himself "unacceptable as a traveling preacher," in their
   judgment, allowing him, however, the privilege of an appeal to the next
   General Conference.

   This rule is founded on the presumption that whenever a member of an
   annual conference fails to fulfill the obligations of his trust, and
   which were the conditions on which he entered the fraternity, he
   forfeits his privileges and all the immunities of his official rank,
   and hence the conference has the right of dismissing him from their
   employment as an unfaithful servant. It is allowed, however, that this
   power ought to be exercised with great caution and moderation, lest it
   degenerate into tyranny and oppression.

   A rule was also inserted for the trial of an accused superannuated
   preacher living out of the bounds of the conference of which he is a
   member, by a committee and the presiding elder of the district in which
   the delinquent may reside, the ultimate decision of the case being
   reserved for the conference of which he is a member.

   But that which excited the deepest interest at thus General Conference
   was the subject of slavery and abolitionism.

   That this subject may be clearly understood, and the controversy to
   which it gave birth duly appreciated, we must be allowed to enter into
   some historical details. That the Methodist Episcopal Church has always
   been opposed to slavery, and has accordingly adopted measures to do it
   away, and where this could not be done, to mitigate its evils, is a
   truth written upon all her institutions, and confirmed by various
   enactments of the General Conference; and she was going on in her
   steady career of doing good to the souls and bodies of both master and
   slave, to the white and colored population of our country, when she was
   suddenly arrested by a new species of measures to effect emancipation.

   The success which had crowned the efforts of British philanthropists in
   bringing about emancipation in the West Indies, though it was effected
   by a compromise between the government and the owners of the slaves, by
   which the latter received a supposed equivalent for their legalized
   property, awakened a spirit of inquiry in our country respecting the
   practicability of emancipating the slaves in our southern and
   southwestern states, without waiting for the slow and more safe process
   of a gradual preparation for such an event. This spirit was powerfully
   excited by agents sent out from England, for the express purpose of
   lecturing us on the evils of slavery, and enlightening us on the duty
   and feasibility of immediate and unconditional emancipation, not indeed
   in imitation of the plan adopted by the legislature of their own
   country, which was to remunerate, in part at least, the owners of the
   slaves for their property; but they insisted upon a full, and free, and
   immediate surrender of the slaves, as a political and religious duty,
   alike demanded by the laws of God and of nature. These heedless and
   enthusiastic lecturers, not understanding the peculiar structure of our
   complicated governments, including the state and general governments,
   and not caring to distinguish between slavery as it existed here, and
   slavery as it had existed in the West Indies, loudly proclaimed a war
   against it, with such a flippancy of misguided zeal, that they soon
   goaded the public mind almost to madness, and thus aroused a spirit of
   resistance to their proceedings and measures which it was not easy to
   control. This interference of foreigners with our domestic relations
   was considered by the more judicious portions of the community as
   highly reprehensible, and worthy of severe rebuke and remonstrance.
   Accordingly, the newspapers soon became rife with discussions upon this
   topic. Criminations and recriminations followed each other, until the
   public mind became so excited as to be incapable of calm and sober
   investigation on either side of the question, so that, in some
   instances, mob violence was substituted for argument; and "lynch law"
   for Scriptural and rational defense. These violent measures were alike
   condemned by the more sober portion of both parties.

   In this agitated state of things, it could hardly be expected that the
   Church should wholly escape the excitement or avoid participating in
   the discussions to which it gave rise. Accordingly, as our brethren in
   the eastern states entered more deeply into this subject than any
   others, and as they had a weekly paper under their control, its columns
   were opened to the discussion of slavery as it existed in the United
   States, and severe denunciations were uttered against all who held
   slaves, whether in or out of the Church. These denunciations were met
   and repelled with spirit by those more immediately implicated, as being
   incompatible with the spirit of brotherly love which ought to
   characterize all Christians, and more especially such as are members of
   the same communion.

   These discussions had been conducted for two or three years previously
   to the session of this General Conference, and a weekly paper had been
   established in the city of New York for the vowed purpose of advocating
   immediate emancipation, irrespective of all consequences. As the
   arguments and measures set forth in this and other periodicals of a
   kindred character were not fellowshipped by a great majority of our
   preachers and people even in the middle and northern conferences, nor
   by the official organ of the Church, the Christian Advocate and
   Journal, these were stigmatized by the immediate emancipationists as
   pro-slavery in their views and feelings, and, of course, as involved in
   the same guilt and condemnation with those who actually held their
   fellow-beings in bondage. These irritating charges were considered
   unjust, as the brethren implicated thought they could easily
   distinguish between arm approval of slavery as a system, and the
   apologizing for those who held slaves under certain peculiar
   circumstances. This clear distinction, however, was not admitted by the
   zealous advocates of immediate emancipation, and hence they poured
   forth their anathemas upon all indiscriminately who either held slaves
   or offered an apology for those that did, on account of their peculiar
   circumstances.

   It was in this state of the public mind, and of the Church, that the
   General Conference came together in 1836. And though many of its oldest
   and most judicious members were very desirous of keeping the discussion
   of slavery from the deliberations of the conference, being convinced it
   could result in no good, yet several circumstances conduced to bring it
   in, and to make it the subject of much debate. In the first place, the
   allusion to the subject in the address of our Wesleyan brethren and in
   the address of their representative, the Rev. William Lord, made it
   necessary to advert to it in the answer of the General Conference,
   which, it will be perceived by those who will look at that answer, was
   done in a very brief and respectful manner. In the second place, not
   many days after the conference had assembled, it was ascertained that
   two of the abolition brethren from New England had attended and
   lectured at an abolition meeting in the city of Cincinnati; and as the
   agitation was very great upon that subject, it was feared by many that
   a popular excitement would be produced injurious to the character of
   the conference, and perhaps detrimental to the peace and harmony of the
   Church in Cincinnati. With a view to allay all such apprehension, the
   conference passed the following preamble and resolutions, by a vote of
   one hundred and twenty in favor and fourteen against them: --

   "Whereas, great excitement has prevailed in this country on the subject
   of modern abolitionism, which is reported to have been increased in
   this city recently by the unjustifiable conduct of two members of the
   General Conference in lecturing upon and in favor of that agitating
   subject; and whereas, such a course on the part of any of its members
   is calculated to bring upon this body the suspicions and distrust of
   the community, and to misrepresent its sentiments in regard to the
   points at issue; and whereas, in this aspect of the case, a due regard
   for its own character, as well as a just concern for the interests of
   the Church confided to its care, demand a full, decided, and
   unequivocal expression of the ideas of the General Conference in the
   premises: -- Therefore,
    1. Resolved, by the delegates of the annual conferences in General
       Conference assembled, That they disapprove, in the most unqualified
       sense, the conduct of two members of the General Conference, who
       are reported to have lectured in this city recently upon and in
       favor of modern abolitionism.
    2. Resolved, That they are decidedly opposed to modern abolitionism,
       and wholly disclaim any right, wish, or intention to interfere in
       the civil and political relation between master and slave as it
       exists in the slave-holding states in this Union.
    3. Resolved, That the foregoing preamble and resolutions be published
       in our periodicals."

   The consideration of these resolutions brought the entire subject of
   slavery and abolitionism before the conference, and elicited a very
   spirited and protracted debate, which finally ended in their adoption,
   as before mentioned. Many very able speeches were delivered on both
   sides of the question, and generally with good temper and much calmness
   of deliberation, though not without some appearance of asperity and
   warmth of feeling. The pith of the controversy, however,
   notwithstanding the whole field of argument and illustration was amply
   surveyed, may be comprehended in two of the speeches, both published at
   the time, that of the Rev. O. Scott in favor, and of the Rev. W. Winans
   against modern abolition. And even this argument itself may be brought
   into a very narrow compass.

   The course pursued by the Methodist Episcopal Church, from the
   beginning of her existence, in reference and in opposition to slavery,
   as it has all along existed in the United States, proves that she has
   always considered it an evil not to be tolerated except under given
   circumstances; and that such circumstances exist in some portions of
   our Union, where severe penal laws have been enacted against
   emancipation, as to justify her in holding in her communion those who
   hold slaves, provided they are otherwise pious. That this was her
   doctrine is provable from her whole course of proceeding from the time
   of her organization in 1784. At this time were passed the severest laws
   against slavery which we find upon record at any time of her existence;
   but even these aimed at a gradual, and did not insist on an immediate
   emancipation; yet finding upon experiment that these severe rules could
   not be carried into execution without producing a greater evil than
   that which they were designed to remove, about six months after they
   were passed they were suspended, and have never been revived, nor were
   they ever inserted in her book of Discipline; and at almost every
   subsequent General Conference some enactment has been made for the
   purpose of regulating slavery, of modifying or mitigating its
   character, with a view ultimately, if practicable, to do it away. This
   has been the doctrine, and these have been the measures of our Church
   in reference to this most difficult and perplexing subject. And they
   prove most incontestably that she does not, nor has at any time,
   considered slave holding, under all circumstances, of such a deadly
   character as to "exclude a man from the kingdom of grace and glory;"
   for it is manifest that the making rules for the regulation of a
   practice is, in some sense, to pronounce that the practice is not, in
   itself considered, independently of all concurring circumstances, a
   moral evil in the sight of God. To legislate for a thing is to sanction
   it, though the manner of holding the thing may be considered either
   unlawful or inexpedient.

   This statement of the doctrine of the Church will enable us to perceive
   the force and scope of the argument now wielded by Mr. Scott against
   slavery in the Methodist Episcopal Church. In opposing the above
   resolutions, he laid down the following proposition: --

   "That slavery is wrong in some circumstances, in no circumstance, or in
   all circumstances." In selecting from these positions the one which
   suited his views, he took this strong ground that slavery is wrong,
   morally wrong, under all possible circumstances; and in the course of
   his argument, contended that no circumstance whatever could alter or
   modify the sinful character of slavery; that it was wrong, or a sin not
   to be tolerated under any circumstance whatever, either in or out of
   the Church. By this comprehensive and sweeping proposition, all who
   held slaves, whatever might be the palliating circumstances, were, on
   that very account, sinners against God, and ought to be forthwith
   excommunicated from the communion of the Church, unless they repented,
   and "brought forth works meet for repentance," by an immediate and
   unconditional surrender of their slaves, without any regard to the
   consequences of such a measure.

   And yet, such was the light and force of truth upon this subject, that,
   almost in the next breath, Mr. Scott admitted that "God himself
   expressly permitted his people to enslave the Canaanites," thus
   upsetting at a stroke the whole array of argument which he had brought
   to prove that slavery was a sin under all circumstances; for here was a
   circumstance in which God either permitted his people to commit sin, or
   which did away with the sinfulness of slavery: the first supposition is
   daringly impious; the second is fatal to the argument.

   Of this concession, a concession which sacred history had forced from
   him, Mr. Winans took advantage, and built upon it the following
   impregnable argument: --

   That according to this admission, taken in connection with the main
   proposition that no circumstance could alter the character of an
   action, as it was once right for God to permit slavery, it was
   therefore always right; is right now; and no possible circumstance
   could make it wrong.

   This was the very gist of the argument. And the reader will observe,
   that in stating the argument thus, Mr. Winans did not attempt to prove
   that slavery, as it existed in the United States, is right, or not
   sinful; but simply to show, that on Mr. Scott's concession, his major
   proposition, that slavery is a sin under all circumstances, could not
   be true.

   I need not trace this controversy any further. The views of the General
   Conference in reference to this subject, as well as others which came
   up for consideration, may be seen in the following Pastoral Address,
   which was adopted near the close of the conference: --

   "To the Members and Friends of the Methodist Episcopal Church

   "Beloved Brethren and Friends: -- The time has come, in the conclusion
   of the session of another General Conference, when it seems proper that
   we should address a few thoughts to you, for whom we labor, and for
   whose present and future happiness we desire to devote the remainder of
   our days. We think we can adopt, at least in some degree, the language
   of the great apostle to the Gentiles, ' ow we live, if ye stand fast in
   the Lord.'

   "In taking a review of our work, we rejoice in being able to say that
   we are more and more convinced of the truth of those doctrines, and of
   the healthful influence of that moral discipline, by which e as a
   people have ever been distinguished. These, therefore, we hope, will
   ever remain the same, and be handed down to posterity unimpaired, that
   the generations following may be led by them into the path of peace and
   holiness here, and finally be conducted to eternal life hereafter. The
   few alterations which have been introduced into our prudential
   regulations, into our plan of missionary operations, and into some
   portions of our temporal economy, are such only as the lights of
   experience, the enlargement of our work, and the occurrence of new
   circumstances, have dictated to be expedient and necessary for carrying
   forward, to the greatest possible extent, the cause of reformation and
   salvation in which we are engaged. These, so far from impairing those
   cardinal principles of revealed truth and precepts of morality, which
   have been incorporated into our excellent Discipline, by which we have
   been guided thus far in peace and prosperity, are designed merely as
   helps to develop and apply these principles and precepts to
   experimental and practical purposes. Though we have been called upon to
   mourn over the loss of our venerated senior bishop, Rev. William
   McKendree, and of our junior bishop, the Rev. John Emory, as well as
   the destruction of our noble and useful book establishment at New York,
   yet we are by no means discouraged; but regarding these chastisements
   of our heavenly Father, who has thus corrected us for our good, that we
   may learn obedience by the things that we are called upon to suffer, we
   would endeavor to renew our diligence in the important work assigned
   us.

   "Though we have had a very considerable increase during the four last
   years, yet for the one year past a diminution in the number of Church
   members appears on the Minutes of the conferences. Whatever may be the
   cause or causes of this decrease, so unusual in our history, it becomes
   us to humble ourselves before God, to apply the means at our command
   for the enlargement of his work, for the increase of holiness among our
   selves, as well as the conversion of sinners to God. Among the means to
   be used for this purpose, we may reckon, --
    1. A recurrence to first principles; a firm adherence to, and a
       faithful development and application of those doctrines of the
       gospel by which we, as a Church, have ever been characterized;
       particularly the doctrine of holiness, a preached and enforced by
       him who, under God, laid the foundation of our spiritual edifice.
       His maxim was, When the work of sanctification goes on among
       believers, the work of God will prosper in all its branches.' It
       becomes, therefore, the imperious duty of all ministers of Jesus
       Christ, to explain and enforce the nature and necessity of this
       work in the hearts of all their hearers; and it is equally the duty
       of these to strive after it in the way of God's appointment, and to
       regulate their lives accordingly. We would, therefore, remind
       ourselves, as well as those whom we now address, of the great
       necessity of making this subject a cardinal point in all our
       ministrations, and in all our public and private duties.
    2. The second thing which demands our most serious attention and
       constant vigilance, is the right enforcement of our Scriptural
       discipline. The history of the Church, from its commencement down
       to the present period, confirms the truth of the remark, that pure
       and undefiled religion has always prospered in promotion to the
       strictness with which discipline has been enforced. The pithy and
       wise caution of our founder in reference to this subject should
       ever be borne in mind, Be strict, but mild.' While it is our duty
       to use all Scriptural means to reclaim an offending brother, to
       bear with the infirmities of the weak, and, if possible, to restore
       such as may have been seduced by temptation into sin, in the spirit
       of meekness yet when these means have failed to effect the desired
       object, it is equally imperative for us to discharge the painful
       duty of severing from the body the corrupt member. Hence, we cannot
       guard with too scrupulous a care, nor watch with too much
       vigilance, that which hath been committed to our trust, with a view
       to the preservation of the Church in peace and purity, by an
       impartial administration of discipline. The accession of numbers to
       the list of Church members, unless accompanied with the witness and
       fruits of the Spirit, instead of adding strength to the Church,
       will tend only to introduce confusion and every evil work. We
       would, therefore, exhort all, both ministers and people, to a
       united exertion in all places, and at all times, to use every
       Scriptural and prudent means for the preservation of the members of
       the Church in purity, simplicity, and godly living. The several
       duties growing out of our relation to God, to each other, and to
       the world around us, are so very obvious, so clearly laid down in
       the sacred Scriptures, and so accurately defined in our general
       rules, as well as so often explained from the pulpit and the press,
       that we need not stop to enumerate them here, and will therefore
       only observe, that the faithful performance of these duties is the
       best evidence we can give to the world, and to each other, of the
       sincerity of our Christian profession, and of our devotedness to
       the cause of Jesus Christ.
    3. The next thing to which we would call your attention, as connected
       with our prosperity, is the cause of education. We rejoice to
       witness the growing interest which has been felt and manifested in
       this branch of our work for a few years past. In the cause of
       education we include sabbath and common schools, academies and
       colleges. Experience and observation, if not, indeed, the common
       sense every individual, demonstrate, that unless we provide the
       means of education for our children and youth, they will be led
       from us to other communities, where these means are more abundant,
       and are put within the reach of every one. Should this unhappily be
       the case, the consequence is inevitable, that he children and youth
       of our community will depart from us, and we shall he compelled to
       mourn over the melancholy fact, that they will have been brought
       under the influence of doctrines and usages which we honestly
       believe will be injurious to their present and future happiness.
       Such, indeed, is the eager desire for intellectual improvement, and
       the facilities for its attainment in other directions, that unless
       we furnish means to gratify this laudable desire, our children and
       youth will avail themselves of those thus offered them from other
       quarters, and be induced to throw the weight of their influence
       into an opposite scale. This consideration admonishes us of our
       duty in this respect, and, in a language which cannot be
       misunderstood, reminds us of our high obligations to enter more
       fully and unitedly into this field of labor.

   "In many places we fear that sabbath schools are either entirely
   neglected, or but partially attended to; while in others these
   nurseries for juvenile improvement are suffered to languish for want of
   that attention to their interests which their importance demands. We
   would therefore urge upon all concerned a steady, active, and uniform
   attention to these appendages to the gospel ministry. Nor are we less
   solicitous that all our brethren and friends should be mindful of their
   duty in selecting such teachers for primary schools as shall secure to
   their children the double advantage of elementary instruction, and
   religious and moral improvement.

   "But it is to the higher branches of education, such as are taught in
   academies and colleges, that we would especially call your attention.
   Of the former we have under our patronage upward of twenty-of the
   latter seven, and two others are in contemplation. Though the academics
   may be sustained without drawing largely upon the pecuniary resources
   of our people, and may therefore be safely multiplied to an indefinite
   extent, yet it is manifest that colleges, in order to answer the end of
   their institution, must be liberally endowed. And such is the condition
   of our country in respect to these institutions, that though some of
   the state legislatures have made small endowments for their support, we
   must depend chiefly upon our own resources for their continuance and
   prosperity. Hence, to increase their number without adequate funds in
   hand or in prospect for their support, is to weaken their influence, if
   not ultimately to endanger their existence.

   "Such, however, is their importance to the interests of our community,
   so closely are they identified with our character as a Church, and so
   intimately connected with our other institutions which are deemed
   essential to our growth, and to that influence which we ought to exert
   over the public mind, that we cannot but regard it as a sacred duty to
   nourish and sustain them by all the means at our command. If, indeed,
   at this crisis of our history, when these literary institutions have
   just begun to put forth their energies, and to exert their improving
   influence upon our youth, and upon the Church generally, they should be
   allowed to languish for want of pecuniary means, the effect would be to
   throw us back for years in this branch of intellectual and moral
   culture. This is an event, however, which we cannot allow ourselves to
   anticipate without very painful emotions, but which can only be
   prevented by a united and simultaneous action in their favor, by our
   wealthy and benevolent friends. That there is ability in the Church
   adequate to sustain a suitable number of these nurseries of learning
   and fountains of knowledge, were proper means adopted to call it into
   active exercise, we cannot doubt; and we therefore affectionately
   exhort all the annual conferences, within whose bounds colleges are
   established, or who have pledged themselves to aid in their support, to
   exert themselves in this laudable work, to make haste to redeem their
   solemn pledges; and we would also invite the attention of all our
   brethren and friends to a hearty co-operation in whatever measures may
   be devised by the conferences to establish these institutions upon safe
   and permanent foundations, not only by contributing of their substance
   for their support, but also by patronizing them as extensively as their
   means will allow, by sending their sons to be educated, as well as by
   offering their fervent prayers to God for his blessing to rest upon
   them.

   4.  The distribution of religious tracts is another mode of diffusing
   abroad a knowledge of the doctrines and duties of Christianity. In this
   department of our work we have reason to believe that there has been
   for some years past an unjustifiable neglect. Such is the cheapness of
   these silent messengers of truth, such the facilities for their
   circulation by an itinerant ministry, in co-operation with all those
   who are zealous for God, that no justifiable apology can be offered for
   the non-performance of this duty-for any one to say that he is not
   supplied with these means of spiritual improvement. We would therefore
   most affectionately invite all our brethren of the ministry, and of the
   laity, to use their diligence to form tract societies, and to engage as
   many as possible in the work of distribution in every place. Let there
   be no circuit or station unsupplied with these messengers of mercy, and
   no hand that can be called into action unemployed in aiding in this
   good work. Form your societies, collect your moneys, send to our
   depositories for tracts, and adopt, as far as practicable, a regular
   system of distribution, such a system as shall secure the co-operation
   of all concerned, both male and female, young and old. We need hardly
   say, that this method of circulating religious knowledge is adapted
   especially to the circumstances and wants of the poor, the illiterate,
   and the young, for whose present and eternal interest we are bound in a
   particular manner to labor.

   "This branch of our duty is therefore submitted to your pious
   consideration, under a solemn conviction that, if attended to with zeal
   and discretion, it will aid us much in the work of saving souls.

   5.  The continual enlargement of our missionary field, and the increase
   of pecuniary means for its occupancy and cultivation, are matters of
   congratulation, and of unfeigned gratitude to God. On this subject we
   need only exhort you to go on as you have begun, and make the hearts of
   the heathen, and the poor of your own land, to rejoice by means of your
   liberality. We have adopted a revised constitution, recommended to us
   by the managers of our Missionary Society, which we hope will afford
   increased facilities for the progress of our missionary work, and
   enable us more effectually to cover the whole ground of this extensive
   and most interesting department of our labor.

   "A field is spread open before us, sufficiently wide and extensive for
   the full display of all our liberality, and the exercise of all our
   energies.

   "Such measures have been adopted at this conference in reference to
   this subject, as will tend, we humbly trust, to call forth and train
   up, more effectually, men for this important work. And surely there is
   a call -- a most imperious call -- for all the men and means, to enable
   us to fill up this extensive field with suitable laborers. In addition
   to those domestic missions which embrace the poorer settlements of our
   white population and the slaves of the south, we hear a voice from the
   distant tribes of our wilderness, all along our western and
   northwestern frontier, yea, even from the valley of the Columbia river,
   beyond the Rocky mountains, and on the very borders of the Pacific,
   which calls humbly for help. From South America, from the desolate
   shores of Africa, as well as from the vast interior of that mighty
   continent, a similar voice salutes our ears, and invites us, yea,
   commands us, in language which appears to be the echo of divine
   Providence to come over and help them. And shall we be deaf to these
   calls? We must not. And we are exceedingly happy to have it in our
   power to say, that you do not turn a deaf ear to them. You, beloved
   brethren and friends, have come up nobly, spiritually, liberally, and
   prayerfully to this work. In the name of our common Christianity, and
   on behalf of those heathen who, but for this timely aid, must have
   perished for lack of knowledge, we heartily thank you; and from having
   witnessed your past liberality, we take courage, folly believing that
   this same benevolent spirit will be continued, and even augmented in a
   ratio with the increasing wants of our Missionary Society. The whole
   world is indeed before us. Thousands, yea, millions of immortal beings
   are, at this moment, enveloped in all the darkness of pagan
   superstition, or led astray by the delusions of Mohammedan imposture,
   or buried beneath the rubbish of Roman Catholic mummeries and deceitful
   workings. Shall we -- can we be either idle or indifferent while
   casting our eyes upon such a mass of moral corruption? No, indeed! Your
   full hearts respond, No, with an emphasis which shall be heard and felt
   throughout all the ranks of our Israel and the effects of which will
   yet be witnessed all along the line of our missionary operations, and
   even far beyond, at no distant period, the places where the footsteps
   of the missionary have marked the soil.

   "Relying, therefore, upon your hearty co-operation in the grand
   enterprise of submitting the world to the obedience of Christ, we
   confidently submit this item in the list of our duties to your pious
   consideration and benevolent feeling, fully believing that he who hath
   begun this good work, will carry it on until the day of Jesus Christ.

   6.  We now approach a subject of no little delicacy and difficulty, and
   which we cannot but think has contributed its full proportion to that
   religious declension over which we mourn. It is not unknown to you,
   dear brethren and friends, that, in common with other denominations in
   our land, as well as our citizens generally, we have been much agitated
   in some portions of our work with the very excitable subject of what is
   called abolitionism. This subject has been brought before us at our
   present session -- fully, and, we humbly trust, impartially discussed,
   and by almost a unanimous vote highly disapproved of; and while we
   would tenderly sympathize with those of our brethren who have, as we
   believe, been led astray by this agitating topic, we feel it our
   imperative duty to express our decided disapprobation of the measures
   they have pursued to accomplish their object. It cannot be unknown to
   you, that the question of slavery in these United States, by the
   constitutional compact which binds us together as a nation, is left to
   be regulated by the several state legislatures themselves; and thereby
   is put beyond the control of the general government, as well as that of
   all ecclesiastical bodies; it being manifest, that in the slave-holding
   states themselves the entire responsibility of its existence or
   non-existence rests with those state legislatures. And such is the
   aspect of affairs in reference to this question, that whatever else
   might tend to meliorate the condition of the slave, it is evident to
   us, from what we have witnessed of abolition movements, that these are
   the least likely to do him good. On the contrary, we have it in
   evidence before us, that the inflammatory speeches, writing and
   movements, have tended, in many instances, injuriously to affect his
   temporal and spiritual condition, by hedging up the way of the
   missionary who is sent to preach to him Jesus and the resurrection, and
   by making a more rigid supervision necessary on the part of his
   overseer, thereby abridging his civil and religious privileges.

   "These facts, which are only mentioned here as a reason for the
   friendly admonition which we wish to give you, constrain us as your
   pastors, who are called to watch over your souls as they who must give
   an account, to exhort you to abstain from all abolition movements and
   associations, and to refrain from patronizing any of their
   publications; and especially from those of that inflammatory character
   which denounce in unmeasured terms those of their brethren who take the
   liberty to dissent from them. Those of you who may have honest scruples
   as to the lawfulness of slavery, considered as an abstract principle of
   moral right and wrong, if you must speak your sentiments, would do much
   better to express yourselves in those terms of respect and affection,
   which evince a sincere sympathy for those of your brethren who are
   necessarily, and, in some instances, reluctantly associated with
   slavery in the states where it exists, than to indulge in harsh
   censures and denunciations, and in those fruitless efforts which,
   instead of lightening the burden of the slave, only tend to make his
   condition the more irksome and distressing.

   "From every view of the subject which we have been able to take, and
   from the most calm and dispassionate survey of the whole ground, we
   have come to the solemn conviction, that the only safe, Scriptural, and
   prudent way for us, both as ministers and people, to take, is wholly to
   refrain from this agitating subject, which is now convulsing the
   country, and consequently the Church, from end to end, by calling forth
   inflammatory speeches, papers, and pamphlets. While we cheerfully
   accord to such all the sincerity they ask for their belief and motives,
   we cannot but disapprove of their measures, as alike destructive to the
   peace of the Church, and to the happiness of the slave himself. But
   while we thus express our disapprobation of these measures, we would,
   with equally strong and decided language, record our abhorrence of all
   unlawful and unscriptural means to check and to counteract them. All
   mobs, and violent movements of self-created tribunals, to inflict
   summary punishment upon those who may differ from them in opinion, are
   condemned alike by the laws of our land, and by every principle of
   Christianity. We should therefore be extremely pained and mortified to
   learn that any of you should have lent your influence to foment a
   spirit of insurrection, in any manner, or to have given sanction to
   such violent movements as have, in some instances and places, disturbed
   the peace of society, and forestalled the operation of the established
   tribunals of justice to protect the innocent and to punish the guilty.
   To be subject to the powers that be is a duty enjoined no less by
   Christianity, than it is a dictate of common prudence, necessary to be
   observed for the preservation of good order, and the support and
   perpetuation of those civil and religious institutions which we so
   highly and justly value as freemen, as Christians, and as Methodists.
   The exercise of mutual forbearance in matters of opinion, is essential
   in a community where freedom of speech is guarantied to the citizens by
   the constitution which binds them together, and which defines and
   secures the rights and liberties of all.

   "Finally, brethren and friends, we exhort you to unity and brotherly
   love, and to the practice of those things which make for peace. Instead
   of indulging in those irritating recriminations which tend to disturb
   the harmony of the body, and to prevent the exercise of mutual good
   will and fraternal feeling, let us follow after that charity which
   edifieth, and the cultivation of that love which endureth all things,
   hopeth all things, believeth all things.

   7.  Among other things which have tended not a little to check the
   progress of pure religion, may we not include that of political
   agitations? In a country where the constitution guaranties to every
   male citizen of full age the right of suffrage, where the freedom of
   speech and of the press is considered an inviolable right; where free
   discussion and debate on all civil as well as religious subjects are
   permitted unrestrainedly, there must be great danger of these high
   privileges being abused by suffering calm and dispassionate discussion
   to degenerate into angry recrimination, until passion usurps a dominion
   over the judgment, and reason is dethroned to make way for the despotic
   reign of wild fanaticism.

   "These remarks are not made with a view to abridge you of any of your
   civil or political privileges, nor yet to prevent the free exercise of
   your dearest rights as freemen and as citizens of this great republic,
   much less to bias your minds in favor of the one or the other of the
   political parties of our country. Into the party politics of the day we
   enter not. We leave every man -- every Methodist and friend to
   Methodism -- to act for himself in these respects. But what we wish is,
   as far as possible, to guard you against allowing yourselves to be
   drawn aside from paramount duties, to mix in that angry strife of
   political contests which tends to disturb the peace of society, to
   alienate the affections of brethren from each other, and to interrupt
   that harmony of feeling which is essential to our spiritual prosperity.
   While you cleave to the civil institutions of your country, by all due
   honor to magistrates, and freely exercise your rights in the choice of
   those who are to rule over you and protect you in the enjoyment of your
   privileges, we exhort you to peace, to harmony, to love as brethren,
   and not to allow the spirit of party to awaken animosity, nor zeal in
   the defense of political distinctions, to dampen your zeal in the cause
   of God. We wish that discussion of this sort may not be permitted to
   engender strife and envy, but that mutual good will may soften the
   asperities of political differences, and cement the hearts of Christian
   citizens together in love and brotherly kindness.

   "And here we would bear our unequivocal testimony against that partisan
   warfare which leads to the detraction of individual character, and to
   slanderous representation of motive and conduct. Every man should be
   presumed to be innocent until proved guilty before some competent
   tribunal. That press, therefore, which drags before the community
   individual characters, dealing in personal abuse, and thus holding them
   up to public execration, on account merely of political differences, is
   to be condemned as a corrupter of public morals, and as tending to the
   prostration of our civil and religious liberties. Instead, therefore,
   of lending your influence to such a spirit of detraction, we would
   persuade you to raise your voice against it, and to let the law of
   truth and kindness at all times dwell upon your ups, and influence your
   conduct in civil as well as religious matters; and thus, as far as
   possible, to live in peace with all men.

   8.  While we wish to devote ourselves, and to beseech all our brethren
   in the ministry to devote themselves exclusively to our peculiar work,
   we beg leave to remind the membership of the Church of the necessity of
   providing a competent support for the ministry. On this subject,
   however, we need not enlarge, as you yourselves know perfectly, that he
   who ministereth at the altar must be partaker of the things of the
   altar, and he that ministereth to you in spiritual things must be
   partaker of your carnal things.

   "In conclusion, we would say, that after a laborious session of
   twenty-six days, we separate for our respective fields of labor, and
   mingle again with our brethren, under a sense, in some degree at least,
   of our high responsibility to God and to his Church, and with a
   determination to devote ourselves, by his grace, to our vocation, with
   renewed diligence and perseverance; and by beseeching you, dear
   brethren and friends, to co-operate with us in the grand work of
   evangelizing the world. Under a consciousness of our continual
   dependence upon divine aid, we desire to look up to God for the
   assistance of his Spirit at all times; and to beg an interest in your
   prayers, that both we ourselves, and all those with whom we are
   connected in Church fellowship, may be preserved blameless until the
   day of Jesus Christ; and that by applying ourselves with all diligence
   in the use of those means which the God of providence and grace hath
   put within our reach, for the furtherance of his holy cause, we may
   hereafter be instrumental in reviving his work, and spreading among our
   fellow men the savor of his name;' we remain as ever your servants for
   Christ's sake.

   "Signed by order and in behalf of the General Conference of the
   Methodist Episcopal Church.

   "Robert R. Roberts, "Joshua Soule, "Elijah Hedding, "James O. Andrew.
   "T. L. Douglass, Secretary. Cincinnati, Oh, May 26,1836."

   As it is not my wish to advert to abolitionism again, I will remark
   here, that it has continued to agitate the Church from that time to
   this, much disturbing its peace, and, in some of the annual
   conferences, distracting its councils, producing finally the secession
   of a few individuals. Indeed, it was feared, for a time, that its
   disastrous results would be extensively felt, particularly in some of
   the eastern and northern conferences; but it has so far passed off in a
   much more quiet manner than was anticipated, and it is to be hoped that
   but few, comparatively, will be seriously and lastingly injured by
   these injudicious measures. Perhaps, however, a future day may disclose
   facts of a different character, and that a future historian may be
   called to bear his testimony to a different result. Though it is
   somewhat difficult to reconcile the conduct of some few leaders in the
   ranks of abolitionism with a sincere regard to the interests of truth
   and righteousness, yet we are willing to award to most of those who
   engaged in the controversy an honest desire to meliorate the condition
   of the slave, and to purify the Church from what they considered a
   sinful pollution; although we cannot but think that their measures were
   ill-chosen, their arguments in the main defective, and their severe
   denunciations and personal criminations wholly unjustifiable.

   The following resolutions have an important bearing upon the
   itinerancy, and the necessity for them grew out of an increased
   disposition among some of our preachers to engage in agencies for
   societies with which we had no connection, and to some of which, as a
   Church, we were opposed: --
    1. Resolved, That this conference deem it highly culpable for any
       member of an annual conference, especially for those sustaining
       supernumerary or effective relations, to engage in agencies not
       known or recognized in the Methodist Episcopal Church.
    2. Resolved, That any presiding elder who consents for a preacher to
       leave the work assigned him to engage in agencies of any kind not
       recognized in the Methodist Episcopal Church, or to become an
       editor of a paper, is an aggressor in the sight of his brethren,
       and should be called to an account for his conduct.
    3. Resolved, That there is no such relation provided for in our
       Discipline as that held by an individual who is left without an
       appointment at his own request, and that such relations are not
       promotive of the interests of Methodism.
    4. Resolved, That it is highly improper for any member of an annual
       conference to engage in political strife, and to offer for a seat
       in the legislative councils, or Congress hall, or to engage in
       speculations of any kind that do not draw his earnest attention to
       the salvation of souls."

   These resolutions were not incorporated in the Discipline, but were
   ordered to be recorded in the journal of each annual conference, for
   the regulation of all concerned; and the two first have been of special
   use in restraining those who seemed much inclined to leave their
   appropriate work for the purpose of becoming itinerant lecturers in
   favor of abolitionism, which was then raging in some portions of our
   country, and which was threatening the peace and harmony of the Church
   and the nation. And it is believed that the measures of this General
   Conference, and the subsequent acts of the New York conference, founded
   upon the known and expressed will of the General Conference, tended
   very much to check the ebullition of that frenzy which had seized the
   minds of so many of our preachers and people.

   Having finished its work, the conference adjourned late in the evening
   of May the 27th, to meet again in the city of Baltimore, Md., May 1,
   1840.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 14

    From the close of the General Conference of 1836 to the commencement of the
    General Conference of 1840

   From the numbers taken at the several annual conferences, and published
   in Cincinnati, it was ascertained that there was a diminution in the
   aggregate number of Church members for this year, notwithstanding the
   zeal which had been displayed in some sections of the Church to purify
   it from the defilements of slavery. The disclosure of this fact, an
   event so unusual in our history, led to a serious inquiry into its
   causes, and various conjectures were put afloat, some of them
   chimerical enough, to account for it. Without attempting to decide
   dogmatically upon a question admitting of such a wide range of
   discussion, and which, after all, is not of so easy solution as some
   may imagine, the following are submitted as the most likely causes to
   tend to such a result.
    1. The unusual excitement which had pervaded the country for a few
       past years, seemed to be followed by a sifting of the Church of
       many who, under that excitement, might have started in the
       Christian race without duly "counting the cost," and therefore in
       the "time of temptation fell away."
    2. The revival of evangelical religion among other denominations might
       have contributed its full quota in lessening the number of
       accessions to our communion. Time was, in many places, when souls
       were truly awakened to a sense of their lost estate, that they came
       to our ministry as a matter of course, in order to get spiritual
       food suited to their wants, other denominations not insisting as
       they ought upon the evangelical doctrines of the Bible, such as the
       new birth, justification by faith, the witness and fruits of the
       Spirit. Now the times were greatly altered for the better in this
       respect. During the progress of the great revivals in our country,
       nearly all denominations were partakers "of the benefit," entered
       heartily into the work, and their ministers enforced upon the
       people the great truths of God our Saviour with powerful effect.
       The consequence was, many who otherwise would probably have come
       among us, connected themselves with other denominations.
    3. In the western country especially, where the decrease was greatest,
       by neglecting to furnish convenient places of worship in the more
       populous villages, others came in and took possession of them, and
       thus drew the population around them before we were aware of it,
       and thus circumscribed the sphere of our influence in these
       particular places.
    4. The agitations consequent upon the discussions respecting slavery
       and abolitionism, no doubt tended to distract the minds of many,
       and to prevent the growth of experimental and practical religion.

   But whatever may have been the causes of this diminution in numbers,
   the fact awakened a spirit of inquiry, highly beneficial in its
   results. It led to self-examination, to self-abasement, humiliation,
   and prayer, that God might again visit his heritage with the outpouring
   of his Spirit, and a revival of his work.

   Notwithstanding this apparent declension in the general work, there was
   a gradual enlargement of the field of missionary labor, the particulars
   of which will be mentioned hereafter.

   The deaths of thirty-five preachers are recorded this year; one hundred
   and thirty-six had located, one hundred and sixteen were returned
   supernumerary, one hundred and sixty-five superannuated, four had
   withdrawn, and four were expelled.

   Among those whose deaths are recorded this year, we find the name of
   Philip Gatch, who joined the traveling ministry in 1773, under the
   superintendence of Thomas Rankin, when there were but ten traveling
   preachers in America. He outlived all his contemporaries, and
   maintained an unblemished reputation to the last, though he desisted
   from the labors of an itinerant preacher from the year 1787 until
   toward the close of his life, when he was readmitted in the relation of
   a superannuated preacher. In this relation he died on Sabbath evening,
   the twenty-eighth day of December, 1835, in the eighty-fifth year of
   his age. On the day of his eighty-fourth year he preached his last
   sermon, and finally closed his life in great peace of mind, and no
   doubt rests from his labors.

   In the early days of his ministry he endured sometimes "a great fight
   of affliction," having to contend with the common prejudices of the day
   against Methodist preachers, and with the troubles originating from the
   war of the Revolution. He, however, kept "his soul in patience," and
   manfully buffeted the waves of persecution which sometimes raged around
   him, though he did not wholly escape their fury. At one time he fell
   into the hands of a mob, who, while endeavoring to cover him with tar,
   cruelly drew some of it across his naked eye-ball, which came near
   destroying the use of his eye; but he still persevered in his work, "as
   seeing Him who is invisible," and who upholds and rewards his faithful
   servants in the midst of their labors and sufferings. Want of health
   compelled him to desist from the work of a traveling preacher, and in
   1798 he removed into the Northwestern territory, now state of Ohio, and
   settled on the Little Miami, a few miles from Cincinnati. The country
   was then new, Cincinnati being only an inconsiderable village, and
   Methodism scarcely known to its inhabitants. Here he became actively
   and usefully engaged as a local preacher, and was much respected as a
   citizen, contributing greatly, by his active exertions and example of
   piety and diligence, to advance the cause of religion and morals.

   Not willing that he should die in obscurity, unwept and forgotten, his
   brethren of the Ohio conference readmitted him into their fellowship as
   a worn-out veteran of the cross, and he ended his days in the sight of
   his brethren, beloved and respected as "an old disciple" of his Lord
   and Master.

   Christopher Fry, of the Baltimore conference, was a minister of
   considerable age and standing, having joined the traveling connection
   in 1802.

   Though not possessed of brilliant talents as a preacher, he was among
   the most useful, being deeply read in the Holy Scriptures, and always
   enforcing the truths which he uttered by the fervency of his piety, and
   the godliness of his example. Apt to teach, and wise to govern, he was
   selected to fill the office of presiding elder, and he much endeared
   himself to his brethren by the gentleness of his manners, by his
   diligence in his calling, and his strict regard to the discipline of
   his Church.

   Though his death was sudden and unexpected to his friends, it did not
   find him unprepared. On the sabbath before his death, in an address
   which he delivered to the people, he dwelt, with great fervor of spirit
   and solemnity of manner, upon Christian experience, and then adverting
   to his own, he testified to the knowledge he had of the love of God in
   his heart, and the many years he had enjoyed the witness of his
   acceptance in the sight of God. "For this faith," he remarked with
   emphasis, "I would be willing to burn at the stake." Two days after
   this, while attending to the operations of a threshing machine, it
   caught his leg, and ere he could be extricated from his perilous
   condition, his thigh bone was broken, his knee crushed, and nearly the
   entire limb severely injured. He survived these injuries only about
   three hours. In the midst of his exquisite sufferings he said, in
   answer to a question by his beloved and weeping wife, "My whole body is
   in tumult, but my soul is calm and stayed on God." After a short
   interval, in answer to a friend who inquired the state of his mind, he
   said, "My body is in an agony of pain, but my soul is happy, happy,
   happy!" With these words faltering upon his lips, he ceased to suffer
   and to breathe, and no doubt went to Abraham's bosom.

   Of the others who had taken their departure, excellent things are said
   both of their life and death; and their reward is doubtless with their
   God.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 564,974; Last Year: 566,957;
   Decrease: 1,983 -- Colored This Year: 82,661; Last Year: 83,135;
   Decrease: 474 -- Indians This Year: 3,033; Last Year: 2,436; Increase:
   597 -- Total This Year: 650,668; Last Year: 652,528 -- Decrease: 1,860
   -- Preachers This Year: 2,929; Last Year: 2,758; Increase: 171.

  1837

   This decrease in the number of Church members has already been
   accounted for, and, as might be supposed, the fact led to "great
   searchings of heart" among those who felt as they ought for the
   prosperity of the Church, and to an application of those means which
   were necessary for a revival of the work of God.

   Among the means used for the revival and spread of the work of God, was
   that of adding strength to the missionary work.

   We have already seen that efforts had been made to establish missions
   in South America. On the 22d of March, 1836, the Rev. Justin Spaulding,
   of the New England conference, sailed from the port of New York for Rio
   de Janeiro, the capital of the Brazilian empire. This magnificent city
   contains many residents from different parts of Europe and the United
   States, and being a place of considerable trade, a number of English
   and American sailors are constantly in the port. By these foreigners
   brother Spaulding was affectionately received, and the letters received
   from him, after his arrival, gave us reason to hope for a favorable
   issue of his labors.

   Since the change in the political affairs of the country, though the
   Roman Catholic religion is still the religion of the empire, and is
   supported by the law of the land, a much more liberal spirit prevails
   among the higher orders of society, and their confidence in the
   infallibility of the priesthood, and those superstitions by which that
   church is distinguished, is much weakened; it is, therefore, hoped that
   the time is not distant when the "blindness which has happened" to that
   branch of the Christian church shall be removed, and a way opened for a
   free and unrestrained promulgation of the pure gospel of Jesus Christ
   in the empire of Brazil.

   In the present state of things, however, brother Spaulding could have
   access only to the English and American portion of the population. To
   as many of these as would attend his meeting he preached in a private
   room, prepared for the purpose, and he had the happiness of finding a
   few who were willing to unite with him in his pious endeavors to spread
   Scriptural truth and holiness among the people. He was much aided in
   this good work by distributing among the people the holy Scriptures in
   the Portuguese language, with which he was generously furnished
   gratuitously by the American Bible Society. Indeed, he found the
   people, even the natives of the country, eager to read the word of God
   in their own language, notwithstanding the prejudices which had been
   excited against it by their early education.

   Such were the encouraging prospects before him, that on the
   recommendation of brother Spaulding, an additional missionary, the Rev.
   Daniel P. Kidder, of the Genesee conference, and a male and female
   teacher, were selected and sent to this field of labor. They sailed
   from the port of Boston on the 12th of November, 1837, and arrived in
   safety to their place of destination. They immediately entered upon
   their work with a fair prospect of success; but the school, though
   prosperous for a season, did not answer our expectations, and was
   therefore abandoned in despair. Brother Kidder, after mastering the
   Portuguese language, traveled extensively from one city and village to
   another, distributing Bibles and tracts, and was generally received
   with affection and treated with respect, though the civil regulations
   of the country would not allow him to preach to the natives in their
   own language.

   In Rio de Janeiro brother Spaulding had formed a small class, had
   established a sabbath school, and he occasionally preached to the
   sailors on board of the American vessels which were in the port. In
   this good work he was much encouraged by Commodore Nicholson, the
   United States naval officer, to whom he was favorably known as a
   minister of the gospel, and who gave countenance to his efforts. Yet
   with all these labors and hopeful prospects, Rio de Janeiro is a hard
   place for the gospel to operate upon, and has yielded but little fruit
   of our labor. The strong prejudices of the Catholic population, the
   indifference of most of those who call themselves Protestants, and the
   want of full toleration for the exercise of religious worship, present
   almost insuperable barriers in the way of planting the seeds of divine
   truth in that rugged soil. It is hoped, however, that a steady
   perseverance "in well doing" will eventually overcome opposition, and
   that we shall yet see South America delivered from the shackles of
   Romanism, and brought into the glorious "liberty of the sons of God."

   On the 14th of October, 1836, the Rev. John Dempster, of the Oneida
   conference, sailed from New York, as a missionary for Buenos Ayres, the
   capital of the Argentine republic, in South America. In this delightful
   city, which takes its name (good air) from the salubrity of the
   climate, there were supposed to be about five thousand foreigners,
   English, Scotch, and Americans, to whom brother Dempster, on his
   arrival, made known the objects of his visit. He was cordially
   received, and he soon opened his mission under favorable auspices, by
   preaching to a large and attentive congregation assembled in a room
   which he had hired for that purpose. His preaching soon made a most
   favorable impression upon the minds of the people, and his congregation
   increased to that degree, that he found it necessary to enlarge his
   place of worship, and he was, the next year, authorized by the board of
   managers to purchase a lot of ground, and proceed to the erection of a
   house of worship, about fifteen hundred dollars being subscribed by the
   people in Buenos Ayres, and ten thousand dollars more appropriated by
   the managers, to meet the expenses.

   These bright prospects were, however, soon eclipsed in some measure by
   a rigid blockade established by the government of France, so that all
   ingress and egress for foreign vessels, except ships of war belonging
   to neutral nations, were prevented. This measure of seeking national
   redress for supposed wrongs very soon brought much distress upon the
   people, cut off all intercourse by merchantmen, and drove many of the
   foreign residents to seek an asylum in Monte Video and other places, as
   might best suit their convenience. But though brother Dempster, in
   consequence of these things, was very reluctantly compelled to remit
   his endeavors to build a church, and though his congregation was
   somewhat diminished in numbers, yet he persevered in his work, acquired
   more and more of the public confidence, and even succeeded in
   establishing a flourishing school. In this last work he was aided by
   the arrival of a teacher, Mr. Hiram A. Wilson, a graduate of the
   Wesleyan University, who was sent by the managers, in September of
   1838. He soon commenced a school in Buenos Ayres, and it has so
   prospered, that in 1840 another male and a female teacher were sent to
   aid him in this good work. There is therefore every reason to believe
   that the issue of this mission will be prosperous.

   Among the most important missions on our list is Liberia, an account of
   which, until the deaths of Cox and Wright, has already been given. In
   1835 the Rev. John Seys of the Oneida conference, was appointed by
   Bishop Hedding the superintendent of this mission. He entered upon this
   hazardous enterprise with an enlightened zeal, and soon succeeded in
   establishing preaching, and forming societies in nearly all the
   settlements in Liberia. The next year he was joined by the Rev. J. B.
   Barton, of the Georgia conference, and they strengthened each other's
   hands in the work of the Lord. Though a war commenced upon the
   colonists by one of the native chiefs, which spread death in the
   colony, and sickness had deprived brother Seys of a promising son, and
   prostrated himself wife, and brother Barton, for a season, yet he and
   they persevered in faith and hope, and they reported for the year 1836
   three hundred and seventy-five members of the Church, and one hundred
   and twenty-eight children in the schools.

   We have already seen that there were in Liberia several colored local
   preachers, most of whom had emigrated to that country for the purpose
   of enjoying the blessings of civil and religious liberty in their
   "fatherland." These were called into the active service of the
   ministry, and were eminently useful in building up the cause of God.
   One of them, brother Williams, formerly lieutenant-governor of the
   colony, volunteered his services to penetrate into the Congo country,
   for the purpose of ascertaining the probability of establishing a
   mission and school in king Boatswain's dominions the king having
   manifested much friendship for the colonists and the mission. He was
   kindly received, and obtained from this friendly chief a promise of
   patronage and assistance. And though the good design was not carried
   into effect immediately, on account of a war which commenced about that
   time between the king and the Golah tribe yet the attempt led to
   important results; for soon after brother Seys was waited upon by a
   messenger from Boatswain, escorted by no less than two hundred men,
   among whom were some of his principal generals, requesting that a
   teacher might be speedily sent among them. After much prayer and
   consultation, a young colonist of good education and deep piety, by the
   name of Jacobs, was appointed for that station, at which the natives
   who had been sent on this errand of mercy expressed great satisfaction
   and joy.

   By means of these additional laborers, they enlarged the sphere of
   their operations, established a new mission at Bushrod island,
   commenced a new stone house for divine worship in Monrovia, and a
   manual labor school at Millsburgh, called the Whiteplains Manual Labor
   school, both of which have been since completed; the former is filled
   from one sabbath to another with attentive hearers, and the latter is
   in successful operation, imparting the blessings of education and
   religion to the rising generation.

   In the month of September, 1836, brother Seys, with a view to recruit
   his health, which had been much impaired by the corroding influence of
   the climate, and his excessive labors, visited the United States, and
   traveled extensively, holding missionary meetings, giving information
   to the people respecting the state of things in Africa, and taking up
   collections in behalf of the mission. This movement had a most happy
   effect in awakening a spirit of prayer, of liberality, and of active
   exertions in the cause of missions. In the following October he
   returned, taking in company with him, as his colleagues in labor and
   suffering, the Rev. Squire Chase, of the Oneida conference, and the
   Rev. George Brown, a colored local preacher of piety and talents, who,
   upon his arrival in Liberia, entered the traveling ministry, and has
   been very useful.

   As the General Conference of 1836 had constituted the Liberia mission
   into a mission annual conference, brother Seys, as its superintendent,
   had called the preachers together, organized them into a conference,
   and nearly all the colored local preachers had become its members, and
   were therefore not considered in the character of traveling preachers.
   His gave a systematic energy to their operations, which added much to
   their strength and efficiency, and extended their influence more
   powerfully throughout the colony.

   As the members of the mission family, as well as the colonists, had
   suffered, and were still suffering much for want of a competent
   physician, the board adopted measures for furnishing them with one, and
   also with no more female teachers. Accordingly, in the month of June of
   this year, Dr. S. M. E. Goheen, a young physician of piety and talent,
   embarked in company with the teachers for Liberia. They arrived in
   safety, and entered upon their work with energy and success. Dr. Goheen
   has been eminently useful as a physician, having succeeded admirably in
   checking and controlling the disease of the country, which has proved
   fatal to so many white people, as well as to many of the colonists,
   more especially soon after their landing while undergoing their
   acclimation. The teachers also have so far filled their stations to
   general acceptance, and they still continue their work for the benefit
   of the children and youth of their own sex.

   The mission was greatly owned of God this year. In nearly all the
   stations, now employing no less than fifteen missionaries, white and
   colored, God poured out his Spirit, so that there were added to the
   Methodist Episcopal Church no less than one hundred and sixty members,
   twenty of whom were natives. In addition to the above-mentioned
   missionaries, and the physician, who aided the mission much by his
   active endeavors to promote the general cause, there were seven school
   teachers, having charge of two hundred and twenty-one pupils; and also
   three hundred children were taught in the sabbath schools. A temperance
   society was formed, with auxiliaries, on the pledge of total abstinence
   from intoxicating liquors as a beverage; and all things seemed to be
   going on prosperously. Brother Chase, however, soon fell sick of the
   African fever, and he was so prostrated as to abandon all hopes of
   recovery there; accordingly he returned to the United States, where he
   has since been restored to his usual health.

   From this prosperous state of things in Liberia, the board of managers
   determined, on the pressing representation of brother Seys, to
   establish a classical school. A teacher, the Rev. J. Burton, a local
   preacher, and a graduate of Allegheny College, was accordingly engaged,
   and funds appropriated for erecting a suitable building, and furnishing
   the needful books, apparatus, etc. A printer was also appointed, who
   was furnished with a press and materials for printing, and brother Seys
   was authorized to issue a semimonthly paper, to be called "Africa's
   Luminary," of which he was appointed editor. In 1839 the academy went
   into operation; and the first number of Africa's Luminary was issued on
   the fifteenth of March, 1839. Both its contents and mechanical
   execution reflect honor upon its editor and printer.

   An additional missionary was also sent out by the same expedition, the
   Rev. W. Stocker. He did not, however, long survive. Soon after his
   arrival, he was seized with the fever of the climate, and after
   lingering for a while, alternately reviving and sinking, he finally
   fell asleep in Jesus, in the hope of everlasting life.

   In the same year the mission was destined to suffer another loss by the
   death of one of its most devoted missionaries, the Rev. J. B. Barton.
   He had labored for the benefit of Africa nearly four years, with great
   zeal and usefulness, and, to all human appearance, had become so
   acclimated as to be able to resist the inroads of the fever for many
   years. The year before his death he visited the land of his birth,
   married him a pious wife, and returned to Liberia with a view to devote
   the residue of his days to the salvation of Africa; but not long after
   his return, his young wife, with her infant child, was called to mourn
   over the sudden death of a pious and devoted husband, in a strange and
   foreign land. As, however, he lived to the Lord, so he died in the
   Lord, and is enjoying the reward of his sacrifices and labors in the
   world of glory.

   It had been the earnest desire of the board of managers and of the
   bishops, that, in addition to supplying the colonists with the word and
   ordinances of the gospel, the native population should not be
   neglected. Accordingly, efforts had been made, hitherto with but little
   immediate success, to penetrate into the interior, and call the
   attention of the native Africans to the blessings of Christianity. Some
   few, who had occasionally mingled with the colonists, and attended our
   places of worship, had tasted "that the Lord is good," and twenty of
   these had become members of the Church. Still, however, but a feeble
   impression had been made upon the minds of the "heathen round about,"
   and the efforts to reach them more effectually with gospel truth were
   renewed with great ardor in 1838. At length, a building was erected and
   a school opened in a place bordering on heathen territory, called, in
   honor of the bishop who had interested himself much in behalf of the
   Liberia mission, Heddington, for the special benefit of native children
   and youth, and the charge of it was given to brother George Brown. Here
   he commenced operations, uniting manual labor with mental training. God
   honored the enterprise. In a short time the house was filled, and the
   divine Spirit was poured out upon its inmates, and how between seventy
   and eighty have professed a "knowledge of salvation by the remission of
   sins."

   There are now, 1840, employed in this interesting mission, fourteen
   missionaries, six teachers, and one physician. In the several stations
   there are seven hundred and twenty-eight Church members, and about four
   hundred pupils in the several schools. The mission is, indeed, exerting
   a hallowing influence upon almost the entire population of the colony,
   and gradually extending its influence among the native Africans
   themselves. If, therefore, no untoward circumstance shall supervene to
   interrupt its progress, but it shall go on in its career of usefulness
   as it has been begun, and thus far advanced, increasing in power and
   influence in a ratio already seen, who can calculate the benefits it
   shall confer upon the benighted sons and daughters of Africa! May God
   ever have it under his holy protection.

   In the western parts of our country, new fields for missionary
   enterprise were daily opening, for which the Missionary Society was
   affording supplies; but as they differ nothing materially from ordinary
   new circuits, it is considered inexpedient to swell this History in
   naming them more particularly than to say, that they were the means of
   giving to these new and destitute places increased facilities for
   securing gospel privileges, and the surest means of temporal and
   spiritual prosperity.

   The aboriginal missions, heretofore particularly noticed, were
   generally prosperous, though some of them were still suffering from the
   removal of the Indians to their new homes west of the Mississippi.

   Thirty-two preachers had died during the past year; one hundred and
   thirty-five located, one hundred were returned supernumerary, and two
   hundred and fourteen superannuated; four had been expelled, and three
   had withdrawn.

   An effort had been made to ascertain the number of local preachers, and
   this year I find the number returned on the Minutes to be 4,954. As,
   however, all the conferences had not sent in their reports, the
   enumeration must have been incomplete.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 570,123; Last Year: 564,974;
   Increase: 5,149 -- Colored This Year: 76,657; Last Year: 82,296;
   Decrease: 5,639 -- Indians This Year: 2,695; Last Year: 2,833;
   Decrease: 138 -- Total This Year: 658,574; [6] Last Year: 653,032 --
   Increase: 5,542 -- Preachers This Year: 3,147; Last Year: 2,929;
   Increase: 218.

  1838

   The work of God in the conversion of souls, judging from accessions
   which were made to the Church, was much more prosperous than it had
   been for the two past years. Revivals were prevalent, and the spirit of
   missions and the cause of education were advancing more and more.

   In the northwestern part of the Illinois conference, efforts had been
   made to introduce the gospel among the Winnebago, Sioux, and Crow
   Indians, with some degree of success, and a few schools had been
   established for the education of their children. This year they were
   more regularly supplied with laborers, and with a better prospect of
   success, though the good work by no means prospered as it had done
   among the other tribes for whose salvation we had labored. But among
   the Potawattomies about one hundred were added to the Church.

   In the summer of l837 a spirited effort was made to establish missions
   in the republic of Texas. This extensive and fertile country, first
   visited by La Salle in 1685, lying south of the state of Arkansas and
   west of Louisiana, formed a part of the Mexican republic, and contains
   not less than 193,000 square miles. Its climate is remarkably mild and
   healthy, the soil rich and productive, bringing forth an abundance of
   cotton, sugar-cane, corn, and other staples common to the southern
   states and to Mexico. Into this fertile region many of the citizens of
   the United States had removed, being invited by the beauty and
   fertility of the country, and the favorable terms on which grants of
   land had been made to actual settlers by the Mexican government. Hence
   large settlements had been formed along the Rio Colorado and Rio
   Brasos, and some towns had become places of considerable trade, and
   were fast rising into importance. The eastern part of Texas, more
   especially, was settled principally by emigrants from the United
   States.

   These, together with those Mexicans who took the liberty of thinking
   for themselves, became very restless under the oppressive government of
   Mexico, the intolerant spirit of which proscribed all religious sects
   except the Roman Catholic, and otherwise exacted obedience to laws
   which pressed heavily upon those who had been accustomed to breathe the
   free air, and to enjoy the immunities of citizens of the United States.
   Hence an insurrectionary movement commenced, which eventuated in the
   severance of the union of Texas with Mexico, and the establishment of
   an independent government. The battle of San Jacinto, in which the
   American arms triumphed over the prowess of Santa Anna, the Mexican
   general, decided the fate of Texas, and left the inhabitants at liberty
   to establish a government according to their own choice; and they
   proceeded to frame one after the model of the United States, in which
   civil and religious rights and privileges were secured alike to all
   sects and parties. This opened the way for the missionary of the cross
   to enter and proclaim salvation unto the people.

   Among those who removed into Texas, there were several members of our
   own Church, some of whom were local preachers; and with a view to
   preserve their piety, they assembled together for mutual edification
   and comfort, sending, in the mean time, a loud and urgent call to their
   brethren in the United States for help. The Missionary Society
   responded to this call, and accepted of the services of the Rev. Dr.
   Ruter, a member of the Pittsburgh conference, and president of the
   Allegheny College, who resigned his presidency, and offered himself as
   a missionary for Texas. Accordingly, in the summer of 1837, accompanied
   by two young preachers, Dr. Ruter entered upon his work in this young
   republic. They found the people ripe for the gospel. Though vice and
   ignorance of spiritual things prevailed to an alarming extent, yet the
   missionaries were received with great respect and affection, and they
   soon succeeded in forming circuits, and establishing preaching in
   different parts of the country. In St. Augustine, Nacogdoches, Houston,
   and Washington, they commenced building houses of worship, the people
   subscribing liberally toward the expense, besides contributing about
   $1000 toward the support of their preacher.

   This promising state of things induced the proper authorities of the
   Church to send the next year additional laborers into that fruitful
   field, and they have been gradually increased until, at the last
   General Conference, the Texas annual conference was organized, and they
   have now nineteen preachers, and about one thousand Church members,
   nearly as many as there were in the United States at the first
   conference in 1773.

   Soon after the arrival of Dr. Ruter in Texas, he adopted measures,
   being encouraged by the liberal offers of the government and the
   people, for establishing a college. And though he did not live to
   realize the object of his wishes in this respect, being cut off in the
   midst of his usefulness, yet the enterprise has been prosecuted by his
   successors in the work, and the college has been erected and gone into
   operation tinder the most favorable circumstances. The government
   appropriated eight thousand eight hundred and eighty-three acres of
   land for its endowment, granted a liberal charter, and "Rutersville,"
   the name of the township in which the college is located, commemorates
   the talents and zeal with which its founder prosecuted the noble
   enterprise, and the veneration which is felt for his memory by his
   survivors. It is pleasantly situated, in a healthy and delightful part
   of the country, and promises much usefulness to the rising population
   of that growing republic.

   This, therefore, is a most promising field of missionary labor, giving
   sure indications of an ample harvest of souls to its enterprising
   cultivators.

   The constant influx of Germans into our country, especially into some
   of the cities and villages of the west, suggested the necessity of
   establishing missions for their special benefit. Accordingly, in 1836,
   a mission was commenced in Cincinnati, and it was given in charge of
   the Rev. William Nast, a young German preacher of sound education and
   deep piety, who could preach and write both in the German and English
   languages. He entered upon his work with an enlightened zeal, and was
   successful in making good and lasting impressions upon the minds and
   hearts of many of his countrymen. The work has gone on steadily from
   that day to this, spreading in various directions in the states of Ohio
   and Pennsylvania, in Wheeling, Pittsburgh, and a number of other
   places, so that there are now 1840) six German missionaries employed,
   and there are on the several circuits upward of four hundred members of
   the Church.

   These missions have been much aided by the American Bible and Tract
   Societies, which have made liberal donations of German Bibles and
   tracts for gratuitous distribution among the people.

   In the city of New York a mission was commenced this year for the
   benefit of the French population who were resident here. A young
   Frenchman by the name of Williamson had recently been made a partaker
   of pardoning mercy, had become a member of our Church, and be felt a
   great concern of mind for the salvation of his countrymen, many of whom
   were "as sheep without a shepherd." There had, indeed, been a society
   of French people attached to our Church in the city of New York for a
   number of years, the germ of which was imported here from the island of
   Guernsey, where our British brethren had labored with success for a
   series of years.

   Mr. Williamson hired a room for preaching, and has continued his labors
   with diligence to the present time; but such are the prejudices of the
   greater proportion of the French population, that his congregation has
   been but small, and the prospects of success are rather gloomy. A few,
   however, have been brought from darkness to light, who, it is hoped,
   may "be faithful until death."

   These, together with the constant enlargement of our work in the new
   countries, and the more vigorous action generally throughout our
   borders, gave us an increase to our membership this year of upward of
   forty thousand.

   The Georgia conference, stimulated by the example of their brethren in
   other places, had made, and were now making, spirited and successful
   efforts in the cause of education. In 1835 they had commenced a
   classical and manual labor school in Covington, Ga., which was soon in
   successful operation, exerting an enlightening and hallowing influence
   upon the youth intrusted to its tuition and care. A literary
   institution was also established for the education of females, which
   bids fair to confer substantial blessings upon that class of the
   population. In 1836 the Emory College was founded, and it has since
   gone into operation under the presidency of the Rev. Ignatius A. Few,
   whose classical learning and deep piety eminently qualify him for his
   station. These institutions are gathering around them the youth of the
   country, of both sexes, and prove the' capabilities of our people to
   educate their own sons and daughters, provided suitable mean are used
   to call them into action.

   Ninety-eight preachers were located this year, six expelled, two had
   withdrawn, one hundred and six returned supernumerary, two hundred and
   sixteen superannuated, and seventeen had died.

   We have already seen that the Texas mission was placed under the
   superintendence of Dr. Martin Ruter. Here he ended his days. He
   commenced his itinerant career in the early days of Methodism in New
   England, when he was only sixteen years of age, and was admitted on
   trial in the New York conference in 1801. In 1804 he went as a
   missionary to Montreal, in Lower Canada, where he gave great
   satisfaction to the people by the diligence and ability with which he
   discharged his duties. Though young in the ministry, he evinced a
   thorough acquaintance with the truths of the gospel, having applied
   himself with great assiduity to study, and particularly to the study of
   the Bible.

   After filling some of the most important stations in the bounds of the
   New England conference, after that conference was formed, when a branch
   of the Book Concern was established in Cincinnati, in 1820, brother
   Ruter was appointed by the General Conference to the charge of that
   institution. In this station he continued, by a re-election in 1824,
   eight years, discharging its duties with great fidelity.

   Before the expiration of his term as book agent, he was elected
   president of the Augusta College, and entered upon its duties in 1828,
   where he continued for about four years, when, on resigning his office,
   he was transferred to the Pittsburgh conference. Soon after his
   transfer he was called to preside over the Allegheny College, an
   institution which he was chiefly instrumental in establishing and
   putting into successful operation. This office he filled for about
   three years, when he resigned his station for the purpose of embarking
   in the more laborious and hazardous enterprise of carrying the gospel
   and establishing Methodism in the republic of Texas. He entered upon
   his work in the month of October, 1837, and soon laid plans for
   systematizing the labor and enlarging the boundaries of that extensive
   vineyard of the Lord, so is to comprehend as much as practicable within
   the several circuits which were formed by him and his colleagues in the
   missionary work.

   Not content with the simple routine of labor appertaining to a
   Methodist preacher, being encouraged by the leading men of the
   republic, he devised a plan for establishing a college and other
   seminaries of learning; for he was always an ardent friend of
   literature and science. In these various labors he was incessantly
   engaged from the time he entered Texas until sickness compelled him to
   desist. His sufferings were somewhat protracted and severe. He bore
   them, however, with patience and submission to the divine will, and
   finally ended his days upon earth in peace, and the hope of eternal
   life.

   Dr. Ruter deserves great credit for his attainments in literature and
   science. Born in humble circumstances, receiving nothing more than a
   common school education, and then entering the itinerancy at the early
   age of sixteen -- an example not to be imitated if it can be
   consistently avoided-he was deprived of those literary advantages in
   his youth, which are generally considered essential to eminence it a
   more mature time of life. Yet he surmounted the difficulties of his
   situation, and astonished both himself and his friends by his literary
   and scientific attainments. To the study of the Latin, Greek, and
   Hebrew languages, as well as the French, he applied himself with
   successful diligence, and gave evidence of how much may be accomplished
   by a constant application of our powers, and an assiduous improvement
   of our time and opportunities, even in the midst of discouraging
   obstacles, and the want of the most appropriate means of instruction.

   It is not, indeed, pretended that his mind was of the first order. For
   strength of intellectual powers, and for depth and variety of learning,
   many others stood far in advance of Dr. Ruter. But, possessed of a good
   understanding, and being impelled by an ardent thirst for knowledge, he
   "sowed beside all waters," and in due time reaped a plentiful harvest.
   It would, indeed, be a reflection upon the discernment of those who
   awarded to him the honors of a college twice, by conferring first the
   degree of A. M., and secondly of B. D., to suppose that his literary
   and theological attainments were not respectable, and his deportment
   irreproachable Equally strong in his favor is the fact of his having
   been elected to the presidency of the Augusta and Allegheny Colleges,
   and of their having prospered tinder his oversight though it may be
   admitted that in these stations he did not shine with a brilliancy
   equal to general expectation.

   Divine grace had done much for him. Having been made a partaker of
   justification by faith in Jesus Christ in the days of his youth, and
   having entered upon the duties of an itinerant minister ere he had
   attained maturity of age and experience, he won for himself, by the
   blessing of God on his exertions, the character of a faithful servant
   of God, living and dying in the confidence and affection of his
   brethren. As a preacher of righteousness he was "in doctrine
   uncorrupt," "in labors abundant," and in success considerable. His
   forsaking the inviting fields of literature and science, in which he
   had moved with so much ease to himself and satisfaction to his friends,
   to encounter the hardships and privations of a missionary of the cross
   in the wilds of Texas, evinces at once the strength of his faith, and
   of his sincere devotion to the cause of Christ. He was now about
   fifty-two years of age, was surrounded with domestic comforts, lived in
   the midst of his friends, and might therefore have spent the remainder
   of his days in comparative ease and comfort; but the wants of the sons
   and daughters of Texas came up before him, accompanied with those
   impressive motives which, to a heart like his, were irresistible; and
   he obeyed the call and ran to the rescue of those who were ready to
   "perish for lack of knowledge." He went; and before he fell, he had
   established a reputation among the people of Texas as imperishable as
   the town of "Rutersville," which name was designed to perpetuate the
   memory of the man who sacrificed his life for their salvation.

   Others might be mentioned, no less eminent for their Christian virtues
   and ministerial usefulness, "whose praise is in all the Churches" where
   they were known and their worth duly appreciated. But their "record is
   on high," and their reward is with their God, in the midst of those who
   "turned many to righteousness. Such were John A. Waterman, of the
   Pittsburgh conference, and Robert L. Kennon, of the Alabama conference,
   who, by their early piety and great assiduity in their calling, rose to
   eminence among their brethren, and died equally honored and lamented.
   Andrew Hemphill also, of Irish extraction, gave evidence of that
   unreserved devotion to God which distinguished most of the early
   Methodist preachers, and who, for about thirty-five years, maintained
   the purity and dignity of the Christian ministry.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 615,212; Last Year: 575,077;
   Increase: 40,135 -- Colored This Year: 79,236; Last Year: 76,240;
   Increase: 2,996 -- Indians This Year: 2,101; Last Year: 2,695;
   Decrease: 594 -- Local Preachers This Year: 5,792; Last Year: 4,954;
   Increase: 838 -- Traveling Preachers This Year: 3,332; Last Year:
   3,147; Increase: 185 -- Total This Year: 705,673; Last Year: 662,113 --
   Increase: 43,560

  1839

   The general interests of the Church were this year promoted by the
   simultaneous and energetic action of the different branches of
   ecclesiastical regulations, all of which were brought to bear upon the
   understandings and hearts of the people under our influence. But the
   most important accession which was made to the work was the
   reinforcement sent to the Oregon mission. After the arrival of the
   last-mentioned family, and holding a general consultation, it was
   finally agreed that brother Jason Lee should return to the United
   States, with a view to strengthen the mission by procuring the aid of
   additional missionaries, farmers, mechanics, etc. Being remote from all
   civilized society, except the small settlement at Williamette, and the
   members of the Hudson Bay Company at Fort Vancouver, it seemed
   essential to the prosperity of the mission, that it should be furnished
   with means to itself with food, buildings, and all necessary apparatus
   for carrying on farming, and the needful mechanic arts. Accordingly,
   arrangements were made for sending an additional family; and, on the
   9th of October of this year, a company, consisting of fifty persons,
   including six missionaries, with their wives and children, a physician,
   wife and child, a missionary steward, wife and two children, two
   farmers, wives and children, two carpenters, a cabinet-maker, and a
   blacksmith, their wives and children, together with five female
   teachers, sailed from the port of New York for the Oregon territory, by
   way of the Sandwich islands. They all arrived in safety, after a voyage
   of about ten months.

   But, what was most cheering to the friends of missions, before the
   arrival of this company a most glorious work of religion had commenced
   among the Indians of Oregon, which terminated in the conversion of not
   less than one thousand of these degraded natives to the Christian
   faith. A reformation so sudden, deep, and wide, among such a people,
   had not been known in modern days, and it tended mightily to revive the
   missionary spirit among us, which had, indeed, begun to languish in
   many places.

   A short account of the manner in which this marvelous work commenced
   and spread among the people will naturally be expected.

   It had been adopted as a maxim from the beginning of our Indian
   missions, that Christianity must precede civilization. Hence our
   missionaries among the aborigines of our country were always
   instructed, first of all, to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ to them
   with all simplicity and plainness. This was especially charged upon the
   missionaries who went to Oregon. And though the circumstances with
   which they found themselves surrounded compelled the Lees to attend so
   much to secular things as to engross most of their time for the first
   year, so that they could give but a very small portion of their
   attention to religious instruction, yet, on the arrival of additional
   laborers, they applied themselves to the work with great assiduity, and
   soon saw the fruit of their labors in the conversion and salvation of
   souls.

   The manner in which this work commenced evinces the truth of our
   remark, namely, that the Indians must be reformed in heart and life by
   the gospel of Jesus Christ, before we can hope to reclaim them from
   barbarism to the practice and blessings of civilized life. How could it
   be otherwise? Ministers of the gospel are not sent primarily to teach
   human science, or to train people in domestic and political economy.
   Their message is of a different character. It is to inform the
   understanding and reform the heart and life, by the application of
   divine truth to the conscience and to the judgment. When this
   reformation is effected, the rest follows as a consequence. Their minds
   become flexible, their hearts tender, and they nay then easily be led
   on to perceive and to appreciate the blessings of civil and domestic
   economy, and finally to attend to farming and mechanical pursuits. The
   experience of more than twenty years, among a variety of Indian tribes,
   has demonstrated the truth of these remarks.

   So it was in Oregon in the present revival. The missionaries became
   convinced that they must be more holy in order to be more useful. That
   they might become so they set apart seasons for prayer and mutual
   edification. First one Indian and then another, beholding the fervency
   and frequency of their devotions, requested to be instructed in the
   nature of these things. Their request was granted. Convictions followed
   in the same manner, attended with the same circumstances of spiritual
   distress, and earnest prayer for deliverance, as are seen among
   civilized people who are impressed with gospel truth. When one and then
   another were delivered, their joyful hearts led them to say to their
   heathen brethren, "Come and hear, and I will declare what God hath done
   for my soul." Their words, uttered from the fulness of their hearts,
   took effect: others were brought under conviction for sin, sought by
   faith and prayer, and found "redemption through His blood, even the
   forgiveness of sins."

   In this way the work begun, and in this way it went on and spread, and
   is still spreading, so that, as before said, not less than one thousand
   of these people have been "brought from darkness to light, and from the
   power of Satan to God." And by the use of the same means we have no
   doubt that it will continue its saving and hallowing influence until
   all the hills and valleys of Oregon shall echo with the songs of
   redeeming love.

   The other missions upon our western frontiers were this year prosecuted
   with vigor and perseverance, and with various degrees of success.

   Another occurrence of this year exerted very general interest, and was
   attended with many blessings: -- I allude to the Centenary of
   Methodism. As the first Methodist society was formed in London in the
   month of November, 1739, so 1839 became properly the one hundredth year
   of Methodism. Accordingly, our brethren in Europe and America prepared
   to celebrate the event with all due solemnity and religious fervor. The
   25th of November was fixed upon as the day for this religious
   celebration. That it might be made a season of spiritual improvement,
   and at the same time yield an increase of means for extending the work
   of God on every hand, it was determined to blend together, as far as
   might be, religious exercises and the making collections for missionary
   and educational purposes, and for the support of the worn-out
   preachers, and the widows, children and orphans of preachers. A very
   general pulsation was felt throughout the entire Methodist community in
   favor of the celebration, and the several annual conferences adopted
   measures for its observance on the day appointed. As nearly as can be
   ascertained, the amount collected was divided as follows: About one
   half was to be devoted for the benefit of superannuated preachers, the
   widows, children, and orphans of preachers, two-tenths for the support
   of missions, and the remainder for the promotion of education.

   The manner in which the celebration was conducted had a hallowing
   influence upon the Church generally, and tended very much to increase
   the spirit of devotion, to give more enlarged views of the divine
   goodness in raising up such a man as John Wesley, and in blessing the
   world with such a system as Methodism. Sermons were preached, and
   addresses delivered in almost every society throughout the connection,
   both on the 25th of November, the day on which the foundation of
   Methodism was laid by forming the first class, and on previous days for
   the purpose of taking up collections for the objects specified. The
   exact amount subscribed I have not been able to ascertain, but it must
   have been in the neighborhood of $600,000, though it is not likely that
   the whole will be collected.

   It was indeed a sublime spectacle to contemplate the assemblage of more
   than one million of people, joined by perhaps three times that number
   of friends, uniting to offer up thanksgiving to God for his boundless
   mercy to a lost world, manifested in the gift of his Son! And as one of
   the many rivulets which flow from that exhaustless fountain of eternal
   love ran through the channel opened by Wesley, it seemed right and
   proper for his numerous sons in the gospel to commemorate the day which
   gave the first impetus to this flowing stream of grace and mercy. Some,
   indeed, affected to call it a species of idolatry. But why is it any
   more an act of idolatry to praise God for raising up, and blessing the
   world with such men as John Wesley, than it is to praise him for any
   other blessings, whether temporal or spiritual? We praise God for the
   heavens and the earth, with all their much and varied productions. We
   praise him for the gospel, and all its attendant blessings. Why should
   we not also praise and adore him for those human instrumentalities by
   which the world has been enlightened and reformed? It is indeed
   marvelous that many of those whose tender consciences will not permit
   them to render honor to whom honor is due, do not scruple to defame the
   character of those men, who, like John Wesley, have rendered the most
   important services to mankind, merely because they have dissented from
   them in opinion on some unimportant points!

   Did we ascribe that glory to man which is due to God alone, and detract
   from the merits of Jesus Christ by ascribing the glory of our salvation
   to human wisdom and righteousness, we might well be accused of
   idolatry. But we do no such thing. We honor John Wesley because God
   honored him, and because he, by his preaching and his whole life,
   reflected the honor and glory of God on his fellow-men.

   By thus distinguishing between God and his servant, making the one
   dependent on the other, and yet so connecting them that the servant
   cannot act and move, nor bring any thing good to pass without the
   direction and aid of the Master, we secure the glory which is due to
   God alone, while we permit his servant to shine in those borrowed rays
   reflected upon him from the "Sun of righteousness."

   Nor do we fear any thing from the pride of sect. It is not sectarianism
   which mars the beauty of gospel holiness. A man may be as proud, as
   vainglorious, and as much sectarian in his feelings, while pleading
   against all sectarianism, as if he were the most bigoted sectarist in
   the universe. All these things are mere accidents of the Christian
   character. They may or may not exist injuriously. It depends altogether
   upon the state of the heart. If the heart be humbled and purified by
   grace, by the energetic working of the Holy Spirit, pride of all sorts
   is expelled, and love to universal man takes its place. This alone is
   destructive of that exceptionable sectarian spirit by which the
   religious bigot is actuated.

   We humbly trust that this love was excited and diffused by this
   centennial celebration. It gave us an opportunity of reviewing first
   principles, of estimating anew the numberless blessings bestowed upon
   us as a people, of praising God for the past, and of clustering
   together motives for future trust and diligence.

   Nor is it doubted but that the thank offerings which were poured out
   upon the altar of God, from so many pure hearts, had a tendency to
   enkindle and increase the gratitude of thousands of devoted souls, as
   well as to nourish the spirit of pure benevolence and charity. With
   these views and feelings, the event was commemorated, and so long as
   they are cherished, so long shall we continue to bless God for giving
   to the world such a man as John Wesley.

   The Indiana conference had taken measures for the establishment of a
   literary institution within its bounds as early as 1837, by the
   appointment of agents to solicit funds for its endowment, and for
   erecting suitable buildings, etc. In 1838 it went into operation by the
   appointment of professors, and receiving students. This year, the
   Indiana Asbury University, as it was called, received its president and
   faculty, and has taken its place and rank among the rising stars of
   literature and science, which were appearing in our hemisphere, to
   enlighten the rising generation.

   Two colleges had been commenced under the patronage of the Holston
   conference, and were now in successful operation. And St. Charles
   College was rising into being, under the patronage of the Missouri
   conference.

   Besides the Emory College in the bounds of the Georgia conference,
   there were under its auspices the Georgia Female College, the Georgia
   Conference Manual Labor School, Collingwsorth Institute, and the Wesley
   Manual Labor School, all of which are exerting an enlightening
   influence upon those portions of the population for whose benefit they
   were especially established. The Cokesbury Manual Labor School was
   founded by the South Carolina conference, and was now beginning to shed
   its light upon the rising population of that region of country.

   The New Jersey conference also had succeeded in establishing two
   academies within its bounds, one for male, and the other for female
   students. They both promise usefulness. Two academics had been recently
   commenced in the bounds of the New Hampshire conference, called the
   Newbury Seminary, and South New Market Seminary.

   From these facts it would appear that the Methodist Episcopal Church
   was determined to redeem her character from the imputation thrown upon
   it from time to time, not without some show of reason, that she was
   indifferent to the cause of learning. If her liberality in collecting
   funds for the purpose of endowing and sustaining her literary
   institutions shall be in proportion to her zeal in founding and getting
   them into operation, she will deserve the thanks of the community, and
   will confer untold blessings upon her sons and daughters. Otherwise,
   however, these institutions will but linger out a sickly existence, and
   perhaps perish for want of that nursing care which she is abundantly
   able to afford them.

   Ninety-eight preachers were this year returned on the Minutes
   supernumerary, -- two hundred and sixty-one superannuated, one hundred
   and ten located, thirty-two had died, eight withdrawn, and six had been
   expelled.

   Death had this year thinned our ranks, by taking away some of our
   oldest and most useful ministers, without, at the same time, sparing
   some of the younger class.

   Among the most aged, and by no means the least able who had gone to
   their reward, was Thomas Morrell, of the New Jersey conference. He was
   born in November, 1747, and during the revolutionary war served in the
   continental army in the capacity of a captain, under the command of
   Washington. In this service his patriotism and courage were equally
   manifested, in encountering the difficulties and sharing the dangers of
   that protracted struggle for our national independence. In the battle
   on Long Island, which terminated so disastrously to the continental
   troops, Captain Morrell fell under a severe wound he received from the
   shot of the enemy, and was taken a prisoner. On being exchanged, and
   recovering from his wound, be resumed his place in the army, and
   continued to render important services to his country during the
   remainder of the war. At its termination, however, like most of his
   fellow-soldiers, through the poverty of his country, he was thrown upon
   his own resources for a livelihood, but he succeeded in procuring a
   competency for himself and family, and at his death bequeathed a
   valuable legacy to his widow and orphan children.

   In 1783, the year in which the war ended, and the independence of the
   United States was acknowledged, Mr. Morrell was brought into the
   glorious liberty of the children of God, through the instrumentality of
   the Rev. John Haggerty, a Methodist preacher. In 1787 he was admitted
   into the traveling ministry, and he soon gave evidence of those eminent
   talents which distinguished him as an "able minister of the New
   Testament."

   On the death of Washington, in 1799, Mr. Morrell was one among the many
   who paid their respects to that illustrious chief by preaching a
   funeral discourse on the occasion. In this he gave vent to his own
   feelings of veneration for the general who had led the armies of
   America to victory, while he commemorated the virtues which adorned his
   character, and the valorous deeds by which he achieved the liberty and
   independence of his country.

   After filling some of the most important stations, such as New York,
   Philadelphia, and Baltimore, where he acquitted himself alike honorably
   to himself and us fully to the people, in 1803, on account of physical
   debility, he was compelled to restrict his ministerial labors; he
   accordingly located, and settled in Elizabethtown, in the state of New
   Jersey, where he continued to reside, respected and beloved, until his
   death. Some years before his death, at the request of those brethren
   who loved and honored him as a fellow-laborer who had once "borne the
   heat and burden of the day," he was readmitted into the Philadelphia
   conference in the relation of a superannuated preacher, his income
   being amply sufficient for his support without drawing upon the funds
   of the conference.

   It is no small evidence of his uniform piety, of his integrity, and of
   his talents as a preacher of righteousness, that the people of
   Elizabethtown always heard him with pleasure and profit, and looked up
   to him as a counselor in whose wisdom they reposed entire confidence.
   Here, therefore, he continued his ministrations with edifying delight,
   and his sermons were always characterized by accurate arrangement, by
   deep thought, and minute analysis, bearing equally upon the
   understanding and affections of his hearers. Equally removed from
   fanaticism on the one hand, and a cold, lifeless formality on the
   other, his sermons partook neither of passionate exclamations nor of
   dull metaphysical speculations, but of a happy mixture of sound
   argument and moving appeals, addressed alternately to the judgment and
   to the passions. Temperate in all things, and equally removed from
   idleness and excessive labor, he preserved the vigor of his
   constitution to a good old age, being, at the time of his death,
   ninety-one years old. Such was the strength of his intellectual and
   physical powers, that he continued to occupy the pulpit generally once
   every sabbath, until within about three years of his death, when the
   feebleness of age obliged him to desist. To this, however, he submitted
   with the same cheerful acquiescence which he had exemplified in the
   more active duties of life. During three years of passive submission to
   the divine will, he bore the marks of the mature Christian, waiting
   patiently until his allotted time came, and finally glided peacefully
   into the ocean of eternity, where he no doubt drinks from its perennial
   waters with unceasing delight.

   He was only partially known to the writer, and then mostly near the
   close of his life. But he appeared to unite in himself those graces,
   and those moral and intellectual qualities, which rendered him every
   way companionable, fitted him for usefulness in the sphere in which he
   moved, and enabled him to derive enjoyment from every lawful source,
   whether purely religious, or from those creatures of God which are
   sanctified by the word of God and prayer. His good common sense, sound
   understanding, fervent piety, and a zeal characterized and guided by
   discretion, enabled him to meet in a becoming manner the various
   exigencies of human life, and to dispose of the subjects which came up
   for consideration in an intelligent and satisfactory manner.

   In the latter years of his life he delighted in reviewing past events,
   in recounting incidents which had come under his own knowledge, and in
   magnifying the grace of God in Christ Jesus as exemplified in his own
   personal experience. In these social interviews there was "cheerfulness
   without sadness," and a due mixture of the gravity of the Christian
   minister with the vivacity and buoyancy of a mind cheerful and happy in
   a consciousness of its own innocence. These things, together with that
   spirit of hospitality which was displayed under his roof rendered him
   an agreeable and edifying companion in those social interviews which he
   enjoyed with his friends. Indeed, it might he said of him that he was a
   cheerful old man, cheerful without levity, and grave without sadness,
   giving a practical illustration of the ministerial, social, and
   domestic virtues, worthy the imitation of all. And joining a prudent
   economy with industry, neatness, and plainness, he exhibited altogether
   the picture of an upright and perfect man in his day and generation,
   equally distant from ostentatious show on the one hand, and a vulgar
   meanness on the other. Whatever infirmities, therefore, may have
   oppressed him, grace enabled him to bear them with becoming patience,
   and the natural wanderings of an imperfect judgment were corrected by
   "the wisdom which cometh from above," while his involuntary
   transgressions were atoned for by the same blood through which he was
   at "first accepted in the Beloved."

   Samuel Merwin, of the New York conference, had also exchanged labor for
   rest during the past year. He was a descendant of one of the New
   England pilgrims, and was born in Durham, Connecticut, September 13,
   1777. While quite young his father and family removed and settled in
   New Durham, in the state of New York, then a wilderness country. Like
   young Timothy, he was taught, by his pious father and mother, the Holy
   Scriptures and to fear the Lord from his youth, the good effects of
   which appeared in his after life. His father's house being the resort
   of Methodist preachers, who, in those days, were penetrating every nook
   and comer in "search of the lost sheep of the house of Israel," when
   but a lad he became, through their instrumentality, a subject of
   awakening and justifying grace, and was received into the Church. The
   ardor of his love and fervency of his zeal soon led him forth in prayer
   and exhortation, more especially in beseeching the youth of his
   acquaintance "to be reconciled to God." Giving satisfactory evidence of
   his capacity and zeal in the cause of God, when about twenty years of
   age he was, by the presiding elder, employed on a circuit. In the year
   1800 he was admitted on trial in the New York conference as an
   itinerant preacher; and it is greatly to his credit to he able to say
   in truth, that from that day to his death he never halted or turned
   aside from his vocation as a traveling preacher in the Methodist
   connection.

   Soon after he entered upon his itinerant career, namely, in the year
   1803, he was sent as a missionary to Lower Canada, and took his first
   station in Quebec, a place almost wholly given to the idolatry of Roman
   Catholicism, and where Protestantism had little more than a "name to
   live." Such were the discouraging circumstances attending this first
   effort to plant Methodism in that strong-hold of iniquity, that brother
   Merwin continued his ministrations only about six weeks, when he left
   for Montreal. During this short stay, however, he made a favorable
   impression on some hearts, which opened the way for future efforts with
   greater promise of success.

   In Montreal he continued to preach, with great acceptance and some
   success, the remainder of the year; when he was removed to the city of
   New York, where he rendered himself respected and beloved for his
   devotion to the came of Jesus Christ.

   It is not compatible with this brief memoir to follow our beloved
   brother through the various stations he filled from year to year, and
   from place to place. His talents as a preacher, and his skill as a
   ruler, made it expedient to give him some of the most commanding
   stations in the bounds of the New England, New York, Philadelphia, and
   Baltimore conferences, to which he was alternately removed, and
   stationed in Boston, Providence, New York, Albany, Troy, Brooklyn, the
   Rhinebeck and New York districts, and in the cities of Philadelphia and
   Baltimore. In all these places he so acquitted himself as to leave the
   savor of a good name behind him.

   For several years before his death he was much oppressed with bodily
   infirmities. These were of such a character as often to threaten him
   with a premature death, and hence deprived the Church, at times, of his
   valuable services. A burning fever at one time, a paralysis at another,
   and constant soreness in one or the other, and sometimes both of his
   legs, so severe as almost to deprive him of their use, constituted a
   complication of diseases which called forth the exercise of much
   patience to enable him to bear them without murmuring. Yet such was his
   flaming zeal in the cause of God, that even in the midst of these
   infirmities he persevered in his work with his accustomed diligence,
   without any other abatement than what stern necessity imposed upon him
   from actual prostration of physical strength. Ann perhaps he may be
   included among the most punctual of our preachers -- not only in
   attending to every thing at the time, but also in scrupulously
   observing every part of his duty as a preacher, both as a presiding and
   ruling elder in the Church of God.

   But the time at length came when he must resign up his stewardship to
   Him from whom he had received it. It was no doubt a source of severe
   affliction to him, as it was of grief to his friends, that, after
   having filled so many important stations with so much distinction and
   success, a remonstrance was made against his being stationed among them
   from a people who had formerly profited by his labors; but it is a
   consolation to know that it originated from a supposition that his
   bodily infirmities only disqualified him from discharging his duties
   with success; and also that the people to whom he was sent received him
   with open arms, and treated him with the tenderness and respect which
   were due to his character. His last station was Rhinebeck, N. Y., the
   residence of the late venerated Garrettson, and the scene of much of
   his active labors. Here, during the second year of his labors, he
   sickened and died. The last time he entered the pulpit he was assisted
   to the church, being too feeble to sustain himself, when he delivered
   his last, solemn message to the people of his charge.

   After this he gradually sunk away into the arms of death, leaving
   behind him a consoling testimony of his faith in Jesus Christ, and of
   his preparedness, through the atoning merits, to meet his Judge and
   Redeemer. He left a widow, with two daughters and four sons, to mourn
   their loss, one of whom is in the itinerant ministry, and, it is hoped,
   may yet fill the vacuum occasioned by the death of his lamented father.

   There were many excellences which clustered around the character of our
   beloved brother Merwin; and the high estimation in which he was held by
   the Church may be inferred from the important stations which he filled,
   as before enumerated. In the sacred Scriptures he was deeply read, and
   familiarly acquainted with their contents. At an early period of his
   ministry he adopted the method of consulting these records of our
   salvation in consecutive order, and continued the practice so long as
   he was able, reading two chapters, one in the Old and one in the New
   Testament, every morning before breakfast. By this commendable practice
   the words of the Holy Ghost were ever fresh in his memory, and hence
   his judgment was constantly tinder the clear light of those luminous
   pages, and his sermons interlarded with quotations in Scripture
   language. He did not, therefore, imitate the injudicious practice of
   those who substitute "profane babblings," or the aphorisms of
   heathenism, for the words of inspiration, nor the dry metaphysics of
   the schools of human philosophy for the lofty and energetic language of
   inspired prophets and apostles.

   As a preacher he was sometimes highly eloquent. His personal appearance
   was commanding, his voice clear and musical, his enunciation full and
   distinct, and with these qualifications; when fully inspired with his
   subject, he commanded profound attention, while he poured forth, in
   accents strong and persuasive, the streams of gospel truth with great
   power and effect. We cannot say that his sermons were characterized by
   that systematic arrangement and minute analysis, nor that profoundness
   of thought by which some others have been distinguished; but there as
   generally a glow of warmth which indicated a heart filled with the fire
   of divine love, and they were then delivered with a pathos and fluency
   with which none but Samuel Merwin could have delivered them under the
   same circumstances.

   Sometimes, indeed, he failed. In this, however, he was by no means
   singular. For who that has had any experience in public speaking,
   especially in extemporaneous addresses, has not felt his mind at times
   barren, his utterance almost choked, as if it were next to impossible
   to make either the understanding, heart, or tongue play and perform its
   part? Whenever, however, he felt these embarrassments, he generally had
   a method of helping himself out of his difficulty by some innocent
   sally of wit, or by adverting incidentally to a topic somewhat foreign
   to the one under immediate consideration. At these times his ready wit
   betrayed him into eccentricities which seemed to detract a little from
   the dignity of the pulpit, while it relieved himself and his audience
   from an ennui [boredom -- DVM] which they mutually felt coming over
   them.

   An instance of this sort occurred once while he was preaching a
   missionary sermon in the Allen Street church, in the city of New York.
   Feeling somewhat embarrassed in his mind, and perceiving that his
   congregation were inclining to a listlessness of spirit, he suddenly
   paused, and, calling to a preacher who was sitting in a slip in the
   body of the church, he said, "Brother B____, you must come up here and
   help me, for I cannot get along with this great subject." The preacher
   replied, with the same freedom with which he had been addressed, "It is
   in good hands -- therefore go on and you will conquer." This innocent
   artifice brought him out of the whirling eddies into which he had been
   carried, and, unfurling his sails, he gently glided off upon the sea of
   gospel truth, much to the satisfaction of all present.

   To those who heard him often there appeared a sameness in some parts of
   his discourses, and more especially in his addresses, as if he had
   treasured up in his memory a set of phrases which he considered
   peculiarly adapted to the subject, and might therefore be often
   repeated, not only without weariness, but with good effect. The lively
   and energetic manner, however, in which he generally delivered himself,
   intermixed with sudden thoughts of inspiration, and all poured forth
   from a full heart in strains of gospel truth and persuasive eloquence,
   made ample amends for any defects arising from a repetition of the same
   thoughts, and sent the hearer home pleased with the speaker, and in
   love with his theme. I remember well that, when stationed in the city
   of New York, in 1830, he was called upon to preach a sermon in the
   Forsyth Street church, on the 4th of July, and a proposition to take up
   a collection in favor of the American Colonization Society had been
   declined by the trustees; -- on this occasion brother Merwin, warming
   with his subject, rising with the importance and grandeur of his theme,
   now soared away into the regions of bold thought and vivid imagination,
   and then melting into the tenderest strains of pathetic and impassioned
   eloquence, his hearers were alternately raised with expanded and
   elevated views of truth and duty, and overwhelmed with deep and
   softened emotions of joy, love, and gratitude. Such, indeed, was the
   power which he exerted over his audience, that he had them under
   complete command, and taking advantage of this state of feeling, he
   suddenly turned from his subject, and asked, "Shall we take a
   collection for the American Colonization Society?" The appeal was
   irresistible. "Yes! yes!" responded from every part of the house, and
   the trustees were compelled to reverse their own decision, and present
   the plates to receive the free-will offerings of the people, whose
   hearts had been made generous by the powerful appeals of the orator of
   the day. An acquaintance of mine, not a member of the Church, who was
   present, came to me and asked me to lend him a dollar; as he had no
   money with him, that he might put it in the plate. All were filled with
   rapture, and the more pleased for having an opportunity to let their
   alms accompany their prayers and praises. The amount of the collection
   told the rest.

   Brother Merwin was a great friend and powerful advocate of all our
   institutions, such as missionary, Sunday school, and other charitable
   societies; and, while filling the office of a presiding elder on the
   New York district, exerted an effective influence in their favor by
   attending their respective boards of management, and otherwise
   promoting their benevolent objects. At their anniversaries he was often
   called to speak in their behalf, and he pleaded their cause with most
   powerful effect, and was always successful; by the playful manner in
   which he did it, in drawing money from the pockets of the people in
   their support.

   I remember on one occasion, at an anniversary of the Missionary Society
   within the bounds of the Philadelphia conference, held in the city of
   Philadelphia during the session of the General Conference of 1832, he
   delivered an address, after two or three others had spoken, which
   electrified the congregation by one of those sudden bursts of eloquence
   for which he was famous, accompanied with a humorous allusion to the
   collection which was about to be made, and which might have been more
   highly appreciated had it been a little more grave. These sallies of
   wit, however, suited him better than they would others of a different
   turn of mind, because they seemed to come unsought, as the spontaneous
   effusions of a heart overflowing with feelings of kindness and
   brotherly affection.

   The manner in which he deported himself toward some of his younger and
   less-informed brethren sometimes gave them offense. It had the
   appearance, as they thought, of a cold and haughty reserve, as if he
   thought them beneath his notice. A nearer approach, however, and a more
   intimate acquaintance, removed the unfavorable impression, and let him
   into your heart as a brother beloved. And to those who shared his
   confidence and won his affection, he unfolded himself with the utmost
   freedom and familiarity, making himself agreeable and edifying by
   humorous anecdotes and edifying incidents, which he delighted to
   detail. Of these he possessed a fund, and could easily make them
   contribute to the entertainment of a company by the lively manner in
   which he recited them. Such, indeed, were his imitative powers, that he
   could assume the voice and gestures, and mimic the tone and accent of
   any person with whom he had been conversant; be grave or comical to
   suit the nonce, or to give a true representation of the facts and
   incidents he wished to rehearse. And though he might have indulged his
   natural propensity too freely for his own and the good of others, yet
   he succeeded to admiration in rendering vice odious, in making folly
   appear ridiculous, and in exposing absurdity to its merited contempt;
   while at other times he clothed the excellences of the Christian
   character in those attractive charms which were calculated to with the
   affection of all who beheld them with a believing and impartial mind.

   He has left a large circle of friends and acquaintances behind in the
   various places where he was stationed, who will no doubt readily
   recognize these traits in the character of Samuel Merwin; the mention
   of whose name revives those recollections of past days which the writer
   of this sketch enjoyed in common with many others, in the society of
   the friend of his youth, the companion of his riper years, and with
   whom he has often wept and rejoiced during the vicissitudes of an
   acquaintance in the ministry of nearly forty years. And this record is
   made with the more pleasure, because during that time nothing worth
   naming ever occurred to interrupt or mar for an hour a friendship begun
   in and cemented by Christian love, and kept up by mutual exchanges of
   fraternal regard and ministerial labors and sympathies. May this
   friendship be matured and perpetuated in heaven! So he it, O Lord, for
   Christ's sake!

   "Death loves a shining mark." This is poetry; and it may be true in its
   application to many individuals, and the more true in the imagination
   of those who mourn under the bereavement of near and valued friends;
   but we have a more infallible authority for saying that "the wicked
   shall not live out half their days." The fact is, that death makes no
   distinction in its victims in respect to age, rank, sex, merit or
   demerit. All -- all are alike exposed to his ravages, and must,
   therefore, sooner or later, yield, however reluctantly, to his despotic
   sway.

   But whatever may be the truth in this respect, death had hit a shining
   mark during the past year by shooting his deadly weapon into the heart
   of Wilbur Fisk, president of the Wesleyan University, and bishop elect
   of the Methodist Episcopal Church.

   He was born in Brattleboro, in the state of Vermont, August 31, 1792.
   His juvenile days, after arriving at a suitable age, were spent at
   school, and he soon evinced an aptitude of mind to learn, by the
   progress he made in his elementary lessons of instruction. Though at
   the early age of twelve he gave evidence of a pious heart, yet while at
   the preparatory school, in which he was fitting for college, he
   gradually lost his serious impressions, and mingled with other
   thoughtless youth in the gayeties and amusements of the world. At the
   proper time he entered as a student in Burlington College, Vermont; but
   that institution being closed for a season while the late war was
   raging between this country and Great Britain, he was sent to Brown
   University, in Providence, Rhode Island, where he graduated, with equal
   honor to himself and satisfaction to his friends. He then commenced the
   study of law, under the instruction of a distinguished attorney; but
   the next year, 1816, he went to the city of Baltimore, and was employed
   as a private tutor in the family of a gentleman in that city,
   continuing, in the mean time, the study of the law. He was soon
   interrupted in these pursuits by a violent attack of a pulmonary
   disease, which so prostrated his physical powers that, under medical
   advice, he relinquished, for the time, all thought of any profession
   which would require any unusual exercise of his lungs.

   Not being able to pursue his studies, nor to attend the duties of his
   vocation as tutor, as soon as his slowly returning health would permit
   he left Baltimore, and returned to the scenes of his early studies in
   Burlington, Vermont. But here he relapsed into his former disease,
   which for a while threatened his life. This sickness, however, by the
   mercy of God, was made subservient to his spiritual salvation, by
   reviving in his mind those religious impressions which had been
   effaced; and during a powerful awakening then spreading in Lyndon,
   Vermont, he was made a partaker of justification by grace through faith
   in Jesus Christ. This great change opened, not only new sources of
   enjoyment, but also new and enlarged subjects of contemplation, and
   finally led him into a field of labor for which he seemed designated by
   the divine Head of the Church. It was not long, therefore, before he
   began to exercise his gifts as a minister of Jesus Christ, and to give
   that evidence of his call to and qualification for the work, that led,
   in 1818, to his admission on trial in the New England conference. He
   commenced his itinerant labors among his own native hills in Vermont,
   inhaling the pure atmosphere, drinking the wholesome water, and
   enjoying the society of his Christian friends of his native state; in
   doing which, though often preaching, he measurably regained his health,
   and manifested great vigor of intellect and decision of character. From
   this place he was removed to Charlestown, Massachusetts.

   Suffering a partial relapse into his former complaint, as might have
   been anticipated from his being confined in the station of Charlestown,
   at the close of his work in that place, in 1820, he was compelled to
   take a supernumerary relation. In 1823, however, he had so far
   recovered as to be able to resume his itinerant career, in the office
   of presiding elder over the Vermont district. Here, amidst the scenes
   of an itinerant life, traversing the hills and valleys of his native
   state again, deriving benefits from traveling constantly from place to
   place, and exercising his lungs in preaching as his strength would
   permit, he gradually regained his health, and was finally able to
   discharge the duties of his station with efficiency and success, to the
   great satisfaction of both preachers and people.

   On the establishment of the Wilbraham Academy he was elected its
   principal, and was therefore compelled to remit the more healthy
   exercise of a traveling preacher; for the labor of superintending a
   school for the education and training of youth, preparatory to their
   entrance either upon the active duties of life; or as students into the
   higher seminaries of learning. Here he began more especially to unfold
   those moral and intellectual powers for which he was distinguished, and
   which he applied so usefully to his fellow-men the remaining days of
   his life. In this employment he continued, attending, in, the mean
   time, as a delegate, the General Conference of 1824 and 1828, until he
   was transferred to the presidency of the Wesleyan University, in 1831.
   Upon the duties of this station he entered with great ardor and
   intelligence, and succeeded in gaining for it a character which
   commanded the public confidence and affection.

   Partly for the benefit of his health, and partly for the benefit of the
   university, in 1835 and 1836 he made the tour of Europe, an account of
   which he afterward published in a large octavo volume. Its merits may
   be estimated from the fact that it has run through several editions,
   has been read with great avidity by all classes of people, and is
   highly appreciated by the most intelligent portion of the community.
   While in Europe he was appointed, by the General Conference of 1836,
   its delegate to the Wesleyan Methodist Conference; which office he
   filled with. Honor to himself, and greatly to the satisfaction of his
   brethren on both sides of the Atlantic. At the same conference he was
   also elected a bishop in the Methodist Episcopal Church; but on his
   return to the United States he declined accepting the appointment,
   believing, in accordance with the views of many of his brethren, that
   the interests of the university had a more imperative claim upon his
   services, and that he could, therefore, more effectually promote the
   cause of God here than in the other high office to which he had been
   elected.

   Very soon, however, the hopes of all were disappointed, in respect to
   his further usefulness to the Church militant, by his sickness and
   death. The pulmonary disease with which he had been afflicted, with
   less or more severity, now for about nineteen years, began to make
   rapid inroads upon his constitution, and he was compelled, in the
   winter of 1838, to remit his active duties and take to his bed, which
   proved, alas! his dying bed. His bodily sufferings were very severe and
   protracted. He bore them, however, with patience and fortitude, making
   them subservient to his more perfect ripeness for heavenly glory. His
   countenance, his words, and all his actions, on the bed of death,
   bespoke a soul full of glory and of God; and he left the most consoling
   evidence behind him of having finished his course with joy, and of
   having entered at last into the everlasting kingdom of his God.

   Thus ended the days of Wilbur Fisk, D. D., and president of the
   Wesleyan University. His name will long be held in grateful and
   affectionate remembrance by those who had the happiness of his personal
   acquaintance, and by those who were benefited by his ministry and
   instructions.

   The following sketch of the character of Dr. Fisk is taken from a
   funeral discourse which was delivered by the present writer, on the
   occasion of his death, and which was published at the request of those
   who heard it. After giving a short account of his life and death, the
   remarks which follow were added: --
    1. His learning, though, perhaps, not so deep and thorough as that of
       some others, was nevertheless sound, various, and of the most
       useful character. He graduated with honor to himself in the Brown
       University, and was highly respected by his fellow-students and the
       faculty under whom he studied. And such was his love of letters in
       subsequent life that he held a distinguished rank among the
       literati of his country, and filled with high reputation the
       stations he occupied at the head of literary institutions.
    2. His religious experience was deep and genuine. This was fully
       evinced by the uniformity of his piety, the humility of his mind,
       and his ardent devotion to the cause of his divine Master. It was
       this also which created that inextinguishable thirst for the
       salvation f a lost world, which led him forth as a preacher of the
       gospel of Christ, as a powerful and fearless advocate of the cause
       of missions, temperance, and all those institutions of benevolence
       which aim at human melioration, or look to the universal spread of
       the gospel of the Son of God.

   Though at an early period of his ministry he was called to preside over
   Institutions of learning, which officially confined him to a more
   limited sphere of action than that which was marked out by an itinerant
   ministry, yet he by no means circumscribed his labors to these narrow
   limits, but as opportunities presented, extended the sphere of his
   labors, in the pulpit and on the platform, wherever and whenever, so
   far as his time and strength would allow, calls were made for his
   services. And in these labors he was eminently useful, and his service
   were highly appreciated by all lovers of human improvement. He was
   therefore never "straitened in his own bowels," but stretched the line
   of his labors in every direction, making his voice to be heard in favor
   of the cause of Christ, in all those diversities of operations by which
   the present age is distinguished for the diffusion of gospel light and
   love. In this work that fountain of divine grace which can be opened in
   the human heart only by a deep and genuine experience of the
   sanctifying influences of the Holy Spirit, gushed out in the purest
   streams of the most charming eloquence, distilling "as the dew, as the
   small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass."

   His efforts to do good were limited only by his means. On a certain
   occasion he was heard to say, "As I have no children of my own to
   provide for, [7] I feel it my duty to do all I can for the benefit of
   others." Acting on this principle, he devoted all his energies of soul
   and body to the best interests of his fellow-men.

   3.?Though deeply interested in the cause of education, yet he
   considered it only so far important as it was made subservient to the
   spiritual and eternal welfare of men. Having suffered much in his
   religious enjoyments while at the preparatory school and at college, on
   account of the irreligion which prevailed at these institutions at the
   time he was there, he was, when he came to feel the responsibility of
   his station, exceedingly solicitous to see seminaries of learning
   established and conducted strictly according to the principles of the
   gospel. Hence, when placed at the head of the university, as well as
   while principal of the Wilbraham Academy, he exerted all his powers to
   banish immorality and irreligion from their precincts, and bring the
   influence of Christianity, in its experimental and practical parts, to
   bear upon the students, and upon all concerned. And in this he
   succeeded even beyond what might have been expected.

   The holy influence which was collected around the Wesleyan University,
   by the power of his precept and example, seconded as he was by his
   associates and the official board, was extensively felt on the
   surrounding population, and gave it a commanding character in the
   community, exempting it from these exceptions which have frequently
   been made, with too much truth, against literary institutions. The
   frequent revivals of religion, which were witnessed among the students,
   furnished an evidence to its friends that a college may be so conducted
   as to insure the blessings of God on its labors, and tended powerfully
   to impress upon the minds of all, the spiritual as well as literary
   benefit to be derived from placing their sons under the wing of the
   Wesleyan University. I may say indeed, with confidence, that on no
   department of God's vineyard has his Spirit been poured out more
   copiously, and the number of genuine converts been more numerous, in
   proportion to the population, than in this nursery of learning and
   religion.

   How much the labors and example of its venerated president contributed
   to this happy result, those can testify who have borne witness to his
   assiduous attention to these things. The wisdom and fidelity with which
   he inculcated the truths of the gospel upon the minds of the students,
   and the fatherly manner in which he led the inquiring soul to Jesus
   Christ for pardon and salvation, and likewise rejoiced over the happy
   believer, attest the interest which he took in the spiritual as well as
   literary welfare of those intrusted to his care.

   His invariable maxim was, that sanctified learning only can be useful
   to mankind. And acting on this maxim, he diffused through every circle
   in which he moved the hallowing influences of Christianity, exhibiting
   in his own temper and spirit the superior excellence and claim it has
   upon the hearts and homage of mankind.

   4.?His talents as a preacher of the gospel were of a high order. He
   entered deeply and systematically into theological truth, and was
   thoroughly Wesleyan in his views of the gospel, and the methods of
   diffusing its blessings among mankind. Though never boisterous in his
   manner, but calm and collected, he was energetic, plain, and pointed,
   and evinced that he spoke from the fullness of his heart -- a heart
   thoroughly imbued with the spirit of his divine Master.

   He was an original thinker. Though the field of theological truth has
   been so frequently surveyed, that little seems to be left for us to do
   but to follow on in the beaten track, yet it was evident that when
   Wilbur Fisk "occupied that holy place, the pulpit," he thought and
   arranged for himself, and clothed his thoughts in language of his own
   selection, which, by its appropriateness, expressed what he wished to
   communicate in words plain, chaste, and classical. In him there was no
   ostentatious show of learning, though it was evident to all who heard
   him, with attention, that he was no stranger to literature and science.

   His sermons were generally of a didactic character, and on this account
   might have appeared to those who did not fully enter into his views,
   and follow his chain of reasoning, somewhat dry and dull. His
   discourses, however, were far from being dull and monotonous. Though
   much accustomed to consecutive reasoning, to sustaining his
   propositions by logical deductions, yet his intimate appeal was to the
   Holy Scriptures; and often his addresses to the conscience were of that
   pungent character, and delivered with that flow of eloquence which made
   the sinner tremble, while he saw swept away all "his refuges of lies."
   On one of these occasions, I remember to have heard him in this city,
   in the Forsyth Street church, when, after I laving substantiated the
   truth of his doctrine by apposite texts of Scripture, and a close chain
   of reasoning, he suddenly turned upon his audience, and commenced one
   of those eloquent and pathetic appeals, which poured upon them like a
   resistless torrent, and bore them away upon the stream of truth almost
   whether they would or not. A minister, sitting within the railing of
   the altar, found himself unconsciously extending his arms to snatch the
   sinner from his impending ruin, and to carry him to the Lord Jesus for
   salvation.

   His manner in the pulpit was solemn, graceful, and dignified; his
   enunciation clear and impressive; and all his gesticulations
   corresponded to the purity and importance of the cause in which he was
   engaged. Perhaps, when unembarrassed, he came as near to the perfection
   of a Christian pulpit orator, as any that can be found among the
   ministers of the sanctuary. He never demeaned himself nor degraded the
   dignity of the place and the subject, by descending to quirks and witty
   sayings to tickle the fancy of the facetious, nor spoke with a view to
   produce a momentary effect, or to elicit the shout of applause. To this
   disgraceful finesse, so unbecoming the time, the place, the subject,
   and the end of preaching, Dr. Fisk never stooped; but his air was
   solemn, his attitude grave, his words sober, his arguments sound, and
   his entire object seemed to be to bring sinners to God, and to build
   believers up in all holy living.

   5.  Dr. Fisk wielded a powerful pen. The few printed sermons he has
   left behind him bespeak for him the sound divine, the able advocate of
   revealed truth, and the fearless defender of experimental and practical
   religion.

   In his controversial writings and who can avoid controversy -- while he
   manfully combated error and defended what he considered the truth in a
   style of independence becoming the ambassador of Jesus Christ, he was
   respectful and courteous toward his antagonists.

   Though it may he admitted that in some instances he was careless in
   stating his arguments, and not sufficiently guarded against the
   insidious attacks of some with whom he was called to contend, yet the
   acuteness of his intellect and the force of his genius were never more
   eminently displayed than in his Calvinistic Controversy, and in his
   Address to the Members of the New England Conference. He wrote, indeed,
   as one who believed what he put to paper, breathing into his sentences
   the inspiration of truth and sincerity, and pouring forth the streams
   of argument and illustration with that earnestness and logical
   precision which cannot but enlighten and convince the judgment.

   Toward the close of his life he was engaged in a very delicate
   controversy, in conducting which he sometimes suffered no little
   reproach. Though Dr. Fisk was the last man who should have provoked
   reproachful language, yet he bore it with that meekness and submission
   which become the Christian minister, and finally testified on his dying
   bed, that, though he may have erred in some of his expressions, he was
   fully confirmed in the truth of his doctrines, as it was principle, not
   victory, for which he had contended.

   We may therefore safely commend him as a writer for an example to
   others, and his writings as worthy of being read and had in
   remembrance.

   6.  Instead of towering above his fellows by an exhibition of any one
   talent of superior strength and brilliancy, in him were concentrated
   that cluster of excellences which constituted a nicely balanced mind,
   admirably adapted to the variety of calls which were made upon his time
   and abilities. This concentration of excellences created that symmetry
   of character which so beautifully displayed itself on all occasions,
   and so eminently fitted him to move in the various circles of
   usefulness in which he was called to exercise his gifts.

   Though he may not have been so thoroughly versed as some others, who
   had devoted themselves more exclusively to any one department of
   literature, in metaphysics, in a knowledge of the languages, or in
   mathematical science yet he was sufficiently acquainted with these
   branches of knowledge to enable him to unravel the sophistry of error,
   to detect the fallacies of subtle antagonists, and to state and defend
   the truth with clearness and precision. With this well-balanced and
   well-disciplined mind, was combined that moral worth of character which
   at all times commanded respect and inspired confidence, and that fitted
   him for the various fields of usefulness in which he was called to
   labor. And in the exercise of these gifts, it was evident that he
   studied to be useful rather than great, though it is equally manifest
   that his greatness of character resulted from the usefulness of his
   life and labors.

   7.  But that which characterized Dr. Fisk among his fellows, and
   rendered him so eminently useful, was the deep vein of evangelical
   piety which ran through all his performances, and exerted a hallowing
   influence over his own mind and the minds of others. This, as I have
   before remarked, blended itself in his private studies, mingled in his
   social intercourse, graced and sanctified all his public
   administrations, whether in the pulpit, on the platform, or in the
   discharge of his duties as president of the university. And though no
   stranger to the weapon of satire, which he wielded sometimes with
   tremendous effect, yet it was manifest that the same hallowed end was
   had in view in the use of this sharp and dangerous weapon, as when he
   dealt in the more sober and dignified accents of direct truth and
   argument.

   8.  In his social intercourse he sweetly blended the meekness of the
   Christian and the gravity of the minister with the urbanity of the
   gentleman and the graces of the scholar. Though too conscientious and
   independent to compromise the truth from deference to the opinions of
   others, yet he always treated their judgment with becoming respect, and
   uttered his dissent with that modesty and diffidence which indicated a
   sense of his fallibility and sincere desire to know the right. To the
   common courtesies of life he was never inattentive, well knowing that
   Christianity distinguishes her children no less by the "gentleness" of
   their manners, and the delicate attentions to the niceties of relative
   duties, than she does by the sternness of her requirements in favor of
   purity of motive and conduct. He was therefore equally removed from
   that vulgar rudeness which marks the clown, and that disgusting
   familiarity which obtrudes itself, unasked and undesired, into the
   privacies of others. In him were united the delicacies of refined life,
   with the strong and unyielding principles of Christian integrity and
   ministerial gravity.

   9.  Though inspired with that spirit of Catholicism which embraces all
   denominations as constituting one Christian brotherhood, he was,
   nevertheless, cordially attached from principle to the doctrine,
   discipline, and usages of the Church to which he belonged, and of which
   he was such a distinguished ornament. Wesley he venerated as the first
   man of his age, as the greatest of modern reformers, as a sound divine,
   and as one of the most evangelical, laborious, and successful ministers
   of Jesus Christ. He fully believed that the doctrine and discipline of
   the Church Wesley was instrumental in founding in America were orthodox
   and Scriptural, and therefore admirably calculated to spread holiness
   and happiness through the land. Hence he labored indefatigably to
   promulgate its doctrine, to establish its government, and to extend its
   influence.

   He loved the itinerant ministry of the Methodist Episcopal Church. No
   more conclusive proof could he have given of this than he did, by
   adhering to it "through good and evil report," so long as the Church
   called him to labor in that field; and when called by his brethren to a
   more restricted sphere of action, his official duties by no means
   deprived him of the privilege he prized so highly, of going forth as an
   itinerant minister in quest of the "lost sheep of the house of Israel."
   He who might have commanded thousands of dollars, had he chosen to
   attach himself to another ministry, "chose rather to suffer affliction"
   with these comparatively poor "people of God," "esteeming the reproach
   of Christ," as borne by a Methodist itinerant, "greater riches than the
   treasures" he might have secured to himself in another department of
   ministerial labor. And though, after he accepted of the presidency of
   the Wesleyan University, he had a most luring offer, so far as
   pecuniary consideration was concerned, to take charge of another
   literary institution, yet he declined the honor because he loved that
   which bore the name of Wesley, from a hope that he could there more
   effectually build up Wesleyan Methodism, by training its sons in the
   principles and practice of that apostolic man, and because he had
   already pledged his best endeavors to promote its literary and
   religious interests. While therefore he gave the right hand of
   fellowship to ail, of every name, who "loved the Lord Jesus Christ in
   sincerity," he manifested his preference for the ministry and doctrines
   of his own Church, by cleaving to them to the end of his life.

   10. It remains only that we look at him as the head of the Wesleyan
   University. Here he seemed to be the center of attraction to all
   connected with the institution, whether as professors, directors, or as
   students. His counsel was respected, his precepts observed, and his
   example considered worthy of the imitation of all. He ruled more from
   the love and respect which were felt and entertained for his character,
   than from a fear of his frown, though the latter was dreaded in exact
   proportion to the esteem felt for his exalted worth.

   His inaugural address developed the principles on which the government
   of the university would be conducted; and the paternal manner in which
   these principles were practically in illustrated gave a character to
   the institution which secured the affection and commanded the respect
   of all interested in its prosperity; and perhaps no student ever left
   his Alma Mater without being impressed with a deep sense of his
   obligations to its president for the fatherly solicitude he had
   manifested in his literary, intellectual, and religious welfare.

   Placed thus at the head of an institution which must tell for good or
   in on the destinies of so many immortal beings, he felt the
   responsibility of his station, and acted in view of that day when he
   must render an "account of his stewardship." And such was the success
   with which he presided over the literary and religious interests of
   those committed to his oversight, and discharged the duties of the high
   trusts confided to him, that he inspired the respect and confidence,
   not only of those immediately connected with the university, but of the
   public at large, as well as those who held a kindred relation to
   similar institutions.

   Hence his death is considered a loss to the entire community. The
   impression he was making upon the public mind generally was of the most
   favorable character; and the lamentations made on hearing the news of
   his death, and the tones of sympathy expressed by others than those
   connected with him in church fellowship, show that the community
   generally felt a lively interest in his welfare, and therefore sorrowed
   "most of all that they should see his face no more."

   Finally, we may say, that "whatsoever things were lovely, pure, and of
   good report," in religion and morals, in learning and science, in
   spirit and conduct, were, in an eminent degree, concentrated in him,
   and, sweetly and harmoniously blending their united influence in his
   heart and life, gave a symmetry, a finish and polish to his character,
   worthy of love and admiration; and although as a human being he must
   have felt and exhibited the common infirmities of our nature, yet,
   having been disciplined by education, refined by grace, and improved by
   reading and extensive observation, he may be safely held up as an
   exemplar for the imitation of the Christian, and the minister of Jesus
   Christ, as well as those to whom are committed the interests of the
   youth of our land.

   There are two other names I wish to mention before I close this volume;
   one because he was among the older class of Methodist preachers, and
   the other because he ranked among the younger; and also because they
   were both worthy of remembrance.

   Smith Arnold was born in Middlebury, Conn., March 31, 1766, the year in
   which Methodism commenced its leavening influence in the city of New
   York, under the preaching of Embury, and the prayers of the few who
   accompanied him to this country. After his marriage and subsequent
   settlement in Herkimer county, N. Y., he was made a partaker of the
   grace of life, and commenced his itinerant career by joining the New
   York conference in the year 1800. The first year of his ministry he
   spent in the western part of New York state, then a new country, but
   rapidly filling with inhabitants. Here he had the happiness of seeing
   the blessed fruit of his labors in the awakening and conversion of
   souls. For twenty-one years he continued his efficient services in the
   itinerant field, often exposed to privations and hardships in the new
   and poorer settlements of western New York, and as often cheered by the
   manifestations of the power and goodness of God on his sincere
   endeavors to advance the cause of Christ.

   At the end of this term he found himself so worn down by excessive
   labor, that he was obliged to take a supernumerary relation, and then a
   superannuated, in which he continued until his death, which happened on
   the 16th of March, 1839. His end was peace and assurance for ever.

   Brother Arnold was a man of great simplicity of manners, a Methodist
   preacher of the old stamp, plain and pointed in his appeals to the
   conscience, though sometimes eccentric in some of his movements and
   phrases. His talents as a preacher were respectable, and he generally
   commanded the confidence and affection of the people among whom he
   labored; and when his death was announced, none doubted but that he had
   exchanged this for a better world.

   Who is exempt from the ravages of death? Among those who had been taken
   from the walls of our Zion to the "Jerusalem which is above," was John
   D. Bangs, son of the Rev. John Bangs, of the New York conference.
   Young, vigorous, pious, and amiable, he promised great usefulness to
   the Church, and much satisfaction to his numerous friends, had God seen
   fit to spare his life, and bless his endeavors.

   He was born in the town of Kortwright, Delaware county, N. Y., May 7,
   1813, and at the early age of fourteen was converted to God, and became
   a member of the Church. Growing in grace and in the knowledge of the
   Lord Jesus Christ, and exhibiting a talent for preaching, he was duly
   authorized, according to the usages of the Church, and went on a
   circuit in 1835. His first labors were in a part of the country where
   his father and uncles were born, in the state of Connecticut, and he
   soon gave evidence of that devotion to the cause of God, and capacity
   to instruct others in the way of salvation, which won for him the
   confidence and the affection of his seniors in the ministry, and the
   people among whom he labored. Accordingly, in the spring of 1836 he was
   admitted on trial in the New York conference, and graduated in regular
   course to elder's orders.

   But his race was short, and his death sudden and unexpected. On the
   15th of July, 1838, his wife, with whom he had been united only about
   one year, but whose amiable virtues fitted her for a useful companion
   in adversity or prosperity, sickened and died. While attending at her
   grave, greatly exhausted with watching and anxiety, he was seized with
   the same disease, the scarlet fever, which had so recently deprived him
   of a beloved wife. Six days only after her death he was called to
   resign up his breath to God who gave it, and in whose praise it was
   employed while at his command. Thus, in the twenty-sixth year of his
   age, this young minister of Jesus Christ bid adieu to all earthly
   enjoyments, in sure and certain hope of everlasting life; and while his
   dust reposes by the side of his wife's, in the town of Yonkers, their
   spirits are doubtless rejoicing together before the throne of God in
   heaven.

   John D. Bangs was characterized by deep humility, genuine piety, and
   amiability of manners, as well as thirst for the salvation of souls,
   which greatly endeared him to his friends and acquaintances, and made
   the pang of separation the more severe in some respects, and the more
   joyful in others, to his bereaved parents and circle of relatives.

   Numbers in the Church: Whites This Year: 650,357; Last Year: 615,212;
   Increase: 35,145 -- Colored This Year: 89,197; Last Year: 79,236;
   Increase: 7,961 -- Indians This Year: 2,249; Last Year: 2,101;
   Increase: 148 -- Local Preachers This Year: 5,856; Last Year: 5,792;
   Increase: 64 -- Traveling Preachers This Year: 3,557; Last Year: 3,332;
   Increase: 235 -- Total This Year: 749,216; Last Year: 705,673 --
   Increase: 43,553.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [6] This result, which is taken from the Minutes, is produced by adding
   the number of traveling and local preachers to the private and official
   members, a practice not hitherto pursued, but followed hereafter.

   [7] Dr. Fisk, though married, died without issue.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 15

    The General Conference of 1840

   This conference assembled in the city of Baltimore May 1, and was
   opened by Bishop Roberts by reading a portion of the Holy Scriptures
   and prayer. John A. Collins, of the Baltimore conference, was appointed
   secretary, and James B. Houghtaling, of the Troy, and Thomas B.
   Sargent, of the Baltimore conferences, assistant secretaries. The
   following is a list of the delegates who were present: --

   New York Conference: Nathan Bangs, C. W. Carpenter, Joshua Holdich
   Samuel Luckey, Daniel Ostrander, Fitch Reed, Phineas Rice, Marvin
   Richardson, Peter P. Sandford, Nicholas White.

   New England Conference: Phineas Crandall, Jotham Horton, A. D. Merrill,
   Joshua A. Merrill, Orange Scott, E. W. Stickney, Fred Upham.

   Main Conference: Moses Hill, B. Jones, W. C. Larrabee, D. B. Randall,
   Ezekiel Robinson.

   New Hampshire Conference: John F. Adams, Charles D. Cahoon, Schuyler
   Chamberlain, Jared Perkins, Elihu Scott, James Templeton.

   Troy Conference: J. B. Houghtaling, Noah Levings, Sherman Minor, Truman
   Seymour, Charles Sherman, Tobias Spicer.

   Pittsburgh Conference: C. Cook, George S. Holmes, Robert Hopkins,
   Thomas M. Hudson, J. G. Sansom.

   Erie Conference: John C. Ayers, John Chandler, H. Kingsley, B. O.
   Plimpton, David Preston.

   Black River Conference: G. Baker, S. Chase, John Dempster, George Gary.

   Oneida Conference: Elias Bowen, George Harman Zechariah Paddock, George
   Peck, D. A. Shephard.

   Michigan Conference: Henry Colclazer, E. H. Pilcher, A. Poe, John H.
   Power.

   Genesee Conference: Asa Abel, Jonas Dodge, A. N. Filmore, Glezin
   Filmore, J. Parker, Manley Tooker.

   Ohio Conference: William B. Christie, S. Hamilton, L. L. Hamline,
   William H. Raper, R. O. Spencer, John F. Wright, Jacob Young.

   Missouri Conference: Andrew Munroe, Thomas Johnson.

   Illinois Conference: P. Aker, Peter Cartwright, John Clarke, Hooper
   Crews, J. T. Mitchell, S. H. Thompson.

   Kentucky Conference: Henry B. Bascom, Thomas N. Ralston, Jonathan
   Stamper, George W. Taylor, J. S. Tomlinson.

   Indiana Conference: E. R. Ames, A. Eddy, C. W. Ruter, Allen Wiley, A.
   Wood.

   Holson Conference: Samuel Patton.

   Tennessee Conference: A. T. Driskill, John B. McFerrin, S. S. Moody,
   Robert Paine, F. E. Pitts.

   Arkansas Conference: John Harrell, John C. Parker.

   Mississippi Conference: Benjamin M. Drake, William Winans.

   Alabama Conference: E. Callaway, E. V. Ivert, William Murrah.

   Georgia Conference: Ignatius A. Few, Samuel K. Hodges, William J.
   Parks, Lovick Pearce.

   South Carolina Conference: Charles Betts, Bond English, Hugh A. C.
   Walker, William M. Wightman.

   North Carolina Conference: Moses Brock, J. Jameson.

   Virginia Conference: Thomas Crowder, John Early, William A. Smith.

   Baltimore Conference: Samuel Brison, John A. Collins, J. A. Gere, John
   Miller, S. G. Roszel, H. Slicer, N. Wilson.

   Philadelphia Conference: Solomon Higgins, Joshua Lybrand, Levi Scott,
   Matthew Sorin, Henry White.

   New Jersey Conference: Manning Force, R. W. Petherbridge, C. Pitman,
   John S. Porter, Isaac Wilmer.

   This conference was favored with the presence of the Rev. Robert
   Newton, as a representative from the Wesleyan Methodist conference, and
   the brethren Joseph Stinson, president of the Canada conference, John
   and Egerton Ryerson, members of said conference, John Harvard, chairman
   of the Lower Canada district, and Matthew Richie, principal of the
   Upper Canada Conference Academy.

   These were severally introduced to the conference, and were recognized
   as brethren beloved, and worthy representatives of Wesleyan Methodism,
   both in Europe and British America.

   Owing to the indisposition of Bishop Soule, who, in consequence
   thereof, was not present until some days after the conference opened,
   the address of the bishops was not presented until about a week after
   the conference commenced its sessions. Though long, yet as it presents
   the particular views of the episcopacy on several important points, the
   reader will, no doubt, be pleased to have it preserved in this
   permanent form. It is as follows: --

   "Address of the Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church to the
   General Conference, held in Baltimore, May, 1840

   "Dear Brethren, -- The meeting of this solemn and constitutional body,
   just at the opening of the second century of Wesleyan Methodism, is a
   peculiarly appropriate occasion for reviewing the rise and progress of
   that great and blessed revival of pure Christianity, which, commencing
   with the labors of that eminent man of God, the Rev. John Wesley, has,
   during the last centennial period, spread over large portions of our
   globe, conveying the blessings of the gospel salvation to millions of
   the human race. It is highly proper for us, at such a period, and under
   such circumstances, to direct our careful attention to the measures and
   means which, under God, have been accompanied with such auspicious
   results. It will appear, it is presumed, upon such an examination, that
   human policy has had less to do in the origin, progress, and final
   accomplishment of this great work, than in any other important and
   extensive enterprise since the days of the apostles. The rise, and
   progress, and ultimate success of Methodism are marked with the special
   openings and interpositions of the providence of Almighty God. And
   although we are a hundred years removed from that era of precious
   memory when this great light first shone forth from Oxford, we look
   back through every successive period of its advancement, deeply
   impressed with this sentiment, Not unto us, O Lord; not unto us, but
   unto thy name give glory!' We have stood still to see the salvation of
   God, or moved forward as his providence opened the way.

   "In the progress of this great work on both sides of the Atlantic many
   instruments have been successfully employed, who would never have been
   engaged in the enterprise had their selection depended merely on the
   wisdom of men.

   "In England, while a Wesley and Fletcher, with a few kindred spirits,
   were wielding the mighty artillery of gospel truth, with all the
   panoply of various and profound science and literature, made mighty by
   the arm of God to the pulling down of the strongholds of error and
   infidelity, a considerable number of unlettered men, taken from
   ordinary occupations, and with no pretensions to any extraordinary
   human qualifications, with such weapons as the Holy Spirit had
   supplied, were marching through the kingdom, attacking the citadel of
   the heart, and bringing thousands into a happy allegiance to the
   Captain of their salvation. The same order of things is observable from
   the commencement till the present time. It has pleased God, from time
   to time, to raise up men, in different parts of these States, who were
   endued with extraordinary intellectual powers, and those powers
   disciplined to sound argument by a thorough education. In these men the
   Church has found able defenders of her doctrines and order; and
   although some of them have fallen asleep, they still speak -- while
   others, in the order of Providence, have been raised up in their stead.
   Thus we have a host of the venerable dead, united with a succession of
   living witnesses, and all set for the defense of the gospel of Christ.

   "But had only such distinguished instruments been employed in preaching
   the gospel on this continent since the first Wesleyan missionaries
   crossed the Atlantic, and commenced their labors in the colonies, what,
   in all human probability, would have been the state of the church in
   these lands at the present day?

   "How many thousands and tens of thousands have been converted to God by
   the instrumentality of the preaching of men who have never explored the
   regions of science and literature-and who, having ' fought their way
   through,' are now resting in Abraham's bosom! And what living
   multitudes bear witness to the efficiency of the same means, by the
   influence of the Holy Spirit, in bringing them from darkness to light,
   and from the power of Satan unto God! Indeed, if we carefully examine
   the history of the church, from the days of the apostles to the present
   time, at what period of her progress shell we find her amply supplied
   with ministers combining in themselves a profound knowledge of science
   and literature, and genuine piety, and giving proof, by the sanctity of
   their lives, and the fruits of their labors, that they were truly
   called of God to the work of the ministry?

   "The probability is, that one chief cause of the great deficiency of
   evangelical ministers in the Church of Christ is the neglect of that
   solemn command, Pray ye the Lord of the harvest that he would send
   forth more laborers.'

   "Our venerable Wesley was fully convinced that the supreme authority to
   constitute and perpetuate the gospel ministry belonged only to the
   Author of salvation; and that those who gave the Scriptural evidence of
   being moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon them the work of the
   ministry were not to be rejected on account of a supposed deficiency in
   human acquirements.

   "This truly evangelical sentiment, so strikingly illustrated in the
   history of the last century, should deeply impress us on the present
   occasion; and we should continue to adhere to it as one of the first
   principles in that system which is destined to evangelize the world.
   Our blessed Redeemer, after he had settled the constitution of his
   kingdom among men, -- after he had accomplished the work of human
   redemption, -- after he had risen from the dead in confirmation of his
   divine commission and authority, -- and in his last interview with his
   disciples, just before his ascension into heaven-said, All power is
   given unto me in heaven and in earth; go ye therefore and teach all
   nations.' All the attending circumstances conspire to render this one
   of the most solemn and important declarations ever made to the world.
   It asserts the exclusive authority of Jesus Christ to select, and
   commission, and send forth the ministers of his gospel; an authority
   which, by right of office and government, he carried with him to the
   right hand of the Father, to be possessed and exercised till the final
   issue of his mediatorial kingdom. In strict conformity with this
   declaration of their divine Master, the apostolic college claimed no
   right to constitute ministers in succession; but sought, with earnest
   prayer and diligent examination of spiritual gifts, connected with
   holiness of life and usefulness in labor, whom God had called to this
   sacred employment; and in this is involved, as we believe, the true
   doctrine of apostolic succession.

   "Keeping steadily in view this fundamental principle in the
   constitution and perpetuity of the Christian ministry, and in
   connection with it the unity of the church of Christ, we, as your
   general superintendents, have thought it proper to invite your
   deliberate attention to several subjects which, in our opinion, have a
   special claim to your consideration-earnestly praying that all things
   may be done, whether in word or deed, as in the immediate presence of
   God, and with an eye single to his glory.

   "To preserve and strengthen the unity and peace of that great and
   increasing body of Christians and Christian ministers which you
   represent in this General Conference, and to devise and adopt measures
   for the more extensive and efficient promotion of the work of God in
   these lands and in foreign countries, ale the primary and very
   important objects of the institution of this body; and in these objects
   your counsel, your acts, and your prayers should concentrate. The
   connection of Wesleyan Methodists in all parts of the world should
   remain one united household, keeping the unity of the Spirit in the
   bonds of peace. One in doctrine, and in all the essential points of
   discipline, they should remain undivided in affection; and no minor
   considerations, growing out of difference of country, civil government,
   or other circumstances, should ever separate us, or interrupt our
   Christian fellowship. Laborers together with our brethren in Europe,
   and in the provinces, in the same vineyard of our common Lord, we
   should avail ourselves of every favorable opportunity, and especially
   of the occasion of the meeting of this body, to convey to them our
   Christian salutations, and the expressions of our undiminished
   affection and esteem.

   "Although it may be safely admitted that every system, except that
   which has a just claim to inspiration, is capable of improvement, it is
   a wise and prudent maxim, as well in ecclesiastical as in civil
   jurisprudence, that principles and measures which have been long
   established and generally successful in their operations, should be
   changed or modified with the utmost caution. The history of communities
   sufficiently proves that innovations upon such a settled order of
   things are very liable to result in consequences unfavorable to the
   peace and well-being of society. This being the case, no ordinary
   considerations should induce us to remove the ancient land-marks which
   our fathers have set up.'

   "In a body so numerous as the Methodist connection, embracing
   twenty-eight annual conferences, extended over these United States and
   territories, and connected with different civil and domestic
   institutions, it is hardly expected that all should see eye to eye'
   relative to the meaning and administration of the discipline of the
   Church, or the fitness and expediency of measures which may be adopted
   in conformity to such a state of things.

   "It has been the constant aim and united endeavor of your general
   superintendents to preserve uniformity and harmony in these respects;
   and, as far as practicable, prevent conflicting action in all the
   official bodies in the Church. But, although we record, with unfeigned
   gratitude to the God of all grace and consolation, the general peace,
   and harmony, and prosperity of the body, since your last session, it
   becomes our painful duty to lay before you some exceptions to this
   happy and prosperous condition.

   "At the last session of the General Conference the subject of slavery
   and its abolition was extensively discussed, and vigorous exertions
   made to effect new legislation upon it. But, after a careful
   examination of the whole ground, aided by the light of past experience,
   it was the solemn conviction of the conference that the interests of
   religion would not be advanced by any additional enactments in regard
   to it.

   "In your pastoral address to the ministers and people, at your last
   session, with great unanimity, and, as we believe, in the true spirit
   of the ministers of the peaceful gospel of Christ, you solemnly advised
   the whole body to abstain from all abolition movements, and from
   agitating the exciting subject in the Church. This advice was in
   perfect agreement with the individual as well as associated views of
   your superintendents. But had we differed from you in opinion, in
   consideration of the age, wisdom, experience, and official authority of
   the General Conference, we should have felt ourselves under a solemn
   obligation to be governed by your counsel. We have endeavored, both in
   our official administration, and in our private intercourse with the
   preachers and members, to inculcate the sound policy and Christian
   spirit of your pastoral address. And it affords us great pleasure to be
   able to assure you, that our efforts in this respect have been very
   generally approved, and your advice cordially received and practically
   observed in a very large majority of the annual conferences, as will
   more fully appear to you on the careful examination of the journals of
   those bodies for the last four years. But we regret that we are
   compelled to say, that in some of the northern and eastern conferences,
   in contravention of your Christian and pastoral counsel, and of your
   best efforts to carry it into effect, the subject has been agitated in
   such forms, and in such a spirit, as to disturb the peace of the
   Church. This unhappy agitation has not been confined to the annual
   conferences, but has been introduced into quarterly conferences, and
   made the absorbing business of self-created bodies in the bosom of our
   beloved Zion. The professed object of all these operations is to free
   the Methodist Episcopal Church from the "great moral evil of slavery,"
   and to secure to the enslaved the rights and privileges of free
   citizens of these United States. How far the measures adopted, and the
   manner of applying those measures, are calculated to accomplish such an
   issue, even if it could be effected by any action of ecclesiastical
   bodies, your united wisdom will enable you to judge.

   "We cannot, however, but regard it as of unhappy tendency, that either
   individual members, or official bodies in the Church, should employ
   terms and pass resolutions of censure and condemnation on their
   brethren, and on public officers and official bodies over whose actions
   they have no legitimate jurisdiction. It requires un very extensive
   knowledge of human nature to be convinced that if we would convert our
   fellow-men from the error of their ways, we must address them, not in
   terms of crimination and reproach, but in the milder language of
   respect, persuasion, and kindness.

   "It is justly due to a number of the annual conferences in which a
   majority, or a very respectable minority of the members are professedly
   abolitionists, to say, that they occupy a very different ground and
   pursue a very different course from those of their brethren who have
   adopted ultra principles and measures in this unfortunate, and, we
   think unprofitable controversy. The result of action had in such
   conferences on the resolution of the New England conference,
   recommending a very important change in our general rule on slavery, is
   satisfactory proof of this fact, and affords us strong and increasing
   confidence that the unity and peace of the Church are not to be
   materially affected by this exciting subject. Many of the preachers who
   were favorably disposed to the cause of abolition, when they saw the
   extent to which it was designed to carry these measures, and the
   inevitable consequences of their prosecution, came to a pause,
   reflected, and declined their cooperation. They clearly perceived that
   the success of the measures would result in the division of the Church;
   and for such an event they were not prepared. They have no disposition
   to criminate their brethren in the south, who are unavoidably connected
   with the institution of slavery, or to separate from them on that
   account. It is believed that men of ardent temperament, whose zeal may
   have been somewhat in advance of their knowledge and discretion, have
   made such advances in the abolition enterprise as to produce a
   reaction. A few preachers and members, disappointed in their
   expectations, and despairing of the success of their cause in the
   Methodist Church, have withdrawn from our fellowship, and connected
   themselves with associations more congenial with their views and
   feelings; and others, in similar circumstances, may probably follow
   their example. But we rejoice in believing that these secessions will
   be very limited, and that the great body of Methodists in these states
   will continue, as they have been, one and inseparable. The uniformity
   and st ability of our course should be such, as to let all candid and
   thinking men see that the cause of secessions from us is not a change
   of our doctrine or moral discipline -- no imposition of new terms of
   communion -- no violation of covenant engagements on the part of the
   Church. It is a matter worthy of particular notice, that these who have
   departed from us do hot pre tend that any material change in our
   system, with respect either to doctrine, discipline, or government, has
   taken place since they voluntarily united themselves with us. And it is
   ardently to be desired that no such innovation may be effected, as to
   furnish any just ground for such a pretension.

   "The experience of more than half a century, since the organization of
   our ecclesiastical body, will afford us many important lights and
   landmarks, pointing out what is the safest and most prudent policy to
   be pursued in our onward course as regards African slavery in these
   States; and especially in our own religious community. This very
   interesting period of our history is distinguished by several
   characteristic features having a special claim to our consideration at
   the present time, particularly in view of the unusual excitement which
   now prevails on the subject, not only in the different Christian
   churches, but also in the civil body. And, first, our general rule on
   slavery, which forms a part of the constitution of the Church, has
   stood from the beginning unchanged, as testamentary of our sentiments
   on the principle of slavery and the slave trade. And in this we differ
   in no respect from the sentiments of our venerable founder, or from
   those of the wisest and most distinguished statesmen and civilians of
   our own, and other enlightened and Christian countries. Secondly, In
   all the enactments of the Church relating to slavery, a due and
   respectful regard has been had to the laws of the states, never
   requiring emancipation in contravention of the civil authority, or
   where the laws of the states would not allow the liberated slave to
   enjoy his freedom. Thirdly, The simply holding or owning slaves,
   without regard to circumstances, has at no period of the existence of
   the Church subjected the master to excommunication. Fourthly, Rules
   have been made from time to time, regulating the sale and purchase and
   holding of slaves, with reference to the different laws of the states
   where slavery is tolerated; which, upon the experience of the great
   difficulties of administering them, and the unhappy consequences both
   to masters and servants, have been as often changed or repealed. These
   important facts, which form prominent features of our past history as a
   Church, may very properly lead us to inquire for that course of action
   in future which may be best calculated to preserve the peace and unity
   of the whole body, promote the greatest happiness of the slave
   population, and advance generally, in the slave-holding community of
   our country, the humane and hallowing influence of our holy religion.
   We cannot withhold from you, at this eventful period, the solemn
   conviction of our minds, that no new ecclesiastical legislation on the
   subject of slavery at this time will have a tendency to accomplish
   these most desirable objects. And we are fully persuaded, that, as a
   body of Christian ministers, we shall accomplish the greatest good by
   directing our individual and united efforts, in the spirit of the first
   teachers of Christianity, to bring both master and servant under the
   sanctifying influence of the principles of that gospel which teaches
   the duties of every relation, and enforces the faithful discharge of
   them by the strongest conceivable motives. Do we aim at the
   amelioration of the condition of the slave? How can we so effectually
   accomplish this, in our calling as ministers of the gospel of Christ,
   as by employing our whole influence to bring both him and his master to
   a saving knowledge of the grace of God, and to a practical observance
   of those relative duties so clearly prescribed in the writings of the
   inspired apostles? Permit us to add, that, although we enter not into
   the political contentions of the day, neither interfere with civil
   legislation, nor with the administration of the laws, we cannot but
   feel a deep interest in whatever affects the peace, prosperity, and
   happiness of our beloved country. The union of these States, the
   perpetuity of the bonds of our national confederation, the reciprocal
   confidence of the different members of the great civil compact; in a
   word, the well-being of the community of which we are members, should
   never cease to he near our hearts, and for which we should offer up our
   sincere and most ardent prayers to the almighty Ruler of the universe.
   But can we, as ministers of the gospel, and servants of a Master whose
   kingdom is not of this world,' promote these important objects in any
   way so truly and permanently as by pursuing the course just pointed
   out? Can we, at this eventful crisis, render a better service to our
   country than by laying aside all interference with relations authorized
   and established by the civil laws, and applying ourselves wholly and
   faithfully to what specially appertains to our high and holy calling;'
   to teach and enforce the moral obligations of the gospel, in
   application to all the duties growing out of the different relations in
   society? By a diligent devotion to this evangelical employment, with an
   humble and steadfast reliance upon the aid of divine influence, the
   number of believing masters' and servants may be constantly increased,
   the kindest sentiments and affections cultivated, domestic burdens
   lightened, mutual confidence cherished, and the peace and happiness of
   society be promoted. While on the other hand, if past history affords
   us any correct rules of judgment, there is much cause to fear that the
   influence of our sacred office, if employed in interfering with the
   relation itself, and consequently with the civil institutions of the
   country, will rather tend to prevent than to accomplish these desirable
   ends.

   "But while we sincerely and most affectionately, and, we humbly trust,
   in the spirit of the gospel of Christ, recommend to you, and to all the
   ministers and members you represent in the body, to pursue such a
   course in regard to this deeply exciting subject, we think it proper to
   invite your attention in particular to one point, intimately connected
   with it, and, as we conceive, of primary importance. It is in regard to
   the true import and application of the general rule on slavery. The
   different constructions to which it has been subjected, and the variety
   of opinions entertained upon it, together with the conflicting acts of
   some of the annual conferences of the north and south, seem to require
   that a body, having legitimate jurisdiction, should express a clear and
   definite opinion, as a uniform guide to those to whom the
   administration of the discipline is committed.

   Another subject of vital importance, as we apprehend, to the unity and
   peace of the Church, and not unconnected with the foregoing, is the
   constitutional powers of the general superintendents, in such relations
   to the annual conferences, and in their general executive
   administration of the government; and the rights of annual and
   quarterly conferences, in their official capacities. In the prosecution
   of our superintending agency, we have been compelled to differ in
   opinion from many of our brethren composing these official bodies; and
   this difference of opinion, connected with a conviction of our high
   responsibility, has, in a few cases, resulted in action which has been
   judged, by those specially concerned, to be high-handed,
   unconstitutional, tyrannical, and oppressive. In all such cases, we
   have given the most unequivocal assurances that we should, with
   unfeigned satisfaction and the kindest feelings, submit the whole
   matter in controversy, with all our official acts in the premises, to
   the enlightened deliberation and final judgment of this constitutional
   tribunal. And we cannot but indulge the hope that those who have
   differed from us will cordially abide the decision of such a
   judicatory, should it not accord with their views. We have no
   disposition to enter into an extensive examination of the merits of the
   case, which, we regret to say, has been a matter of prolonged
   discussion in self-created conventions, and in some of the religious
   periodicals of the day. But our object is to lay before you the simple
   points involved, and leave the issue to be settled as your united
   wisdom shall determine, requesting liberty, at the proper time, if
   occasion should require, to correct erroneous statements, and remove
   improper impressions, having reference to both course of action. In
   presenting this subject to your consideration, it is due to a very
   large majority of all the annual conferences, and to the members
   composing them, individually, to say that the utmost harmony, and
   confidence, and affection exist between them and the general
   superintendents. The geographical bounds of the controversy are very
   limited.

   The whole subject may be presented to you in the following simple
   questions: When any business comes up for action in our annual or
   quarterly conferences, involving a difficulty on a question of law, so
   as to produce the inquiry, What is the law in the case? does the
   constitutional power to decide the question belong to the president, or
   the conference? Have the annual conferences a constitutional right to
   do any other business than what is specifically prescribed, or, by fair
   construction, provided for in the form of Discipline? Has the president
   of an annual conference, by virtue of his office, a right to decline
   putting a motion or resolution to vote, on business other than that
   thus prescribed or provided for?

   "These questions are proposed with exclusive reference to the principle
   of constitutional right. The principles of courtesy and expediency are
   very different things.

   "As far as we have been able to ascertain the views of those who
   entertain opinions opposite to our own on these points, they may be
   summed up as follows: --

   "They maintain that all questions of law arising out of the business of
   our annual or quarterly conferences are to be, of right, settled by the
   decision of those bodies, either primarily by resolution, or finally by
   an appeal from the decision of the president: that it is the
   prerogative of an annual conference to decide what business they will
   do, and when they will do it:' that they have a constitutional right to
   discuss, in their official capacity, all moral subjects:' to
   investigate the official acts of other annual conferences -- of the
   General Conference, and of the general superintendents, so far as to
   pass resolutions of disapprobation or approval on those acts. They
   maintain that the president of an annual conference is to be regarded
   in the same relation to the conference that a chairman or speaker
   sustains to a civil legislative assembly: that it is his duty to
   preserve order in the conference, to determine questions of order,
   subject to appeal, and put to vote all motions and resolutions, when
   called for according to the rules of the body: that these are the
   settled landmarks of his official prerogatives, as president of the
   conference, beyond which he has no right to go: that although it
   belongs to his office, as general superintendent, to appoint the time
   for holding the several annual conferences, he has no discretionary
   authority to adjourn them, whatever length of time they may have
   continued their session, or whatever business they may think proper to
   transact. From these doctrines we have felt it our solemn duty to
   dissent. And we will not withhold from you our deliberate and abiding
   conviction, that if they should be sustained by the General Conference,
   the uniform and efficient administration of the government would be
   rendered impracticable.

   "The government of the Methodist Episcopal Church is peculiarly
   constructed. It is widely different from our civil organization. The
   General Conference is the only legislative body recognized in our
   ecclesiastical system, and from it originates the authority of the
   entire executive administration. The exclusive power to create annual
   conferences, and to increase or diminish their number, rests with this
   body. No annual conference has authority or right to make any rule of
   discipline for the Church, either within its own bounds or elsewhere.
   No one has the power to elect its own president, except in a special
   case, pointed out, and provided for, by the General Conference.
   Whatever may be the number of the annual conferences, they are all
   organized on the same plan, are all governed by the same laws, and all
   have identically the same rights, powers, and privileges. These powers,
   and rights, and privileges are not derived from themselves, but from
   the body which originated them. And the book of Discipline, containing
   the rules of the General Conference, is the only charter of their
   rights, and directory of their duties, as official bodies. The general
   superintendents are elected by the General Conference, and responsible
   to it for the discharge of the duties of their office. They are
   constituted, by virtue of their office, president of the annual
   conferences, with authority to appoint the time of holding them; with a
   prudential provision that they shall allow each conference to sit at
   least one week, that the important business prescribed in the form of
   Discipline may not be hurried through in such a manner as to affect
   injuriously the interests of the Church. The primary objects of their
   official department in the Church were, as we believe, to preserve, in
   the mot effectual manner, an itinerant ministry; to maintain a
   uniformity in the administration of the government and discipline in
   every department, and that the unity of the whole body might be
   preserved. But how, we would ask, can these important ends be
   accomplished, if each annual conference possesses the rights mid powers
   set forth in the foregoing summary? Is it to be supposed, that
   twenty-eight constitutional judges of ecclesiastical law, and these,
   too, not individuals of age and experience, who have had time and means
   to thoroughly investigate, and analyze, and collate the system; but
   official bodies, many members of which are young and inexperienced, and
   without the opportunity or necessary helps for such researches, and
   without consultation with each other on the points to be decided, will
   settle different questions of law with such agreement as to have no
   material conflict between their legal decisions. Is it not greatly to
   be feared, that, with such a system of ecclesiastical jurisprudence,
   what might be law in Georgia might be no law in New England? that what
   might be orthodoxy in one conference might be heresy in another? Where,
   then, would be the identity of the law, the uniformity of its
   administration, or the unity and peace of the Church?

   "A well-digested system of collegiate education, under the direction
   and control of the General Conference, is, in our opinion, loudly
   called for by the present state of the Church, and by our widely
   extended and extending influence, as a religious denomination. Such a
   system is of such vast importance, in connection with the general
   principles and designs of Methodism, as to render the policy of
   submitting its direction and superintendence to sectional control, to
   say the least, very doubtful. For many years, the state of the Church
   was such in these States as to render it impracticable to accomplish
   much in the cause of education, any further than as we were associated
   with other bodies, or were connected with the institutions of the
   country. And it is not to be denied that there existed among us, to a
   considerable extent, even down to a recent date, strong opposition to
   commencing this important enterprise among ourselves. But during the
   last twenty years, the spirit of inquiry has been wakened up, and a
   very general interest excited on this subject; and the energies and
   means of our preachers and people have been employed to a very
   considerable extent in the promotion of such a worthy and noble object.
   What appears to be especially necessary at the present crisis is a
   well-organized system which shall give the best direction to those
   energies and means. It will not be at all surprising to men who have
   made themselves acquainted with the former and present condition of the
   Methodist Church, relative to the promotion of literature, that there
   should be at the present time a spirit of zeal and enterprise in
   operation, which, if not guided by the soundest principles of wisdom
   and policy, and concentrated in a general and harmonious system, may
   fail to accomplish the desirable and important object, and ultimately
   result in injurious reaction. This can hardly fail to be the case, if
   colleges, or other high institutions of learning, which must depend
   upon other means of support than the revenues arising from tuiition,
   are multiplied beyond the available means necessary for their adequate
   and permanent endowment. And it is to be feared that in this respect we
   are not entirely free from error and danger. We scarcely need to say to
   this enlightened and experienced body of ministers, many of whom are
   familiar with the polity and fiscal concerns of literary institutions,
   that such of them as we have just named cannot be considered in a safe
   and sound condition in regard to their efficiency and perpetuity, until
   they realize a revenue from permanent endowment entirely sufficient to
   support their faculties, leaving the fund arising from tuition to meet
   contingent expenses. If this is a correct rule of calculation in regard
   to the safety of collegiate institutions, it is very doubtful whether
   any of our colleges or universities can be considered permanently
   secure. It appears to us that the time has arrived for the General
   Conference to take this subject into their deliberate consideration,
   and adopt such measures as, in their wisdom, may the most effectually
   secure our colleges already in operation from liability to failure, and
   guard against the erection of others till sufficient available means
   are secured to place them on a firm foundation. The circumstance that
   there are members of the faculties or boards of trustees of nearly, if
   not quite all our colleges, present as representatives in this body,
   is, in our opinion, peculiarly favorable to such a design. We cannot
   too deeply impress upon your minds the importance of preserving in our
   own power the direction and control of the system of collegiate and
   theological education in the Church. Perhaps a more favorable
   opportunity than your present session will seldom, if ever, occur, for
   devising and adopting a judicious and uniform course of literary and
   moral discipline in all the collegiate institutions under our
   superintendence. And we will not withhold our solemn conviction, that
   any course of study in a Methodist college or university would be
   essentially defective if it did not embrace the Bible -- the most
   ancient, the most learned, and the most important book in the world. As
   a Christian community, all our institutions of learning should be
   sanctuaries of theological science. Do we send our sons to explore the
   regions of science and literature, merely, as did idolatrous Greece and
   Rome, to prepare them for the senate, the forum, or the field? Do we
   not rather desire that they may be qualified by mental and moral
   improvement, to diffuse, in every circle of society in which they may
   move, the influence of the enlightening, peaceful, and benevolent
   principles of our holy religion? Do we intend them for professional
   life? In what profession can they be employed in a Christian country in
   which the Bible is not a most important text book? Are not the civil
   governments of Christendom based upon it? Is it not the fountain of
   law, and the charter of rights? When do you see the statesman, the
   judge, or the advocate, more clear, convincing, authoritative, or
   sublime, than when he appeals to its doctrines, morals, or sanctions?
   Do we desire our sons to practice the healing art? Would we send them
   forth to mingle in scenes of wretchedness and suffering without the
   knowledge of those divine truths taught by Him who went about doing
   good, and healing all manner of diseases? In a word, we cannot but
   believe that the doctrines, history, evidences, and morals of
   revelation, should be regarded as forming one of the most important
   departments in our system of collegiate education. We are aware that
   such a feature in the course of study in our colleges would subject
   them to the too common objection of being theological seminaries. This
   objection would certainly come with more grace from the lips of
   infidels than from the tongues or pens of professed believers in the
   divine authenticity of the Christian revelation. While, in our opinion,
   the science of the word of God should be a paramount branch of
   instruction in our literary institutions, we desire not to be
   understood as recommending the establishment of Theological
   Seminaries,' in the common acceptation of the term; that is, for the
   special purpose of educating men for the work of the gospel ministry.
   We feel, with many enlightened Christians and able ministers, both in
   our own and other religious denominations, the importance of an able
   and efficient ministry. Nor are we unapprised of the great advantages
   of a thorough education to those whose business it is to preach Christ
   and him crucified.' But we are free to acknowledge that the policy of
   establishing schools of divinity for the exclusive purpose of preparing
   young men for the sacred office, as for a profession, is, in our
   opinion, to say the least, of doubtful authority and expedience. The
   history of such institutions, from their earliest establishment,
   admonishes us, that the speculators of human science have but too
   frequently obscured and adulterated the doctrines of the revelation of
   God; and that, in many cases, where they have been commenced on
   evangelical ground, in their onward course they have wandered into the
   wilderness of metaphysical disquisitions, or been lost in the still
   darker regions of rational Christianity.' When the history, doctrines,
   evidences, and duties of the revelation of God shall form a distinct
   and primary department of study in our institutions of learning our
   children be dedicated to God, and trained up in his knowledge and fear,
   and the whole Church united in devout and fervent prayer that God would
   raise up, and send forth into his vineyard, men of his own selection,
   and Scriptural proofs be required of those who profess to be called to
   preach the gospel, it is believed that human agency will have reached
   its legitimate bounds in the premises, and that this great concern will
   be perfectly secure with the supreme Head of the church, to whom alone
   belongs the authority to perpetuate the ministry of his gospel to the
   end of the world. But should this body differ from us with regard to
   the expediency of establishing institutions for theological education
   separate from our literary establishments, and for the exclusive
   purpose of preparing the students for the work of the ministry, we
   cannot too strongly recommend to you the propriety and importance of
   having the whole subject under the direction and control of the General
   Conference. We are well persuaded that your wisdom and experience will
   lead you to apprehend the great impropriety of sectional institutions
   in the Church for such a purpose. To intrust a matter of such vast
   moment to a self-organized association, or to an annual conference, or

   "A regular and uniform course of study for the under graduates in the
   ministry has, in our judgment, a special claim to your attention at
   your present session. At a former session it was made the duty of the
   general superintendents to point out a course of study for the
   candidates, preparatory to their admission into full connection, with
   discretionary privilege of appointing a committee for that purpose. By
   this rule, no provision is made for a course of study for preachers,
   for the two years previous to their induction to the office of elders.
   This has been thought to be a defect in the system, and at the request
   of many of the annual conferences, an advisory course has been
   prepared, embracing these two years. The result, as far as we have
   knowledge, has been very advantageous in the improvement of the
   ministry. And we recommend to the General Conference to extend the
   course so as to embrace the whole period from the time of admission on
   trial, until the full powers of the ministry are conferred. The
   situation of the superintendents is such, in visiting all parts of the
   work, extending over all the states and territories, as to render it
   extremely difficult, and for the most part impracticable, without great
   labor and expense, to meet for consultation with each other on this, or
   any other, important interest of the church; and their duties are so
   various and weighty as to incline them to the opinion, that the great
   object contemplated in this provision would be better accomplished by a
   uniform course of study prepared by this body, and published in our
   form of Discipline. The local ministry is to be regarded as forming an
   important department in our system. They are truly helpers in the work
   of the Lord. As such we should always esteem them. And nothing should
   be neglected which has a tendency to preserve and strengthen the bonds
   of affection and confidence between them and the itinerant connection.
   Many of this useful class of ministers have deeply felt the necessity
   of a regular system of study, adapted, as far as practicable, to the
   condition and circumstances of local preachers, embracing studies
   preparatory to their receiving license, and extending to the time of
   their graduating to the office of elders. Many and great advantages
   might doubtless be derived from such a course, judiciously formed in
   adaptation to the circumstances of our local brethren, whose time must
   necessarily be employed, to a greater or less extent, in secular
   avocations. We recommend the subject to your deliberate consideration.

   "We invite your particular attention to a review of the process
   prescribed in the Discipline in the provision for locating a preacher
   without his consent. The course directed in case of the trial of a
   superannuated preacher, residing without the bounds of the annual
   conference of which he is a member, is found to be attended with great
   inconvenience, and is liable to result in injustice to the accused, or
   injury to the church. A considerable number of superannuated preachers
   (and the number is constantly increasing) have their residence many
   hundred miles from the bounds of the conferences where they hold their
   membership. The consequence is, that it repeatedly occurs, that the
   communications which the Discipline requires them to make to their own
   conference fail to be received, in which cases the passage of their
   characters may be involved, and they are liable to be deprived of their
   regular allowance, even when they sustain the fairest reputation, and
   when they are in real need of the amount to which they have a lawful
   claim. But these points are far from being the most important, though
   they are certainly entitled to consideration. The subject embraces
   deeper interests, both to the individuals and to the church. In case of
   the trial of a superannuated preacher, within the bounds of a
   conference remote from his own, as provided for in the Discipline,
   there are several difficulties which experiment can hardly fail to make
   obvious. It is provided that the presiding elder, in whose district the
   accused may reside, shall bring him to trial, and in case of
   suspension, shall forward to the annual conference of which the accused
   is a member, exact minutes of the charges, testimony, and decision of
   the committee in the ease, and on the testimony thus furnished, the
   conference must decide. The great difficulty of deciding important
   cases equitably, from minutes of testimony thus taken, is well known.
   This difficulty is increased in proportion to the complexity of the
   ease, and the conflicting character of the testimony. Add to this, that
   it will rarely be practicable in such cases for the accuser and accused
   to be brought face to face, or for either to be present to plead in the
   premises. Distance of place, length of time required, and the labor and
   expense involved, would, in most eases, form an insurmountable obstacle
   to the parties being heard before the tribunal where judgment must
   finally be given. And, further, in cases of this kind it must
   frequently happen that the testimony will be voluminous, and the
   difficulty and expense of its transmission very considerable. And
   finally, documents forwarded a great distance are very liable to fail
   of reaching their place of destination, in which case the
   administration of justice might be delayed, if not finally defeated,
   and the church suffer reproach. Besides, the present provision in our
   Discipline is, in our opinion, too liable to abuse. Should any one of
   the annual conferences think it proper to enter upon any favorite
   enterprise, for the success of which they might conceive it necessary
   to have agents operating without their own bounds, it would be no
   difficult matter to place such brethren as would very well serve their
   case in a superannuated relation. And if the object to be accomplished
   was of very deep interest, the liability of their agents to trial and
   suspension by a committee would hardly form an obstacle, especially as
   the final decision of the case would be in their own power. In view of
   all the difficulties to which the present provision is liable, we are
   inclined to the opinion that a different course might be devised, by
   which the ends of justice might be obtained more readily, and with
   greater certainty, and in perfect accordance with our system of
   government. As the trial and expulsion of a preacher is not to be
   regarded simply as a process affecting only his relation to the
   conference where he belongs, but is to all intents and purposes an
   expulsion from the itinerant connection, and from the Church; and as
   the same rules for the trial of preachers must govern the action of all
   the annual conferences, and the same rights and privileges are secured
   to all by the constitution and Discipline of the Church, we are not
   apprised of any valid objection to the trial of traveling preachers by
   the annual conferences in which they may reside at the time of the
   occurrence of the offense of which they are accused. Indeed, it would
   seem that the principle of constitutionality in such a course is fully
   recognized by the General Conference in the present provision: -- For
   if a presiding elder may have jurisdiction over a superannuated
   preacher, residing within his district, and out of the bounds of his
   own conference, so as to suspend him from all official acts and
   privileges, which is the utmost extent of his authority in regard to
   the preachers stationed in his district, it will be difficult, it is
   presumed, to raise valid constitutional objections to the jurisdiction
   of an annual conference to prosecute such cases to a final issue. And
   it can hardly be doubted that these two great advantages would be
   secured by such a process -- it would secure a more ready and easy
   access to testimony, especially such as might be presumptive and
   circumstantial, on which, it is well known, the final issue may
   materially depend, and afford the accuser and accused the opportunity
   of appearing face to face, to plead their own cause. And we
   respectfully suggest whether a provision, in some respects similar,
   might not be made for the trial of local preachers in the circuits
   where they are charged with committing offenses. With these views we
   submit the subject to your consideration. Since the General Conference
   provided for the appointment of preachers to the charge of seminaries
   of learning, many institutions for the education of youth of both sexes
   have sprung up, preferring their claims to such appointments. Most of
   these schools have been originated by individuals, or associations of
   individuals, having no other connection with an annual conference than
   such as consists in the courtesy of patronage, connected with the
   annual visits of a committee appointed for the purpose of attending
   their examinations, and reporting the results.

   "In discharging the important and responsible duties of their office,
   your superintendents have not been so happy as to avoid difficulty from
   this department; and in some eases their convictions of the limits of
   their authority, in connection with their judgment of expediency, have
   compelled them, though with the most friendly reciprocal feelings, to
   differ from the views, and decline to meet the express wishes of annual
   conferences. And it is with the most sincere satisfaction that they
   refer their opinions and acts to this body, that if in error, as they
   are certainly liable to be, they may be corrected, and the whole body
   harmonized on all material points. There are two distinct cases in
   which the superintendents are authorized to appoint preachers to
   institutions of learning. The one respects such institutions as are or
   may be under our superintendence, and the other, such as are not. Out
   of these cases several important questions have originated, which have
   been the ground of the difference of opinion of which we have just
   spoken. These questions may be stated as follows: 1. What is necessary
   to constitute a seminary of learning so far under our superintendence
   as to bring it fairly within the rule of the General Conference
   authorizing the appointment of a preacher to it? 2. What classes of
   literary institutions was it the intention of the General Conference to
   embrace in this provision? 3. In providing for the appointment of
   preachers to 'seminaries of learning' not under our superintendence,
   was it the intention of the General Conference to include all classes
   of literary institutions, if the appointment was requested by an annual
   conference, or to limit the appointment to seminaries of collegiate
   literature? 4, Is an appointment under this provision discretionary
   with the superintendent, or does the request of an annual conference
   create an obligation as a matter of duty, as in the case of
   appointments in the districts and circuits? There are principles and
   interests, in our opinion, involved in these questions which have a
   special claim to the deliberate consideration of this body. From the
   numerous applications which are made for the appointment of preachers,
   to be school teachers and agents for various institutions, it is to be
   feared that unless the subject be clearly defined, and carefully
   guarded by suitable limitations and restrictions, our grand itinerant
   system may be impaired by a virtual location of many valuable
   ministers, and the Church suffer in spiritual interests from the loss
   of useful labors. There are at this time about seventy of the effective
   traveling preachers employed as presidents, professors, principals, and
   teachers in literary institutions, and as agents devoted to their
   interests. These ministers are selected from the several annual
   conferences with reference to their qualifications for the duties of
   their station. They are men of talent, science, and learning, and many
   of them ministers of age and experience. And the calls for such
   appointments are constantly multiplying on our hands. While we readily
   and thankfully acknowledge the usefulness of brethren employed in this
   important department of our great work, we must be permitted to doubt
   whether the cause of God might not be more effectually and extensively
   promoted, if, to say the least, a very large proportion of these able
   ministers of Christ were exclusively devoted to the work of the gospel
   ministry. And we respectfully suggest the inquiry, whether pious and
   learned men may not be obtained from the local ministry, or from the
   official or private membership, well qualified as teachers to advance
   the cause of education, and by this means bring into the regular field
   of itinerant labor a great weight of talent and influence now almost
   confined to the precincts of academies and colleges.

   "At the last session of this body the publication of three religious
   periodicals was provided for, in addition to those previously
   established. They have now, it is presumed, been before the religious
   community a sufficient time to enable you to form an opinion of their
   intrinsic merits as official papers, going forth to an enlightened and
   reading people, under the authority and patronage of the General
   Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and of their usefulness
   in promoting the great enterprise in which we are engaged, by spreading
   abroad the light of gospel truth, advancing the interests of our
   important institutions, and strengthening the bonds of peace and
   harmony in the Church. The influence of the periodical press, either
   for weal or woe, is too well ascertained to render it necessary for
   this body to be reminded of the importance of throwing around it, so
   far as it is under their direction and patronage, those safeguards
   which shall preserve its unity, and render it subservient to the
   promotion of intellectual, moral, and religious improvement. We have no
   doubt but you will agree with us in sentiment, that our religious
   papers should take no part in the political warfare of the day -- that
   they should never interfere with the civil institutions of the country
   that they should promote, as far as practicable, quietness, peace; and
   love, among all Christian people, and especially in the Church by whose
   authority and patronage they exist, and whose interests they are
   particularly designed to serve. Whatever might have been the views of
   the General Conference at the time of the establishment of these
   papers, it did not occur to the superintendents that they were to be
   mediums of mercantile or professional advertisements; and we
   respectfully submit it to your enlightened judgment, whether it is
   consistent with the character of the Church, and the grand designs of
   her religious institutions, among which the periodical press is one of
   the most efficient, to make them such. We are not apprised whether
   recourse has been had to this measure from courtesy to friends in
   secular occupations, or for the purpose of realizing funds sufficient
   to meet the expenses of publication. But with due deference, we must be
   permitted to doubt whether the credit or the general interests of the
   Methodist Church will be promoted by the publication of a paper under
   the official sanction of the General Conference, which cannot obtain a
   patronage sufficient to meet its expenses without devoting its columns
   to business advertisements. Your timely and judicious advice to the
   annual conferences, not to establish any more conference papers, has
   been respectfully regarded, so that no new paper has been published by
   any conference for the last four years, except one, which has since
   been discontinued, and it is believed there is an increasing conviction
   in the conferences generally, that it is inexpedient to publish such
   papers. Several papers, however, are published, assuming to be in the
   interests of the Methodist Church, and edited by Methodist preachers,
   and which are patronized to a considerable extent by many members of
   several annual conferences. We are already admonished by the history of
   the past, how easy it is, under the popular pretext of the right of
   free discussion, to disturb the harmony and peace of the Church, stir
   up strife and contention, alienate the affection of brethren from each
   other, and finally injure the cause of Christ.

   "Applications from members and ministers of other churches, with whom
   we are in Christian fellowship, are becoming more frequent, and a
   variety of opinions being entertained by preachers of age and
   experience, with regard to the manner of receiving them among us, the
   Discipline making no special provision in the case, we have thought it
   advisable to bring the subject before you, with a view to the adopting
   a course which may harmonize the views and official action of all
   concerned, and manifest that spirit of Christian charity which should
   always abound in the church of Christ. It is only necessary for us to
   lay before you the different opinions entertained on the subject,
   which, from the character and number of those who hold them, are
   certainly entitled to respectful attention. With regard to private
   members of other churches who make application for membership with us,
   it has been maintained on the one hand, that they should be admitted
   and remain on trial for six months, as the Discipline provides, before
   they are received into the Church; and on the other, that the
   circumstance of their being regular and approved members of other
   churches, with which we are in Christian fellowship, virtually answers
   the essential ends of the provision for a probationer, and consequently
   that they should be received into the Church without requiring such
   trial. The views which are entertained with respect to receiving
   ministers from other churches are not capable of so simple a
   definition. But they may be summed up as follows: -- Many are of the
   opinion, that, in common with all other persons, they should be
   admitted on trial, and pass a probation of six months, before they are
   received as members of the Church. That, being received as such, they
   should obtain recommendation and license and graduate in the ministry,
   in strict conformity to the letter of the Discipline, without regard to
   their ordination by the constitutional authorities of the churches from
   which they came. Others are of the opinion that, coming to us with
   accredited testimonials of their Christian piety and official standing,
   and giving satisfaction, on examination as the Discipline directs, with
   respect to their belief in our doctrine, and approval of our
   discipline, they should be immediately received and accredited as
   ministers among us. And that on answering the questions, and taking
   upon them, the solemn obligations of our ordination service, they
   should receive credentials of authority to administer the holy
   sacraments without the imposition of hands repeated by us, unless they
   themselves should incline to it. These conflicting opinions, in
   connection with the fact that a number of ministers have been received
   among us in conformity to the latter view, seem to require that the
   General Conference take such order upon it as in their wisdom may be
   best calculated to produce unanimity of sentiment and action, and
   promote Christian confidence and affection between ourselves and other
   religious denominations, without impairing any fundamental principle of
   our order and government

   "Of your general superintendents, six in number, three are enfeebled by
   labor, age, and infirmity. We are of one heart and one mind,
   acknowledging our obligation according to our ability, and to the
   utmost extent of it, to serve the Church of God in that highly
   responsible office which you have committed to us; but, in view of our
   own weakness and the arduous work intrusted to us, with fear and much
   trembling, we have cause to exclaim, Who is sufficient for these
   things?' There are now twenty-eight annual conferences represented in
   this body, and in all probability the number will be considerably
   increased during your present session. These embrace a country
   extending from New Brunswick to Texas on the Atlantic coast and Gulf of
   Mexico, and from the sea-board to the vast northern lakes, and to the
   territories on the upper Mississippi and Missouri. The general
   superintendents sustain the same relation to all these conferences; and
   our system requires that we should be annually visited. Between three
   and four thousand traveling preachers are to be appointed every year to
   their fields of ministerial labor. These appointments must be made with
   due regard to the qualifications, age, infirmities, and domestic
   circumstances of this vast body of ministers, and with the same regard
   to the condition and wants of the millions of people to whom they are
   sent. To minds capable of grasping this vast machinery of our itinerant
   system, it will readily appear that an effective itinerant
   superintendency is indispensably necessary to keep it in regular,
   energetic, and successful operation. It must be effective, not
   imbecile; general, not sectional; itinerant, not local. Destitute of
   either of these prerequisites, the probable result would be a
   disorganization of the system, and weakness and inefficiency in all its
   parts. In the relation we sustain to you as the highest judicatory of
   the Church, and to the whole itinerant connection, it becomes us to be
   cautious and unassuming in presenting you with our sentiments on a
   subject like this, in which it may be supposed we have a special
   individual interest. We will only suggest two points for your
   consideration, which we are confident will appear to you in the same
   light in which we view them. The first is to preserve a sufficient
   number of effective superintendents to secure to the conferences their
   regular annual visits, taking into view the number of conferences, and
   their relative locations. And, second, that there be no greater number
   than is strictly necessary to accomplish this work, carefully guarding
   against the increase of the numbers of laborers beyond the
   proportionate increase of the work, bearing in mind that, if we would
   have laboring preachers, we must have laboring superintendents. As the
   number of annual conferences increases, and the work extends in the
   states and territories, it becomes necessary to strengthen the general
   superintendency in due proportion. But, as you will doubtless have an
   able committee to examine and report on this important subject, we
   forbear any further remarks in relation to it.

   "Our missionary operations among the Indians, and in foreign countries,
   especially on the continent of Africa, are recommended to your special
   attention. The condition of the Indian tribes located on the western
   boundary line of Arkansas and Missouri, and the territories on the
   upper Mississippi and Missouri rivers, calls aloud for united and
   vigorous efforts to disperse among them the light of the gospel, and
   the blessings of civilization. We are encouraged to such effort by the
   circumstance that there is an increasing disposition among most of the
   tribes to encourage the labors of our missionaries, and improve their
   condition by the establishment of schools for the instruction of their
   children in the knowledge of our language, and in agriculture and
   mechanical arts.

   "Since your last session, a plan has been devised, with the approbation
   of the officers and board of managers of the Parent Missionary Society,
   to establish a central Indian manual labor school, with the design of
   collecting and teaching the native children of the several adjacent
   tribes. The plan has been submitted to the executive department of the
   national government having the superintendence of Indian affairs, and
   has met with a favorable and encouraging consideration; and we are much
   indebted to officers and agents of the civil government in, and
   adjacent to, the Indian country, for the extensive aid they have given
   in the establishment of the institution, both by employing their
   influence in recommending it to the Indians, and advising in its
   structure and organization. This school is already, to a considerable
   extent, in successful operation. Native children, from five different
   tribes, are collected; and men from these tribes have visited the
   institution, and have very generally been satisfied with its government
   and objects. We cannot but regard this establishment as full of promise
   of lasting benefits to the Indian race. But as a detailed report of its
   organization, designs, and prospects, will come before you, we will
   only add our earnest recommendation of the plan to your deliberate
   consideration, with regard to the present condition and wants of the
   Indians, and its adaptation to the great objects it is designed to
   accomplish -- the conversion of the Indians to the Christian faith, and
   their improvement in all the arts and habits of civilized life. And we
   would further recommend an inquiry into the expediency of establishing
   one or more institutions, at suitable locations in the Indian country,
   on the same plan, and for the same purposes.

   To Africa we look with the deepest solicitude. Our sympathies, prayers,
   and efforts mingle on her coasts. In our missionary enterprise
   commenced at Liberia, we aim at the conversion of a continent to God.
   The handful of precious seed which has been sown in that infant colony,
   and watered by the tears and prayers of the missionaries and the
   Church, shall spring up and ripen to be sown again with a hundred-fold
   increase, till Africa shall become one fruitful field, cultivated in
   righteousness. Although a number of faithful and devoted missionaries
   have fallen in that field of labors we should by no means be
   discouraged in the prosecution of so great a work. They have fallen
   asleep, but they sleep in the Lord. And being dead they still speak;
   and the voice from their tombs is a call to the church of Christ on the
   American continent to emulate their holy zeal, and fill up the ranks
   from which they have been removed. We have no doubt but you will be
   disposed to take some efficient measures for the constitutional
   organization of the Liberia annual conference, and to provide for the
   ordination of ministers in their own country, that the infant African
   church may be duly and regularly supplied, not only with the ministry
   of the word, but also with the holy sacraments.

   "The character which the Oregon mission has recently assumed, is well
   calculated to invite your particular attention to that extensive and
   important field of missionary enterprise. We can have little doubt
   that, with the blessing of God attending our efforts, the time will
   arrive, when the interests of the missionary colony, and the success of
   the work among the aboriginal tribes, will call for the organization of
   an annual conference in that vast territory. And our grand object
   should be to preserve one harmonious compact, in the unity of the
   Spirit, and the bonds of peace, and that Methodism may be one on either
   side of the Pacific and Atlantic oceans, and on all the islands of the
   sea;

   And mountains rise and oceans roll To sever us in vain.'

   "It was doubtless a wise and safe provision, that copies of the records
   of the proceedings of the annual conferences should be forwarded to the
   General Conference for examination. By this means the General
   Conference may obtain the knowledge of the official acts of those
   bodies, from evidence which cannot be disputed or contravened, and
   consequently they may correct errors in their proceedings, if found to
   exist, on the simple authority of official records. We regret to say
   that, in our opinion, this judicious provision has not been
   sufficiently regarded, either on the part of the annual conferences, in
   forwarding copies of these records, or on the part of the General
   Conference in a careful inspection of them. As these records contain,
   not only the official transactions of the conferences, having an
   important connection with the government and general interests of the
   Church, but also frequently embrace the opinions of the superintendents
   on questions of law, and the administration of discipline; and as it is
   the constitutional prerogative of this body to correct what is
   erroneous in these transactions and opinions, with an earnest desire
   that all things may be done in every official department of the Church
   in strict conformity to her constitution and Discipline, we recommend a
   careful examination of these records at your present session.

   "Finally, brethren, we commend you and ourselves, and the ministers and
   people connected with us in the bonds of the gospel of Christ, to the
   guidance and protection of the great Head of the church, whose we are
   and whom we serve; sincerely and ardently praying that your
   deliberations, with all their results, may be under the influence of
   that wisdom which is from above; which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy
   to be entreated; full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality or
   hypocrisy.

   "We are, dear brethren, sincerely and affectionately yours, in the
   unity and fellowship of the gospel of Christ,

   "R. R. Roberts, "Joshua Soule, "Elijah Hedding, "James O. Andrew, "B.
   Waugh, "Thomas A. Morris, "Baltimore, May 4,1840."

   The several subjects adverted to in this very able address were
   referred to appropriate committees; and so far as their reports were
   adopted by the conference, they will be noticed in the proper places.
   After the address of the bishops was received and disposed of, Mr.
   Newton presented the following address from the Wesleyan Methodist
   Conference, which was read by the seminary, and referred to a committee
   of three to consider and report thereon:

   "Address of the British Conference to the Bishops and Members of the
   General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church in the United
   States of America

   "Very Dear Brethren, -- We gratefully avail ourselves of this
   opportunity to renew the tokens of our fraternal intercourse with you;
   and, while we unfeignedly rejoice in all the blessings with which it
   has pleased Almighty God to accompany your cares and labors, we
   devoutly pray that mercy unto you, and peace, and love' may be yet more
   abundantly multiplied, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus,
   the Son of the Father, in truth and love.'

   "It has afforded us great satisfaction to hear from different quarters
   of your continued prosperity, and especially to receive the personal
   communications which have been made to us at this conference by the
   Rev. Dr. Olin. We are thankful that, notwithstanding the languor of
   indisposition, this esteemed minister in your Church, and our beloved
   brother, has been able to attend several of the sittings of the
   conference, and to address us, at considerable length, on topics which
   are more than usually gratifying to our best affections. Most sincerely
   do we hope that God will, in his goodness, more fully restore his
   health, and prepare him, by an increase of vigor, and of every
   spiritual gift, long to occupy the important station which, to speak
   according to the views and feelings of frail mortality, has been so
   prematurely left vacant by the decease of the excellent and lamented
   Dr. Fisk.

   From a wish to perpetuate a free and familiar interchange of kindly
   offices with you, in the way which we doubt not is most agreeable to
   you as well as to ourselves, we have requested our dear friend and
   brother, the Rev. Robert Newton, to visit you at your next General
   Conference. To enlarge on the high regard which we entertain for our
   honored messenger -- a regard which he has justly merited by his
   unweariable and faithful services in every province of our work, and by
   the exemplary manner in which he has, at two different times, sustained
   the most momentous office in our body -- would be a welcome task to us;
   for it is pleasant to speak of those whom we love but it is, on the
   present occasion, perfectly unnecessary. You are not unacquainted with
   the character which he bears in this country; and yon will receive him
   as a chosen representative of the British Conference, and as one in
   whose views and principles we repose entire confidence.

   The subject which has this year engrossed no small portion of our
   attention, cannot fail to awaken the deepest interest in every part of
   the Wesleyan community throughout the globe. You will anticipate our
   reference to the close of the first century of our existence as an
   organized religious society. On a review of the hundred years which
   have now reached their termination, we humbly acknowledge and adore the
   mercy of God, who marvelously raised up our ever-revered fathers as the
   instruments, in his hands, of so extensive a revival of primitive
   Christianity; who has preserved us, as a connection, in the midst of
   many conflicts and changes; and who has granted us, at this time, so
   cordial a sense of attachment, which we trust that nothing shall ever
   be permitted to abate, to the doctrines, spirit; and usages of those
   venerated men who now rest in eternal peace. May the Lord God of our
   fore-elders, and of all who fear his most holy name, bestow upon us a
   larger measure of his Spirit's grace, and grant that the second century
   of the Wesleyan Society may be marked by still more illustrious
   displays of his power and love in the church universal, and in the
   world!

   "But while we freely indulge in sentiments such as these, we cannot
   forget that on one subject especially -- the subject of American
   slavery -- you, our beloved brethren, are placed in circumstances of
   painful trial and perplexity. We enter, with brotherly sympathy, into
   the peculiar situation which you are now called to occupy. But, on this
   question, we beg to refer you to what occurs in our address to you from
   the conference of 1836, a proper copy of which will be handed to you by
   our representative as also to the contents of our preceding letter of
   1835. To the principles which we have affectionately but honestly
   declared in these two documents we still adhere, with a full conviction
   of their Christian truth and justice.

   "The time which has elapsed, and the events which have taken place,
   since the preparation of the above-mentioned papers, serve only to
   confirm us yet more in our views of the moral evil of slavery. Far be
   it from us to advocate violent and ill-considered measures. We are,
   however, strongly and unequivocally of opinion that it is, at this
   time, the paramount Christian duty of the ministers of our most
   merciful Lord in your country to maintain the principle of opposition
   to slavery with earnest zeal, and unflinching firmness. May we not also
   be allowed, with the heart-felt solicitude of fraternal love, to
   entreat that you will not omit or qualify the noble testimony which we
   have extracted, in a note to our address, from your Book of Discipline,
   but that you will continue to insert it there in its primitive and
   unimpaired integrity.

   And now, very dear brethren, we commend you to the protection and
   mercies of the only wise God, our Saviour,' with united prayers that
   you, and all who labor with you in the word and doctrine, with the
   multitudes who are happily brought to share in your Christian
   fellowship, may enjoy a richer effusion of the Holy Spirit's promised
   unction, and may at last be presented faultless before the presence of
   our common Saviour's glory.' To Him be glory and majesty, dominion and
   power, both now and ever. Amen.'

   Signed, by order of the conference,

   "Theophilus Lessey, President. "Liverpool August 16, 1839."

   The following is the answer which the conference returned to the above
   address of the Wesleyan Conference: --

   "Answer of the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church --
   To the Reverend the President and Members of the Wesleyan Methodist
   Conference in Great Britain

   "Honored and Very Dear Brethren, -- We acknowledge with grateful
   emotions the reception of your letters at the hand of your excellent
   representative, our honored and esteemed brother, the Rev. Robert
   Newton, whose visit, as your messenger, we esteem the best and kindest
   proof you could have given of your love for us, and desire to promote
   our blessed unity. His bright example of love and courtesy, simplicity
   and dignity in conference, and of pure essential Methodism, full of
   faith and charity, abounding in hope, rejoicing only in Christ Jesus,
   and knowing no respite from labor, in his public ministry, has been
   alike edifying and refreshing to us; while also, we have felt our
   hearts warmed thereby, and drawn closely to you in affection, partakers
   of the same spirit with you, walking by the same rule, minding the same
   thing, one people, and our name one in the Lord Jesus.

   "And it will not be unwelcome to you that we add, further, an
   expression of the gratification it has afforded us to be favored with
   the presence of our beloved and endeared brother Mr. Harvard, and our
   friend Mr. Richie, of the district of Lower Canada, and of Mr.
   President Stinson, and the excellent brethren, John and Edgerton
   Ryerson, representatives of the Wesleyan Methodist Church in Upper
   Canada. May the God of our common fathers make you a thousand times so
   many more as ye are, and bless you, that from you the word of the Lord
   may sound out unto all people as unto us at the beginning, and the
   fruits of your labors be multiplied in all the earth, to the glory of
   God, by the power of the holy Ghost, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

   "We fully unite with you, dear brethren, in the expression you give of
   your cordial and even jealous attachment to the principles, doctrines,
   and usages of Methodism, as established under the heaven-directed
   ministry of our venerated fathers. Those principles, doctrines, and
   usages we have especially felt that we were called to review, (and
   reviewing them, have taken, we trust, still closer to our hearts,) on
   the great occasion of our first centennial jubilee. This has been a
   joyful time with us, even as with you, our whole communion joining in
   extraordinary acts of devotion and offerings to the Lord, giving
   grateful evidence of our common character the world over, and
   covenanting to keep Methodism still unworldly and spiritual, abounding
   in charity, a work of righteousness and peace, rendering unto Caesar
   the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's.

   "We greatly rejoice, and give thanks unto the Lord for all your
   prosperity, brethren, and especially for your peaceful state, and the
   success of your missions. Missionary zeal, founded in love, is the
   vital pulse of Methodism, the purity and fruitfulness of which, in its
   home department, depend on the active sympathy there with the work
   abroad. Methodism, indeed, might not so much as exist in a narrower
   parish than the world, nor act on any other than her own gospel
   principle of equal duty to all tongues and kindreds. Actuated by this
   principle, we have labored to carry the gospel into every part of our
   great country; and now into Texas, the territory of Oregon, South
   America, and Africa at the entrance of Liberia on the western coast.
   But, alas, how feeble and insufficient are our efforts to accomplish,
   to any considerable degree, the great work of evangelizing mankind! We
   long for the salvation of God to become universal.

   "The unusual and unwelcome fact of a decrease in our numbers the year
   previous to our last General Conference, and to which you so kindly and
   piously allude in your letter of August following, induced much
   searching of heart, both among our preachers and people; and through
   God's abounding grace, we have not been afflicted since on a like
   account. At that time our numbers were -- of traveling preachers,
   2,781, and of members, 650,678. And in September last they were, of
   traveling preachers 3,296, and members 740,459; showing an increase of
   515 traveling preachers, and 89,781 members since our last General
   Conference. We record it with thanksgiving, though we reckon not our
   strength by numbers.

   "We have considered, with affectionate respect and confidence, your
   brotherly suggestions concerning slavery, and most cheerfully return an
   unreserved answer to them. And we do so the rather, brethren, because
   of the numerous prejudicial statements which have been put forth in
   certain quarters to the wounding of the Church. We assure you then,
   brethren, that we have adopted no new principle or rule of discipline
   respecting slavery since the time of our apostolic Asbury; neither do
   we mean to adopt any. In our General Rules, (called the General Rules
   of the United Societies,' and which are of constitutional authority in
   our Church,) the buying and selling of men, women, and children, with
   an intention to enslave them,' is expressly prohibited; and in the same
   words, substantially, which have been used for the rule since 1792. And
   the extract of part ii, section 10, of our Book of Discipline, which
   you quote with approbation, and denominate a noble testimony,' is still
   of force to the same extent that it has been for many years; nor do we
   entertain any purpose to omit or qualify this section, or any part
   thereof. For while we should regard it a sore evil to divert Methodism
   from her proper work of 'spreading Scripture holiness over these
   lands,' to questions of temporal import, involving the rights of
   Caesar, yet are we not the less minded on that account to promote and
   set forward all humane and generous actions, or to prevent, to the
   utmost of our power, such as are evil and unchristian. It is our first
   desire, after piety toward God, to be merciful after our power; as we
   have opportunity, doing good of every possible sort, and as far as
   possible to all men, to their bodies,' but especially, and above all,
   to their souls.'

   "Of these United States, (to the government and laws of which,
   according to the division of power made to them by the constitution of
   the Union, and the constitutions of the several states,' we owe, and
   delight to render, a sincere and patriotic loyalty,) there are several
   which do not allow of slavery. There are others in which it is allowed,
   and there are slaves; but the tendency of the laws, and the minds of
   the majority of the people, are in favor of emancipation. But there are
   others in which slavery exists so universally, and is so closely
   interwoven with their civil institutions, that both do the laws
   disallow of emancipation, and the great body of the people (the source
   of laws with us) hold it to be treasonable to set forth any thing, by
   word or deed, tending that way. Each one of all these states is
   independent of the rest and sovereign, with respect to its internal
   government, (as much so as if there existed no confederation among them
   for ends of common interest,) and therefore it is impossible to frame a
   rule on slavery proper for our people in all the states alike. But our
   march is extended through all the states, and as it would be wrong and
   unscriptural to enact a rule of discipline in opposition to the
   constitution and laws of the state on this subject, so also would it
   not be equitable or Scriptural to confound the positions of our
   ministers and people (so different as they are in different states)
   with respect to the moral question which slavery involves.

   "Under the administration of the venerated Dr. Coke, this plain
   distinction was once overlooked, and it was attempted to urge
   emancipation in all the states; but the attempt proved almost ruinous,
   and was soon abandoned by the doctor himself. While, therefore, the
   Church has encouraged emancipation in those states where the laws
   permit it, and allowed the freed-man to enjoy freedom, we have
   refrained, for conscience' sake, from all intermeddling with the
   subject in those other states where the laws make it criminal. And such
   a course we think agreeable to the Scriptures, and indicated by St.
   Paul's inspired instruction to servants in his First Epistle to the
   Corinthians, chap. vii, ver. 20,21. For if servants were not to care
   for their servitude when they might not be free, though if they might
   be free they should use it rather; so, neither should masters be
   condemned for not setting them free when they might not do so, though
   if they might they should do so rather. The question of the evil of
   slavery, abstractedly considered, you will readily perceive, brethren,
   is a very different matter from a principle or rule of Church
   discipline to be executed contrary to, and in defiance of, the law of
   the land. Methodism has always been (except perhaps in the single
   instance above) eminently loyal and promotive of good order; and so we
   desire it may ever continue to be, both in Europe and America. With
   this sentiment we confide the subject, adding only the corroborating
   language of your noble Missionary Society, by the revered and lamented
   Watson, in their instructions to missionaries, published in the report
   of 1833, as follows: --

   "As in the colonies in which you are called to labor a great proportion
   of the inhabitants are in a state of slavery, the committee most
   strongly call to your remembrance what was so fully stated to you when
   yon were accepted as a missionary to the West Indies, that your only
   business is to promote the moral and religious improvement of the
   slaves to whom you may have access, without in the least degree, in
   public or private, interfering with their civil condition.'

   "We have judged it necessary, for the preservation of the children of
   our people from irreligious or unMethodistical principles while
   pursuing their education at a distance from home, and for the
   maintenance of a due proportion of influence in this great country, to
   encourage the establishment of schools and colleges under the control
   of our annual conferences, at which a liberal education should be
   afforded in intimate and graceful connection with Christian training.
   Accordingly we have now twelve collegiate and twenty-one academic
   institutions thus established, which, though not as amply endowed as
   they require to be, are doing well, and we hope will continue to do
   well.

   Permit us, reverend and dear brethren, to refer you to our most honored
   and beloved brother, Mr. Newton, for any further information you may
   desire on the above subject, or the present state of our affairs in
   general. And again we thank you for having sent him to us, whose name
   had long been known as that of one whose noble efforts in the cause of
   Christ had placed him with our Bensons, Watsons, Clarkes, and Buntings,
   men who have lived for the whole world, and for Methodism in all the
   world. And we pray for his safe return to you, and that it may please
   God our heavenly Father to make him more and more useful among you,
   even to old age. If it shall please God that our venerated and beloved
   Bishop Some shall be in health to do so, and the work can possibly
   allow it, we expect him to make it convenient to visit your conference
   two years hence; and we have appointed one of our body to accompany him
   to you, or if the bishop cannot go, to represent us fully at that time.
   And we solicit, brethren, a continuation of this so pleasant and
   profitable interchange, at our next General Conference.

   "Finally, brethren, we commend you to God's most gracious blessing,
   praying for you in the love of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, (as
   you also do for us,) that you may be enriched with all spiritual
   blessings in Christ Jesus, and abound in good works, to the glory of
   God, among all people, and for evermore.

   "Signed in behalf of the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal
   Church, held in Baltimore, Md., May, 1840.

   "R. R. Roberts, "Joshua Soule, "Elijah Hedding, "James O. Andrew,
   "Beverly Waugh, "Thomas A. Morris "John A. Collins, Secretary."

   An address was also received from the Canada Conference, full of tender
   expressions of fraternal regard, and of a determination to maintain
   with us an indissoluble union in doctrine, moral discipline, and
   brotherly affection. This was referred to the same committee, and an
   answer was returned reciprocating the same sentiments and feelings, and
   pledging the conference to the inviolate preservation of the doctrines
   and usages of Methodism.

   The managers of the Missionary Society of the Methodist Episcopal
   Church presented the following, expressive of their feelings and views
   in relation to the great cause in which they were engaged.

   "Address of the Managers of the Missionary Society of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church to the General Conference, to be held in Baltimore,
   May 1, 1840

   "Dear Fathers and Brethren, -- We gladly embrace the present
   opportunity to present for your consideration and adoption, if you
   shall concur with us in their propriety, some amendments to the
   constitution of our society, which have been suggested by the
   experience and practice of another four years. The most important of
   these relate to the appointment of n assistant corresponding secretary;
   the enabling the managers to provide for those superannuated
   missionaries, their wives, widows, and children, who, being on foreign
   missions, are not provided for by the ordinary funds of the annual
   conferences; and that which was recommended by the last General
   Conference, to empower the society to make any alterations in the
   constitution in future which may be recommended by the General
   Conference. Should therefore your experience of the practical workings
   of the system enable you to detect any defect in the provisions of the
   constitution, or perceive the necessity of any amendment by which its
   objects may be more readily accomplished, by pointing them out they
   will be considered, it is hoped, with that calmness and respectful
   deference which is due to the collected wisdom and long experience of
   Your venerable body.

   As to the other amendments which are proposed, they appear to us so
   obviously necessary for the more perfect and equitable operation of the
   principles of the society as to need no special arguments to enforce
   them. Leaving them therefore to be explained by those of our brethren
   who compose a part of your body, and who fully comprehend our views,
   and the reasons on which they are founded, we will only say that we
   shall cheerfully acquiesce in whatever disposition you may be pleased
   to make of them, believing, as we do, that the General Conference is
   equally interested with us in preserving the integrity and promoting
   the prosperity of the society.

   There is another subject connected with the interests of this society
   which we beg permission to present to your consideration. We have been
   much gratified to find that all the annual conferences, in making
   provision for a suitable celebration of the centenary of Methodism,
   have devoted a portion of the money which shall be realized on that
   occasion to the cause of missions, most of whom, we believe, leaving
   the final disposition of it to the General Conference. That this
   celebration has had a most happy effect upon the cause of Methodism, we
   have abundant reason to believe not only in raising money for the
   various objects specified, but also and more especially in reviving
   true religion among us.

   "For some time past we have felt the need, for the prosecution of our
   great and benevolent objects, of having mission premises procured, and
   suitable buildings erected, for the accommodation of our local offices,
   and the meetings of the managers, &c. An estimate of the expense is
   herewith presented. Should your venerable body concur with us on the
   propriety of securing such premises, it would not only accommodate the
   society, and be a saving of expense, but would stand as a lasting
   monument of the liberality of the donors, and tell to posterity what
   was done on the one hundredth year of Methodism in behalf of missions.
   We therefore confidently rely on the approbation of the General
   Conference of this measure, and the more so as it was fully understood
   at the time the division of the avails of the centenary collections was
   made that this object was in contemplation by the managers of the
   Missionary Society.

   "The following statement will exhibit, at one view, the amount received
   and expended during the past four years; for the particulars of which
   we refer to the treasurer's account, as published in the annual
   reports, herewith presented: --

   1837: Received $62,749.01; Expended 66,536.85

   1838: Received $90,105.36; Expended $95,110.75

   1839: Received $135,521.94; Expended $103,664.58

   1840: Received $116,941.90; Expended $146,498.58.

   From this it will be seen that there has been a rapid increase to the
   resources of the society from one year to another, thereby enabling us
   to meet the enlarged demands upon our treasury created by the extension
   of the fields of missionary labors. We only add, that, relying upon the
   good providence of God for direction and aid in urging the important
   trusts committed to our charge, and upon the wisdom and integrity of
   the General Conference for devising the most efficient means for
   carrying into practical effect the general and benevolent objects of
   the society, we once more pledge ourselves to the faithful performance
   of our duties, according to the light and ability which God may be
   graciously pleased to vouchsafe unto us."

   The following was also read and referred: --

   "Report of the Committee on the Journal of the Corresponding Secretary
   of the Missionary Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church

   "The committee to whom was referred the subject of the office of the
   corresponding secretary, his journal, &c., respectfully report:

   "That it appears by the records submitted to their examination, that
   the duties of the corresponding secretary have been extensive and
   arduous both at home and abroad, demonstrating the necessity of having
   such an officer, as represented by the board to the last General
   Conference. In addition to the preparation of the annual reports and
   other documentary manuscripts, the correspondence of the society
   exhibits more than five hundred official letters to missionaries, &c.;
   and during the last four years, we learn from the journal kept by the
   present officer, that besides the duties of corresponding secretary in
   the office at home, and the preparation of multiplied reports for
   publication in the Advocate, he has traveled in the service of the
   society more than eleven thousand miles, in visiting ten annual
   conferences, some of them twice and thrice, and in holding missionary
   meetings in ten different states in the Union. "It also appears that he
   has delivered one hundred and thirty-four missionary sermons and
   addresses, in various parts of the country, and been directly
   instrumental in this way of bringing into the treasury the amount of
   $13,427. How far his labors and writings have been further tributary to
   the increase of our funds, we have no data upon which to make the
   estimate. We invite attention, however, to the increased contributions
   to our treasury since his appointment, as affording evidence that the
   cause is improving annually under the present system of operations.
   During the first year of his appointment, the receipts were $62,749 --
   the second, $90,105.36 -- the third, $135,521.94 -- and this, too,
   notwithstanding the unprecedented prostration of the times. The amount
   of the fourth and last year is not yet ascertained, but will be found
   comparatively large, though less than the previous year, because of the
   special efforts made for the centenary fund, a portion of which is
   destined to our treasury.

   "From a review of the whole subject, your committee respectfully submit
   the following resolutions to be communicated to the next General
   Conference: --

   "Resolved, That the experience of the last four years has amply
   confirmed the propriety of the appointment of a corresponding secretary
   devoted to the interests of this society, as prayed for at the last
   General Conference.

   "Resolved, That this board bear their united testimony to the diligent,
   faithful, and successful performance of the duties of the office by the
   present incumbent; and in view of his long experience in the service of
   the board, we shall rejoice at his reappointment by the next General
   Conference."

   A number of petitions and memorials were received on a variety of
   subjects, particularly in reference to slavery and abolitionism, all of
   which were referred to appropriate committees. It seems that among
   these, some of the petitioners were not content with asking simply for
   the abolition of slavery instantly and unconditionally, but they also
   coupled with it a desire for an alteration in some important features
   of our Church organization. This latter subject was referred to the
   committee on the itinerancy, who presented the following report, which
   was concurred in by the conference:

   "The committee to whom were referred the petitions and memorials on the
   subjects of a moderate episcopacy, the election of presiding elders by
   the annual conferences, and a lay delegation in the General Conference,
   have bestowed upon the matters submitted to them the attention which
   they were conceived to merit, and submit the following report:

   "It appears the petitions and memorials on these subjects have been
   obtained by a concerted operation, under the direction of some single
   intellect, inasmuch as nearly every petition on any one of these
   subjects is not only substantially, but literally the same -- most of
   them being printed slips, cut from some newspaper, and where they are
   written, literal copies of such as are printed. This fact induced a
   conviction in the minds of the committee that these petitions and
   memorials are the result of agitation, and not of original
   dissatisfaction on the part of most of the persons signing those
   petitions and memorials; and, therefore, by no means deserving the same
   consideration as if they were the spontaneous expression of the
   dissatisfaction of the petitioners and memorialists. But if it were
   otherwise, the number of petitioners is so very small in proportion to
   the entire membership of the Methodist Episcopal Church, that, in the
   opinion of the committee, these memorials and petitions, regarding not
   individual grievances, but general interests, are entitled to no other
   consideration than that to which they are entitled as mere arguments in
   favor of the courses indicated. And as the committee have not seen
   reason to attach much importance to them in this light, they are not
   prepared to recommend the measures which are called for by these
   petitions and memorials.

   "Moreover, the committee, having witnessed the operation of the present
   system of Methodist Episcopal Church government, and being persuaded
   that its operation has been eminently useful, would require the most
   cogent reasons to induce them to recommend changes so important and so
   fundamental; especially as two, at least, of these changes have been,
   after long, grave, and deliberate consideration, recently declined by
   the Methodist Episcopal Church. The committee refer to the proceedings
   of the General Conference of 1828, for the light in which the election
   of presiding elders by the annual conferences, and a lay delegation in
   the General Conference, was then viewed; and the decision which was
   made by the Church on these subjects.

   "With the views above presented, the committee can do no other than
   present the following resolution, viz.: --

   "Resolved, That it is not expedient to change the form of our Church
   government in any of the matters suggested in the petitions and
   memorials which have been under the consideration of the committee."

   While this report was under consideration, the following conversation
   took place between some members of the conference and the Rev. Mr.
   Newton, the respected representative from England.

   Having expressed his willingness to answer any questions which might be
   put to him in reference to the subjects then under discussion, he was
   asked,

   "Whether there was any authority among them equal in extent of power to
   our superintendency?

   "Rev. Mr. Newton. -- We have the thing without the name. The president
   of our conference exercises more authority than your venerable bishops.
   He can, at any time, arrest debate by his decision; and, although Mr.
   Wesley did not assume the title, he claimed and exercised the
   prerogatives of a Christian bishop. Our chairmen of districts are, in
   their sphere, also representatives of the president.

   "Rev. Mr. Horton asked, whether the presidents were not elected
   annually?

   "Rev. Mr. Newton. -- Unquestionably they are; but the president never
   dies.

   "Is not the chairman of the district also elected annually? asked Rev.
   Mr. Horton.

   "Unquestionably he is, but he never dies, replied Rev. Mr. Newton.

   "The chair also inquired of Rev. Mr. Newton, whether the president of
   the British Conference did not decide many questions which we decide by
   the vote of the conference; to which he received an affirmative
   response.

   "Rev. Mr. Horton also asked, how long the chairman of the district
   might retain his office? to which he received the reply, that it
   depended on circumstances. He always deferred to seniority in case of
   the presence of a more aged minister. This was generally, if not
   invariably and universally done."

   It is due, perhaps, to the interests of truth, as well as to the
   character of our people, to say, that the dissatisfaction evinced by
   these memorials restricted to comparatively few, the great majority of
   our preachers and people being entirely satisfied with our general
   economy, and in love with our peculiar doctrines and features of Church
   government, and were therefore heartily sickened with the perpetual
   complainings of a few restless individuals respecting tyranny and
   oppression.

   On the subject of education the committee reported as follows on those
   parts of the bishops' address which referred to an increase in the
   number of literary institutions a general course of instruction, and to
   Biblical knowledge and ecclesiastical history, the episcopal power of
   stationing preachers in seminaries of learning, and the zealous of
   their support: --

   "Your committee believe that the advantages of education are most
   widely diffused and certainly secured, by multiplying institutions of
   learning within proper limits, but it is obvious enough that if their
   number is too great to admit of their being competently endowed, the
   ends of their creation must be defeated; it is certainly wise policy,
   therefore, for the different annual conferences to secure the
   permanence of those already established, before they attempt to found
   others.

   "In regard to the course of studies to be pursued in our literary
   institutions, to which the attention of the committee has been called
   in the address of the bishops, and by a resolution of the Baltimore
   conference, they believe that it would be inexpedient to lay down a
   course which should be pursued in all cases. The board of trustees and
   faculties will desire to exercise some control in this matter, and it
   seems to your committee proper that they should. There is a wide and
   allowable difference of opinion upon the subject, and an attempt to
   produce uniformity would be most likely to cause dissatisfaction,
   without accomplishing the object; but your committee do not hesitate to
   recommend that the commonly received English version of the Bible
   should be introduced into every school and college, and that it should
   be studied according to some system which may be adopted by the
   different boards of instruction in their several institutions, and in
   those institutions which embrace the ancient languages, they recommend
   that the Old and New Testaments be studied in the originals critically;
   they also recommend that the Evidences of Christianity,' and
   Ecclesiastical history,' constitute a part of the regular course in all
   our colleges and universities. When it is remembered that heathen
   mythology, Roman and Grecian archeology, and profane history, enter
   into the regular course of most literary institutions, and are believed
   to be essential to the education of an accomplished scholar, it can
   need but little argument to prove that knowledge, so much more
   important, should be imparted to the student.

   "Your committee recommend that in all the universities and colleges
   under the control of the Church, the instruction given in every
   department of science and literature, in their broadest sense, be full
   and thorough. Some arguments may be urged in favor of a limited
   education, none can have weight in favor of a superficial one; a
   limited education is better than none, and one who cannot take a full
   course may be greatly profited by a partial one, provided it is
   thorough; but those who are superficially taught, have lost their time
   and money, and at the close of their collegiate education are helpless
   in themselves, and useless to the community. It is a happy omen to the
   world, that the Church generally is awaking to the sense of its
   responsibility in providing for, sustaining, and directing public
   education. It must not shrink from this responsibility; it cannot
   without hazarding the most fatal consequences. Mind, energized by its
   own exertions, and furnished from the armories of science, unless
   controlled by the restraints, and guided by the counsels of religion,
   becomes the most powerful auxiliary which infidelity and vice ever won
   over to their cause; while on the other hand, the intellect, brought
   into captivity to the obedience of Christ,' august in the integrity of
   its object, and the directness of its means, vigorous from the
   concentration of power to one end, and invigorated by the special
   blessing of God, given to those who seek to honor him, when supplied
   with the argument which the learning of this age furnishes, becomes a
   champion for Christianity, before whom infidelity, superstition, and
   bigotry must cower and fall. It is readily conceded that principles of
   morality should be taught as soon as they can be understood. It
   inevitably follows that religion, which furnishes the only
   incontrovertible arguments to prove the obligations of morality, and
   the only sanction which can enforce its precepts, should be taught
   still earlier; and that all knowledge which is afterward imparted
   should be harmonized with it. The neglect of this obvious duty has
   caused the strange result that education fostered infidelity. It first
   grew out of the efforts made to improve the gross absurdities and foul
   deformities of a godless and miscalled Christianity upon the mind; and,
   unhappily, has been suffered to continue after the cause ceased to
   exist. It should be so no longer. Science, in its conventional sense,
   is a knowledge of the works of God, the laws which govern them, their
   relations to each other, and their combination into one harmonious
   whole. Its discoveries demonstrate the existence of a God; and
   learning, in its widest sense, arranging and concentrating the facts,
   proves, by a circumstantiality of evidence and a directness of
   inference which are irresistible, that this God is the God of the
   Bible, the Father of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; and the time
   has come when, if the Church is true to her trust, learning will be the
   great agent in promoting religion, by every one of her ten thousand
   instrumentalities, and over all the face of this earth. In view of the
   premises, your committee believe that no jealousy should be felt in
   relation to the calls which our schools and colleges are making upon
   the ministry for teachers and professors. The number required will be
   necessarily small in proportion to the whole number of ministers, and
   when they are otherwise properly qualified, they are undoubtedly the
   most suitable persons to be employed in the business of education. No
   fear need be entertained lest their labor should be too light, or that
   they should become effeminate and self-indulgent; a little experience
   would soon remove such apprehensions. Your committee can see no good
   reason why preachers on trial should not be appointed to schools and
   colleges.

   "Your committee do not believe that the conference should make any
   regulation controlling or limiting the episcopal power of stationing
   the preachers, and in answer, therefore, to the question asked by the
   superintendents in their address, whether an appointment to seminaries
   of learning, when an annual conference requests such a one to be made,
   renders it obligatory upon the bishop to comply with the request? would
   recommend that it be answered in the negative.

   "In conclusion, your committee, in view of the vast importance of this
   great trust committed to the Church, for the purpose of making a
   permanent provision for sustaining our literary institutions, recommend
   the adoption of the following resolution, viz.: --

   "Resolved, That any annual conference may direct public collections to
   be taken up by the preachers in charge of circuits and stations, in
   each society, once in each year, for the purpose of sustaining the
   literary institutions under its control or patronage, if it should
   judge it expedient so to do, or may adopt such other measure for that
   end, as may seem to the members thereof most advisable."

   As this report was very unanimously adopted by the conference, we may
   consider the present policy in respect to establishing colleges and
   academies as settled, and that it is highly proper that Biblical
   instruction should be adopted in all our seminaries of learning.

   Questions of administration had been mooted in some of the annual
   conferences, on which the bishops and many members of these conferences
   had disagreed respecting the power of the episcopacy to decide points
   of law, to refuse putting certain questions to vote which the presiding
   officer might consider unconstitutional. To settle these questions, the
   subject had been submitted to the conference, and the following was the
   result of its deliberations in reference to it:
    1. That it is the province of the bishop "to decide all questions of
       law in an annual conference, subject to an appeal to the General
       Conference; but in all cases the application of law is with the
       conference."
    2. That it belongs to the president of a quarterly meeting "to decide
       all questions of law in the quarterly meeting conference, subject
       to an appeal to the president of the next annual conference; but in
       all cases the application of the law shall be with the conference."

   These words, "application of the law," appeared involved in obscurity
   to some. The meaning is, I apprehend, that the conference, after the
   law has been explained, is to judge of its applicability to the
   particular case under consideration. Suppose a man is accused of an act
   of immorality; the president of a conference explains the law, its
   nature and penalty in reference to the particular act of immorality of
   which the person is accused; the members of the conference then, as the
   judges or jurors in the case, examine into the facts, hear witnesses,
   decide upon the guilt or innocence of the accused; and then apply the
   law to that particular case, and if found guilty, bring in their
   verdict accordingly, while the presiding judge passes the sentence of
   condemnation. Here the law is applied to, or brought to bear on that
   particular person, according to its legitimate intent and meaning, the
   presiding officer being responsible for the interpretation, and the
   conference for the application of the law to the case in hand.

   The conference also decided that the president of an annual or a
   quarterly meeting conference had a right to decline putting a motion or
   resolution to vote, if he considered it foreign to the proper business
   of a conference, or inconsistent with constitutional provisions; and
   also to adjourn a conference without a formal vote.

   In respect to slavery and abolitionism, though these subjects were much
   discussed, referred to a committee, and reported on, there was no final
   action of the conference on either of them, but all things remain as
   they were, both in the Discipline and the resolutions of the
   conference.

   There was one other subject which excited a deep interest. An appeal
   had come up from a member of the Missouri conference, appealing from a
   decision of said conference condemning him for admitting colored
   testimony against a white person. The appeal was sustained, and the
   decision of the Missouri conference reversed. As this reversal was
   considered as sanctioning the practice of admitting colored testimony
   against the character of a white person, the following resolution,
   offered by Dr. Few, of the Georgia conference, after a strong and
   protracted debate, was adopted: --

   "That it is inexpedient and unjustifiable for any preacher to permit
   colored persons to give testimony against white persons, in any state
   where they are denied that privilege in trials of law."

   "The passage of this resolution gave great dissatisfaction to many
   members of the conference; and after a variety of expedients had been
   resorted to, in vain, to obviate the difficulties which seemed to grow
   out of it, Bishop Soule offered the following resolutions, which were
   adopted by a great majority, ninety-seven voting in the affirmative and
   twenty-seven in the negative: --
    1. Resolved, That in the decision of this conference in the case of
       the appeal of Rev. Silas Comfort, it is not intended to express or
       imply that the testimony of colored persons against white persons,
       in Church trials, is either expedient or justifiable in any of the
       slave-holding states or territories where the civil laws prohibit
       such testimony in trials at law.
    2. Resolved, That it is not the intention of this conference, in the
       adoption of the resolution of Rev. Ignatius A. Few, of Georgia, in
       regard to the admission of the testimony of colored people, to
       prohibit such testimony in Church trials in any of the states or
       territories where it is the established usage of the Church to
       admit, and when, in the judgment of the constitutional judicatories
       of the Church, such testimony may be admitted with safety to the
       peace of society, and the best interests of all concerned.
    3. Resolved, That it is not the intention of this conference, in
       either of the above cases, or in any action had by this body, to
       express or imply any distrust, or want of confidence in the
       Christian piety and integrity of the numerous body of colored
       members under our pastoral care, to whom we are bound by the bonds
       of the gospel of Christ, and for whose spiritual and eternal
       interests, together with all our fellow-men of every color, and in
       every relation and condition in life, we will never cease to
       labor."

   The subject of temperance was again discussed, at great length and with
   lively interest; and although a memorial had been sent the rounds of
   the several annual conferences, praying for the substitution of Mr.
   Wesley's rule in the place of the one now in the Discipline; and
   although, out of the two thousand and eighty who were present and voted
   on the resolutions praying for and authorizing the General Conference
   to make the alteration, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-four
   voted in the affirmative, and only three hundred and six in the
   negative; yet the committee to whom the subject had been submitted
   reported against the change, because they thought that the "true
   grammatical construction of the language of the Discipline implies that
   there must be three-fourths of the members of every annual conference
   in favor of the contemplated measure, in order that it may be lawfully
   carried into effect." This novel interpretation of the law, though I
   believe it was not by any means sanctioned by a majority of the
   conference, tended much to defeat the measure so earnestly recommended
   and desired by such a large majority of both preachers and people; for
   when the vote was taken there were seventy-five for and thirty-eight
   against it, and these not being a majority of two-thirds of the whole
   number of delegates, the motion was declared lost.

   I have already expressed my opinion freely upon the inconclusiveness of
   the reasoning of this report. In addition to what is there said, it may
   be remarked, that the doctrine would put it into the power of one
   single annual conference, and that too the smallest in the Union, to
   defeat the wishes of all the rest, though these wishes should be
   unanimously expressed. And surely it was never the intention of the
   General and annual conferences who proposed and adopted the proviso in
   the Discipline thus to authorize so small a minority to rule the whole
   Church, for this was the very thing they designed to defeat or to
   prevent. Several attempts had been made at preceding conferences to
   adopt some uniform method by which ministers of other denominations
   might be received into the Church and recognized in their proper
   character. At this General Conference the following regulations were
   adopted: --

   Question 1. In what manner shall we receive those ministers who may
   come to us from the Wesleyan connection in Europe or Canada?

   Answer If they come to us properly accredited from either the British,
   Irish, or Canada Conference, they may be received according to such
   credentials, provided they give satisfaction to an annual conference of
   their willingness to conform to our Church government and usages.

   Question 2. How shall we receive those ministers who may offer to unite
   with us from other Christian churches?

   Answer Those ministers of other evangelical churches who may desire to
   unite with our Church, whether as local or itinerant, may be received
   according to our usages, on condition of their taking upon them our
   ordination vows, without the reimposition of hands, giving satisfaction
   to an annual conference of their being in orders, and of their
   agreement with us in doctrine, discipline, government, and usages;
   provided the conference is also satisfied with their gifts, grace, and
   usefulness. Whenever any such minister is received, he shall be
   furnished with a certificate, signed by one of our bishops, in the
   following words, viz.: --

   This is to certify, that ____ has been admitted into conference as a
   traveling preacher, [or has been admitted as a local preacher on ____
   circuit,] he having been ordained to the office of a deacon, (or an
   elder, as the case may be,) according to the usages of the ____ church,
   of which he has been a member and minister; and he is hereby authorized
   to exercise the functions pertaining to his office in the Methodist
   Episcopal Church, so long as his life and conversation are such as
   become the gospel of Christ.

   "Given under my hand and seal, at _____ this _____ day of _____ in the
   year of our Lord, _____.

   Question 3. How shall we receive preachers of other denominations who
   are not in orders?

   Answer They may be received as licentiates, provided they give
   satisfaction to a quarterly, or an annual conference, that they are
   suitable persons to exercise the office, and of their agreement with
   the doctrines, discipline, government, and usages of our Church."

   The custom of receiving person on trial for six months before they are
   admitted into full membership had been made to apply, by the generality
   of our preachers, to those who came to us recommended from other
   churches, while some had admitted them without this intermediate
   process. To settle this question, and to produce uniformity in this
   branch of the administration, the rule in relation to receiving members
   was so altered as to read as follows: --

   "Let none be received into the Church, until they are recommended by a
   leader with whom they have met at least six months on trial, and have
   been baptized; and shall, on examination by the minister in charge,
   before the Church, give satisfactory assurances both of the correctness
   of their faith, and their willingness to observe and keep the rules of
   the Church. Nevertheless, if a member in good standing in any other
   orthodox church shall desire to unite with us, such applicant may, by
   giving satisfactory answers to the usual inquiries, be received at once
   into full fellowship."

   The Sunday School Union of the Methodist Episcopal Church had become
   defunct. This had originated partly in an injudicious attempt to
   amalgamate the Bible, Tract, and Sunday School Societies together, by
   which the business of these several societies might be transacted by
   one board of management, and partly from the little control which the
   parent society exercised over its auxiliaries and branches, and, I may
   add also, from the peculiar manner of our organization in respect to
   the duty of furnishing books for sabbath schools. While the boards of
   other denominations were responsible for the entire management of all
   the affairs of the societies under their supervision, ours had nothing
   to do with raising money to meet the expense of publishing books, this,
   as well as selecting and printing them, being in the hands of the
   agency of the Book Concern. In consequence of this wise arrangement,
   the managers of the Sunday School Union incurred but few
   responsibilities, and had but little to do, while the mingling of many
   things together rendered that little perplexing and inefficient.

   It must not be supposed, however, that the sabbath school cause had
   been suffered to languish. The various societies continued their
   existence, were in efficient operation, and the children were regularly
   taught in nearly all our congregations, particularly in our large
   cities and villages; but they acted independently of each other, and
   were therefore not connected together by any general head, or bond of
   union, except so far as the agency of the Book Concern exerted its
   influence in furnishing the books on the cheapest terms, according to
   the provisions of the Publishing Fund.

   There were supposed to be defects, however, in this system, which ought
   to he remedied. To do this, a memorial was presented to this General
   Conference, by a number of brethren in the city of New York, praying
   for the reorganization of a Sunday School Society according to the
   principles of a new constitution which was submitted to the conference.
   The deliberations resulted in the adoption of the constitution, and of
   the following section in the Discipline: --

   Question What shall we do for the rising generation?

   Answer
    1. Let Sunday schools be formed in all our Congregations where ten
       children can be collected for that purpose. And it shall be the
       special duty of preachers having charge of circuits and stations,
       with the aid of the other preachers, to see that this he done; to
       engage the co-operation of as many of our members as they can; to
       visit the schools as often as practicable; to preach on the subject
       of Sunday schools and religious instruction in each congregation at
       least once in six months; to lay before the quarterly conference at
       each quarterly meeting, to be entered on its journal, a written
       statement of the number and state of the Sunday schools within
       their respective circuits and stations, and to make a report of the
       same to their several annual conferences. Each quarterly conference
       shall be deemed a board of managers, having supervision of all the
       Sunday schools and Sunday school societies within its limits, and
       shall be auxiliary to the Sunday School Union of the Methodist
       Episcopal Church; and each annual conference shall report to said
       union the number of auxiliaries within its bounds, together with
       other facts presented in the annual reports of the preachers as
       above directed.
    2. It is recommended that each annual conference, where the general
       state of the work will allow, request the appointment of a special
       agent, to travel throughout its bounds, for the purpose of
       promoting the interests of Sunday schools; and his expenses shall
       be paid out of collections which he shall be directed to make, or
       otherwise, as shall be ordered by the conference.
    3. Let our catechisms be used as extensively as possible, both in our
       Sunday schools and families; and let the preachers faithfully
       enforce upon parents and Sunday school teachers the great
       importance of instructing children in the doctrines and duties of
       our holy religion.
    4. It shall be the special duty of the preachers to form Bible classes
       wherever they can, for the instruction of larger children and
       youth; and where they cannot superintend them personally, to
       appoint suitable leaders for that purpose.
    5. It shall be the duty of every preacher of a circuit or station to
       obtain the names of the children belonging to his congregations,
       and leave a list of such names for his successor; and in his
       pastoral visits he shall pay special attention to the children,
       speak to them personally, and kindly, on experimental and practical
       godliness, according to their capacity, pray earnestly for them,
       and diligently instruct and exhort all parents to dedicate their
       children to the Lord in baptism as early as convenient; and let all
       baptized children be faithfully instructed in the nature, design,
       privileges, and obligations of their baptism. Those of them who are
       well disposed may be admitted to our class meetings and love
       feasts, and such as are truly serious, and manifest a desire to
       flee the wrath to come, shall be advised to join society as
       probationers."

   Whether this society will he able to perform the duties and to
   accomplish the objects which the other failed to do, remains to be
   seen. If, however, the members and managers heartily co-operate with
   the book agency in the selection and publication of books, and
   otherwise carry into practical effect the spirit and objects of their
   organization, they will no doubt render important service to the
   sabbath school cause.

   A very able report was adopted near the conclusion of the conference on
   the subject of ordaining ministers in slave-holding states who own
   slaves, and will not liberate them from their bondage. This arose out
   of the practice of the Baltimore conference in refusing to ordain some
   local preachers, who lived in the state of Virginia, where they pleaded
   that the laws would not permit emancipation.

   As this subject had never before been so fully investigated, and as the
   report, dawn up by Dr. Bascom, very clearly unfolds the principles by
   which the Church has ever been governed upon this grave and important
   question, I think the reader will be pleased to have the entire report
   before him. It is as follows: --

   "The committee, to whom was referred the memorial and appeal of some
   fifteen official members of the Methodist Episcopal Church in
   Westmoreland circuit, Baltimore conference, on the subject of alleged
   withholdment of right from a portion of the local ministry within the
   limits of that conference, and to when was likewise referred the report
   of the judiciary committee upon a similar remonstrance from the same
   division of the Baltimore conference, signed by about thirty official
   members of the Church, and addressed to the General Conference in 1836,
   after giving to the subject the attention its obvious importance
   demands, beg leave to report the following as the result of their
   deliberations: --

   "The particular portion, or rather general section of country in which
   these remonstrances have their origin, although belonging to the
   Baltimore conference, is found within the limits of the state of
   Virginia; and the memorialists represent in strong but respectful
   terms, that local preachers within the jurisdiction of the Baltimore
   conference, but residing in the commonwealth of Virginia, have, in
   considerable numbers, and for a succession of years, been rejected as
   applicants for deacon's and elders orders in the ministry, solely on
   the ground of their being slave-holders, or the owners of slaves. In
   the memorials referred to it is distinctly stated, that election and
   ordination have been withheld from the applicants in question on no
   other ground or pretense than that of their being the owners of slave
   property; and it is further argued that the Baltimore conference avows
   this to be the only reason of the course they pursue, and which is
   complained of by the petitioners. The appellants allege further, that
   the laws of Virginia relating to slavery forbid emancipation, except
   under restrictions, and subject to contingencies amounting, to all
   intents and purposes, to a prohibition; and that the Discipline of the
   Church having provided for the ordination of ministers thus
   circumstanced, the course pursued by the Baltimore conference operates
   as an abridgment of right, and therefore furnishes just ground of
   complaint. The memorialists regard themselves as clearly entitled to
   the protection of the well-known provisional exception to the general
   rule on this subject found in the Discipline; and assume with
   confidence, and argue with firmness and ability, that no other
   objection being found to the character of candidates for ordination, it
   is a departure from the plain intendment of the law in the case, and a
   violation of not less express compact than of social justice, to
   withhold ordination for reasons which the provisions of the law plainly
   declare are not to be considered as a forfeiture of right. It is set
   forth in the argument of the appellants, that, attaching themselves to
   the Church as citizens of Virginia, where, in the obvious sense of the
   Discipline, emancipation is impracticable, the holding of slaves, or
   failure to emancipate them, cannot be plead in bar to the right of
   ordination, as is the ease in states where emancipation, as defined and
   qualified by the rule in the case, is found to be practicable. In the
   latter ease the question is within the jurisdiction of the Church,
   inasmuch as the holding or not holding of property of this kind depends
   not upon the constitution and regulation of civil property, but upon
   the will and purpose of individuals. Under such circumstances the
   conduct in question is voluntary, and in every final sense the result
   of choice. In the former, however, where emancipation is resisted by
   the prohibition of law, it may be otherwise and in many instances is
   known to be resulting entirely from the involuntary relations and
   circumstances of individuals connected with the very structure of civil
   polity, and the force and array of public opinion and popular interest.
   The memorialists advert to the fact, that we have in the Discipline two
   distinct classes of legislative provision in relation to slavery -- the
   one applying to owners of slaves where emancipation is practicable,
   consistently with the interests of master and slaves, and the other
   where it is impracticable without endangering such safety, and these
   interests on the part of both. With the former, known as the general
   rule on this subject, the petitioners do not interfere in any way, and
   are content simply to place themselves under the protection of the
   latter as contracting parties with the Church; and the ground of
   complaint is that the Church has failed to redeem the pledge of its own
   laws, by refusing or failing to promote to office ministers, in whose
   case no disability attaches on the ground of slavery, because the
   disability attaching in other cases is here removed by special
   provision of law, and so far leaves the right to ordination clear and
   undoubted, and hence the complaint against the Baltimore conference. In
   further prosecution of the duty assigned them, your committee have
   carefully examined the law, and inquired into the system of slavery as
   it exists in Virginia, and find the representation of the memorialists
   essentially correct. The conditions with which emancipation is burdened
   in that commonwealth preclude the practicability of giving freedom to
   slaves as contemplated in the Discipline, except in extremely rare
   instances say one in a thousand, and possibly not more than one in five
   thousand. The exception in the Discipline is therefore strictly
   applicable to all the ministers and members of the Methodist Episcopal
   Church holding slaves in Virginia, and they appear clearly entitled to
   the benefit of the rule made and provided in such cases.

   "As emancipation under such circumstances is not a requirement of
   Discipline, it cannot be made a condition of eligibility to office. An
   appeal to the policy and practice of the Church for fifty years past
   will show incontestably, that, whatever may have been the convictions
   of the Church with regard to this great evil, the nature and tendency
   of the system of slavery, it has never insisted upon emancipation in
   contravention of civil authority; and it therefore appears to be a
   well-settled and long-established principle in the polity of the Church
   that no ecclesiastical disabilities are intended to ensue either to the
   ministers or members of the Church in those states where the civil
   authority forbids emancipation. The general rule therefore distinctly
   and invariably requiring emancipation as the ground of right, and the
   condition of claim to ordination where the laws of the several states
   admit of emancipation, and permit the liberated slave to enjoy freedom,
   and which, in the judgment of your committee, should always be carried
   into effect with unyielding firmness, does not apply to your
   memorialists, and cannot by any fair construction of law affect their
   rights.

   "On the other hand, your committee have given the most careful
   consideration to the position of the Baltimore conference complained of
   by the appellants. The journals of the several sessions of the
   Baltimore conference, for a series of years, have been carefully
   examined, and found to be silent on the subject of the rejections in
   question, except the single statement that A, B, and C, from time to
   time, applied for admission or orders, and were rejected. We find no
   rule or reason of action, no evidence of preconception, no grounds or
   reasons of rejection, stated in any form, directly or indirectly.
   Nothing of this kind is avowed in, or found upon the face of the
   journals of that body. The charge of particular motives, it occurs to
   your committee, cannot be sustained in the instance of a deliberative
   body, say the Baltimore conference, unless it appears in evidence that
   the motives have been avowed by a majority of the conference; and it is
   not in proof that the conference has ever had an action to this effect,
   whatever may have been the declaration of individuals sustaining the
   charge of the appellants. The fact charged without reference to
   motives, that there has been a long list of rejections, both as it
   regards admission into the traveling connection and ordination, until
   the exception seems to be made a general rule, is undoubtedly true, and
   is not denied by the defendants. The evidence, however, in relation to
   specific reasons and motives is defective, and does not appear to
   sustain the charge of a contravention of right by any direct accredited
   action of the Baltimore conference had in the premises.

   "That this view of the subject presents a serious difficulty is felt by
   your committee, and must be so by all. The rule applicable in this case
   allows an annual conference to act under the circumstances; but does
   not, and from the very nature and ubiquity of the case, cannot require
   it. Among the unquestioned constitutional rights of our annual
   conferences is that of acting freely, without any compulsory direction,
   in the exercise of individual franchise. Election here is plainly an
   assertion of personal right on the part of the different members
   composing the body, with regard to which the claim to question or
   challenge motives does not belong even to the General Conference,
   unless the result has turned upon avowed considerations unknown to the
   law and rule in the case. The journal of the conference is the only
   part of its history of which this body has cognizance, and to extend
   such cognizance to the reasons and motives of individual members of
   conferences not declared to be the ground of action by a majority,
   would be to establish a rule at once subversive of the rights and
   independence of annual conferences. In the very nature of the case an
   annual conference must possess the right of free and uncontrolled
   determination, not only in the choice of its members, but in all its
   elections, and keeping within the limits and restrictions of its
   charter as found in the Discipline, can only be controlled in the
   exercise of such right by moral and relative considerations, connected
   with the intelligence and interests of the body.

   "The memorialists prayed the last General Conference, and they again
   ask this to interfere authoritatively by change or construction of rule
   so as to afford relief; and in failure to do so in the memorial of
   1836, they ask to be set off to the Virginia conference, as the only
   remaining remedy. In their present petition they are silent on the
   subject of a transfer to Virginia. Under all the circumstances of the
   case, and taking into the account the probabilities of future action in
   the premises, your committee cannot but regard this as the only
   conclusive remedy. But how far this may be considered as relatively
   practicable, or whether advisable in view of all the interests
   involved, the committee have no means of determining, and therefore
   leave it to the judgment of those who have. That the petitioners, in
   accordance with the provisions of the Discipline, whether said
   provisions be right or wrong, are entitled to remedy, your committee
   cannot for a moment doubt, inasmuch as they are laboring, and have been
   for years, under practical disabilities actually provided against by
   the Discipline of the Church. The alleged grievance is by the
   petitioners themselves regarded as one of administration, not of law.
   No change of legislation is asked for, unless this body prefer it; and
   it does not appear to your committee to he called for by any view of
   the subject they have been able to take.

   "Your committee are unwilling to close the brief view of this subject,
   without anxiously suggesting that, as it is one of the utmost
   importance, and intense delicacy in its application and bearings
   throughout our entire country, involving in greater or less degree the
   hopes and fears, the anxieties and interests of millions, it must be
   expected that great variety of opinions and diversity of conviction and
   feeling will be found to exist in relation to it, and most urgently
   call for the exercise of mutual forbearance and reciprocal good will on
   the part of all concerned. May not the principles and causes, giving
   birth and perpetuity to great moral and political systems or
   institutions be regarded as evil, even essentially evil in every
   primary aspect of the subject, without the implication of moral
   obliquity on the part of those involuntarily connected with such
   systems and institutions, and providentially involved in their
   operation and consequences? May not a system of this kind be jealously
   regarded as in itself more or less inconsistent with natural right, and
   moral rectitude, without the imputation of guilt and derelict motive,
   in the instance of those who, without any choice or purpose of their
   own, are necessarily subjected to its influence and sway?

   "Can it be considered as just or reasonable to hold individuals
   responsible for the destiny of circumstances over which they have no
   control?, Thus conditioned in the organic arrangements and
   distributions of society, is there any necessary connection between the
   moral character of the individual and that of the system? In this way
   the modifying influence of unavoidable agencies or circumstances in the
   formation of character is a well-known principle, and one of universal
   recognition in law, morals, and religion, and upon which all
   administration of law, not unjust and oppressive, must proceed. And
   your committee know of no reason why the rule is inapplicable, or
   should not obtain, in relation to the subject of this report. In
   conclusion, the committee would express the deliberate opinion that,
   while the general rule on the subject of slavery, relating to those
   states only whose laws admit of emancipation, and permit the liberated
   slave to enjoy freedom, should be firmly and constantly enforced, the
   exception to the general rule applying to those states where
   emancipation, as defined above, is not practicable, should be
   recognized and protected with equal firmness and impartiality. The
   committee respectfully suggest to the conference the propriety of
   adopting the following resolution: --

   "Resolved, by the delegates of the several annual conferences in
   General Conference assembled, That, under the provisional exception of
   the general rule of the Church on the subject of slavery, the simple
   holding of slaves, or mere ownership of slave property, in states or
   territories here the laws do not admit of emancipation and permit the
   liberated slave to enjoy freedom, constitutes no legal barrier to the
   election or ordination of ministers to the various grades of office
   known in the ministry of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and cannot,
   therefore, be considered as operating any forfeiture of right in view
   of such election and ordination."

   It will be seen by a reference to the address of the managers of our
   Missionary Society, that they prayed for certain alterations in its
   constitution. After considerable debate, provision was made for the
   election of two additional secretaries, and likewise empowering the
   managers to provide for the widows and orphan children of such
   missionaries as have fallen in foreign missionary work where an annual
   conference has hen or may he found, inasmuch as they had no claim upon
   the ordinary funds of the annual conferences. And the general report of
   the conference regarding missions gave an encouraging view of the great
   and growing missionary field of labor, and invited preachers and people
   to a united and vigorous prosecution of this holy and benevolent
   enterprise.

   A memorial was presented to the conference by the secretary of the
   American Colonization Society, which was referred to a committee, and
   the following report was adopted almost unanimously: --

   "That, after mature deliberation, we are convinced that the American
   Colonization Society is deserving the patronage and support of the
   entire Christian community as exerting a most beneficial influence upon
   the colored population of our own country, and more especially upon the
   inhabitants of Africa, particularly the colonists of Liberia, and the
   neighboring native tribes. It is chiefly however, as Christians, and as
   Christian ministers, that we view this enterprise favorably, on account
   of the facilities which it affords to the Christian missionary to
   extend the blessings of the gospel to that benighted portion of our
   globe. The success which has already attended our missions in that
   country is, to us, a sure indication that Providence designs to make
   Liberia a means of enlightening Africa with the light of salvation, as
   well as a place of refuge for the distressed. With these views the
   committee respectfully recommend to the conference the adoption of the
   following: --
    1. Resolved, by the delegates of the several annual conferences in
       General Conference assembled, That we view with favor the efforts
       which are now making by the American Colonization Society to build
       up a colony on the coast of Liberia with free people of color by
       their own consent.
    2. Resolved, That the success which has hitherto attended this noble
       and philanthropic enterprise is a sure pledge that, if still
       prosecuted with wisdom and energy, it will be rendered a great
       blessing, not only to the colonies themselves, but also to the vast
       population of Africa, now enveloped in heathenish darkness.
    3. Resolved, That we recommend this society to the attention and
       patronage of our brethren and friends; and that the several annual
       conferences which may feel themselves free to aid this enterprise
       of benevolence to the souls and bodies of people of color, both in
       our own country and in Africa be, and hereby are affectionately
       advised and requested to adopt such measures as they may think
       suitable to promote its objects, by taking up collections on or
       about the fourth of July in each year."

   Much inconvenience had been experienced in some of the conferences in
   consequence of supernumerary preachers leaving their stations with a
   view to become agents for societies not in connection with our Church,
   and which, in some instances, even operated against the peace and
   harmony of the body. To prevent evils of this character, the following
   clause was inserted in the Discipline: --

   "A supernumerary preacher who refuses to attend to the work assigned
   him, unless in case of sickness or other unavoidable cause or causes,
   shall not be allowed to exercise the functions of his office, nor even
   to preach among us; nevertheless, the final determination of the case
   shall be with the annual conference of which he is a member, who shall
   have power to acquit, suspend, locate, or expel him, as the case may
   be."

   The rule incorporated in the Discipline at the last General Conference
   respecting the trial of superannuated preachers who reside out of the
   bounds of their respective conferences, was found inadequate to its
   object, as it was impossible to arrest the progress of a disorderly
   person who might choose to evade the rule, if justified in his course
   by the conference to which he belonged. This conference, therefore, so
   amended the rule as to make it read as follows: --

   "If the accused be a superannuated preacher, living out of the bounds
   of the conference of which he is a member, he shall be held responsible
   to the annual conference within whose bounds he may reside, who shall
   have power to try, acquit, suspend, locate, or expel him, in the same
   manner as if he were a member of said conference."

   These comprehend all the important acts of the conference. There were,
   to be sure, several verbal alterations in some portions of the
   Discipline, which, however, do not materially alter the sense, or any
   principle of the government. The motion for a complete revision of the
   Discipline, so as to harmonize its several parts, to make a more
   systematical arrangement of its sections, and to correct the
   phraseology, which had become, in consequence of haste or negligence,
   somewhat unintelligible, notwithstanding its obvious necessity, was
   lost, chiefly because the object of the mover was misapprehended. It is
   hoped, however, that such a revision will yet be made, as it would add
   greatly to the perspicuity of the Discipline, and prevent much of that
   discordant administration which arises from the ambiguity of the law in
   certain cases.

   Before the conference adjourned, Bishop Soule was appointed to attend
   as a representative to the Wesleyan Methodist Conference in 1842, and
   he nominated Thomas B. Sargeant to accompany him, and the nomination
   was confirmed by the conference. Bishop Hedding was requested to attend
   the Canada Conference, or, in the event of his being unable to go, the
   bishops were authorized to select a person for that service.

   The following is the pastoral address: --

   "Dearly Beloved Brethren, -- As the representatives of the several
   annual conferences in General Conference assembled, we assume the
   pleasing duty of addressing to you our Christian salutations: Grace be
   unto you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
   Christ,' both now and for ever.

   "In reviewing the history of the past four years, while we see some
   occasions for humiliation before God, we see much in the dealings of
   our heavenly Father with us which calls aloud for gratitude and praise.
   The unwelcome and startling fact of a diminution of the numbers in
   society had awakened in our minds great solicitude. Fearing lest we had
   so far departed from our original purity of character as to be cursed
   with barrenness, and to give place to others whom God would constitute
   more appropriate instruments in achieving the moral renovation of the
   world, we sent up our cry to heaven,' Spare thy people, O Lord, and
   give not thine heritage to reproach.' At this point in our history we
   very justly concluded that instead of indulging in fruitless
   speculations upon the causes which had brought about this state of
   things, it became us to gird ourselves for new exertions, and to look
   up to the great head of the Church for a renewed and signal
   manifestation of his power and grace, to raise the fainting spirits and
   cheer the trembling hearts of the armies of our Israel. And how
   wonderfully have our efforts been succeeded! Truly may we say, In a
   little wrath he hid his face from us, for a moment, but with
   everlasting kindness' has he had mercy upon us.'

   "Within the last year the state of the American Methodist Church has
   assumed a most interesting and cheering aspect. The spirit of grace and
   supplication has been poured out upon her, and her converts have been
   greatly multiplied. Extensive and powerful revivals have been reported
   through our excellent periodicals, from almost every point of the wide
   field occupied by our regular itinerant ministry, or by our
   missionaries. Multitudes of fallen and miserable men have been happily
   renovated and brought within the pale of the Church. Many desolate and
   barren fields have become as the garden of the Lord; presenting to the
   gaze of the world the variegated tints of moral beauty, sending up to
   heaven the sweet odors of pure devotion, and yielding the precious
   fruits of righteousness, to the glory and honor of God.

   "The first centenary of Methodism has brought with it a state of great
   enlargement and prosperity. The pious zeal which you exhibited in the
   appropriate celebration of this new era in our history, and the liberal
   offerings you presented to the Church, exhibit a praiseworthy regard
   for her institutions, and doubtless constitute a sacrifice with which
   God is well pleased. Though, on this interesting occasion, you did no
   more than was your duty to do, God blessed you in the deed, having
   brought your tithes into the storehouse of the Lord, and proved him
   therewith, he has poured you out a blessing that there is scarcely room
   to contain.

   "It affords us great pleasure to witness the strong tendency which
   develops itself among the Methodists to adhere to the peculiar
   principles which have characterized them from the beginning, and to
   remain one and indissoluble. Though some have entered into doubtful
   disputations,' and a few of our societies have been hurtfully agitated,
   yet to the honor of our enlightened membership, and to the glory of
   God, would we at this time express our solemn conviction that the great
   mass of our people have remained firm as a wall of brass' midst the
   commotions of conflicting elements. There seems at this moment far less
   occasion to fear from the causes of dissension than there was at the
   last meeting of this conference. Indeed, brethren, we have no doubt but
   if we all continue to walk by the same rule, and to mind the same
   things,' in which in the order of God we have been instructed, the
   gates of hell shall not prevail against us,' and the enemy who would
   divide and scatter, in order to destroy us, will be dis appointed.

   "Since the commencement of the present session of the General
   Conference, memorials have been presented principally from the northern
   and eastern divisions of the work, some praying for the action of the
   conference on the subject of slavery, and others asking for radical
   changes in the economy of the Church. The results of the deliberations
   of the committees to whom these memorials had a respectful reference,
   and the final action of the conference upon them, may be seen among the
   doings of this body, as reported and published. The issue in several
   instances is probably different from what the memorialists may have
   thought they had reason to expect. But it is to be hoped they will not
   suppose the General Conference has either denied them any legitimate
   right, or been wanting in a proper respect for their opinions. Such is
   the diversity of habits of thought, manners, customs, and domestic
   relations among the people of this vast republic, and such the
   diversity of the institutions of the sovereign states of the
   confederacy, that it is not to be supposed an easy task to suit all the
   incidental circumstances of our economy to the views and feelings of
   the vast mass of minds interested. We pray, therefore, that brethren
   whose views may have been crossed by the acts of this conference will
   at least give us the credit of having acted in good faith, and of not
   having regarded private ends or party interests, but the best good of
   the whole family of American Methodists.

   "Radical changes in our economy are conceived to be fraught with
   danger. After having so long, and under such a variety of
   circumstances, proved the efficiency of our existing institutions, we
   conceive that it is now no time to go into untried experiments. The
   leading features of our excellent Book of Discipline, we have every
   reason to believe, commend themselves alike to the enlightened
   judgments and to the pious feelings of the great mass of our people.
   Upon this subject they hold the sentiment expressed in the language of
   our Lord: No man having drunk old wine, straightway desireth new, for
   he saith the old is better.' They desire to continue on in the same
   tried path, and preserve, in its simplicity and purity, Methodism as we
   received it from our fathers. With these convictions, we should prove
   recreant to the trust committed to us were we in the slightest degree
   to yield to the spirit of innovation.

   "After this free expression of our views and feelings in relation to
   those great interests which naturally come under review in such a
   communication, will you, brethren, permit us, as your pastors and
   servants, for Jesus' sake, to 'stir up your pure minds by way of
   remembrance,' in relation to several important duties, which at the
   present time especially demand your utmost care and diligence?
    1. In addition to the ordinary means of grace to which we are bound to
       attend as Christians, there are certain duties which are obligatory
       on us as Methodists; among these are our class meetings and love
       feasts. Numerous melancholy instances have proved that these means
       cannot be wantonly neglected by our people without the loss of
       their religious comfort, a total paralysis of their spiritual
       energies, and utter uselessness i the Church. As you then desire to
       be useful, to be happy, and to glorify God in this life and that
       which is to come, we beseech you, brethren, never for a moment to
       decline in your attention to these precious means of grace.
    2. Exercise the utmost vigilance and care over the moral and religious
       training of the rising generation. In a very few days we shall be
       with our fathers: and it is for us now to say what influence our
       children shall exert upon the condition of society, and the
       destinies of the world, when we are no more. Give your infant
       offspring to God in holy baptism. When they are of sufficient age,
       put them into the sabbath school, impart to them personal religious
       instruction, pray incessantly for their conversion and salvation,
       and by all means, if possible, give them the advantages of the
       excellent institutions of learning which have been reared by your
       benevolent and praiseworthy exertions.
    3. We would also apprise you who are heads of families, of the vast
       importance of supplying those committed to your trust with such
       reading as will have a tendency to make them wiser and better.
       Preoccupy their attention with our excellent books and periodicals,
       and to the utmost of your power guard them against the dreadful
       tide of froth and corruption which is making such ravages upon the
       intellectual and moral character of the age, under the general
       title of novels. These publications, with very few exceptions, like
       the dreadful sirocco, blast, and wither, and destroy wherever they
       come. Superinducing a state of intellectual languor, and blunting
       the moral feelings, they prepare the young mind for the more open
       and decided demonstrations of error, in the various forms of
       infidelity, or make it an easy prey to the seductions of vice.
       Recollect that to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.'
       Take care, then, to supply the appropriate aliment of the mind in
       sufficient variety and abundance, that there may be left no opening
       for the entrance of these mischievous agents.
    4. We furthermore exhort you, brethren, not to forget the high and
       holy object of our organization. We profess to be a company of men
       having the form and seeking the power of godliness; united in order
       to pray together, to receive the word of exhortation, and to help
       each other work out their salvation.' We are a voluntary
       association, organized, as we believe, according to the will of our
       Lord Jesus Christ, for purposes of a purely spiritual nature. It
       was with reference to our mutual spiritual edification that we
       struck hands before God's altar, and gave to each other pledges of
       future fidelity. Let us then labor to the utmost to do each other
       good, praying for one another, bearing each others burdens, and so
       fulfilling the law of Christ,' forgiving one another if any have a
       quarrel against another.' Our obligations to these duties we took
       upon ourselves voluntarily, and under the most solemn
       circumstances. Can we then lightly cast them off, or claim them at
       the hands of others, when we will not discharge them ourselves'
       Nay, brethren, they are mutual, perpetual, inviolable.
    5. We exhort and beseech you, brethren, by the tender mercies of our
       God, that you strive for the mind that was in Christ Jesus.' Be not
       content with mere childhood in religion; but, having the principles
       of the doctrines of Christ, go on unto perfection.' The doctrine of
       entire sanctification constitutes a leading feature of original
       Methodism. But let us not suppose it enough to have this doctrine
       in our standards: let us labor to have the experience and the power
       of it in our hearts. Be assured, brethren, that if our influence
       and usefulness as a religious community, depend upon one thing more
       than any other, it is upon our carrying out the great doctrine of
       sanctification in our life and conversation. When we fail to do
       this, then shall we lose our pre-eminence; and the halo of glory
       which surrounded the heads, and lit up the path of our sainted
       fathers, will have departed from their unworthy sons. O brethren,
       let your motto be, holiness to the Lord.' And may the God of peace
       sanctify you wholly, and we pray God, that your whole spirit, and
       soul, and body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
       Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do
       it.'

   "Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
   honest, whatsoever things are just, what soever things are pure,
   whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if
   there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things.'
   And now, we commend you to God and the word of his grace, who is able
   to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that are
   sanctified.' AMEN."

   On the evening of Wednesday, June 3, the conference adjourned to meet
   again in the city of New York, May 1, 1844. At an early period of the
   session of this conference a resolution prevailed to employ a reporter
   to take down the proceedings of the conference, that they might be
   published weekly in the Christian Advocate and Journal, and the other
   papers published under the direction of the General Conference. The
   following is the reporter's account of the closing of the conference:
   --

   "A motion being made to adjourn sine die, Bishop Soule addressed the
   conference:

   "Dear Brethren, -- Under any other circumstances than those in which we
   are now placed, I should esteem it a high privilege, as well as a
   solemn duty, to offer you an extended parting salutation. But the
   extreme lateness of the hour requires that we should close our session
   without further delay. Indulge me a few, and but a few, moments.

   "It has afforded me much pleasure to witness so little improper
   excitement. I do not recollect that I ever attended a conference in
   which I saw less. While great difference of opinion has existed on
   various subjects, I rejoice to have seen exhibited, universally, so
   much brotherly kindness and affection. I am more especially rejoiced in
   the firm persuasion, the steadfast belief, that great and important
   principles have been investigated and established, destined to exert a
   most salutary influence on our future prospects, our peace, and our
   unity. In this I do rejoice, and I will rejoice.

   "And now in separating, to carry out the measures here adopted -- to
   further the cause of God with renewed zeal and energy -- I entreat
   brethren to refrain rigidly from all unkind expressions in regard to
   each other; and to be careful how, as members of this body, they pass
   their animadversions, publicly or privately, upon its acts. It becomes
   us to speak, if we speak at all, with great respect and due deference
   for the opinions of those who have acted under responsibilities so vast
   and momentous.

   "Let us keep the unity of the Spirit in the bonds of peace.

   "And may the God of all grace continue to strengthen our union, until
   we shall see the accomplishment of the great design for which Methodism
   was raised up, viz.: to spread Scriptural holiness all over these
   lands.

   "The bishop then read that admirable and appropriate hymn, commencing
   --

   And let our bodies part, To different climes repair; Inseparably joined
   in heart The friends of Jesus are.'

   "The whole body, together with a considerable audience, joined solemnly
   in singing these sacred lines; after which the venerable bishop
   addressed the throne of grace, amidst the responses, the tears, and the
   sighs bursting from the heaving bosoms of the conference and the
   audience.

   "The conference then, at ten minutes past one o'clock, Thursday
   morning, June 4, adjourned sine die.

   "Thus closed the Centenary General Conference, after the most
   protracted, the most interesting, and, to human judgment, the most
   auspicious session ever held. May its deliberations redound to the
   glory of God and the good of the Church. The Church! Esto perpetua."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 16

    Methodist Book Concern

   I. Historical sketch of the Concern. -- In vol. i, where a short notice
   is given of the origin of the Book Concern, I promised to give a more
   detailed account of this useful establishment in a subsequent part of
   the History. I shall now attempt to redeem this pledge, although my
   space will not allow of a very particular and extended account.

   As is there stated, at a very early period of his ministry, Mr. Wesley
   established a printing office, and in 1778 commenced the publication of
   the Arminian Magazine, in which he vindicated the doctrines taught by
   that distinguished divine, James Arminius, so far as they coincided
   with what he believed the truth as revealed in the Holy Scriptures, and
   likewise the doctrine and usages promulgated and adopted by himself and
   his brother, Charles Wesley. This publication, together with a variety
   of tracts and volumes on religious, philosophical, and scientific
   subjects, have done immense good to the community in Great Britain and
   other parts of the world; and the Wesleyan connection in England has
   produced some of the first writers of the age, such as Clarke, Benson,
   Watson, and many others of less note, but equally indefatigable in
   spreading light and truth by means of the press. The Magazine, filled
   with a vast variety of the most useful knowledge, has been continued,
   gradually enlarging its dimensions, and c hanging ifs name to the
   Wesleyan Methodist Magazine, to the present time, making in all no less
   than sixty-three volumes, of from six hundred to upward of nine hundred
   pages each.

   In the early days of Methodism in this country, our people were
   furnished with books from England, and they were distributed among them
   by the itinerant preachers, the cost of the first purchase being
   transmitted to Mr. Wesley to assist in keeping up a constant supply.
   This method, however, of obtaining the needful books became very
   troublesome and expensive, and measures were adopted by Dr. Coke, on
   his arrival in America, to remedy the evil by procuring the
   republication of such small tracts and sermons, together with a
   hymn-book, as the growing wants of the people seemed to demand.

   The first account I find in the Minutes of the conferences of a book
   steward is in the year 1789, and John Dickens, then stationed in
   Philadelphia, where the Book Concern was begun, was the first editor
   and agent. It appears that when the business was commenced, being but
   small, and requiring but a portion of the time of the agent for that
   particular work, he was at the same time the stationed preacher in the
   city of Philadelphia, there then being but one in the city.

   By referring to the books of the agency; the first entry in the
   handwriting of John Dickens is under date of August 17, 1789, and it
   appears that the first book which printed was Mr. Wesley's edition of
   "A Kempis," a little devotional work, written by a Roman Catholic,
   breathing the true spirit of piety, and containing the most pure and
   exalted sentiments of Christianity. In the same year was issued the
   first volume of the Arminian Magazine, being chiefly a reprint of
   pieces which had appeared in its prototype in England, but containing
   also some accounts of the work of God in America, and other
   miscellaneous matters of an edifying character. The Methodist
   Discipline, Saints' Everlasting Rest, a hymn-book and Mr. Wesley's
   Primitive Physic, were all published in the same year.

   This was a small beginning, but it was quite equal to the means then at
   command; for it appears that there were no funds in hand to begin with,
   except a small amount, about six hundred dollars, which John Dickens
   lent to the Concern to enable it to begin its benevolent operations.

   In 1790, some portions of Fletcher's Checks, much needed at die time,
   and the second volume of the Arminian Magazine, made their appearance.
   In this small way the number of books was gradually increased tinder
   the skillful management of John Dickens, a man of inestimable worth as
   a Christian minister, and of great prudence, industry, and fidelity in
   this particular work. To assist him in his labor, and to guard, as far
   as possible, the purity of the press, a book committee was appointed in
   1797, to whom all works were to be submitted before they were
   published, except such as were ordered by the General Conference; and
   the first committee consisted of Ezekiel Cooper, Thomas Ware, John
   McClasky, Christopher Spry, William McLennan, Charles Cavender, Richard
   Swain,. and Solomon Sharp. From that day to this a book committee, with
   similar powers, has been appointed from year to year, tinder the
   direction of the General Conference, which reports the state of the
   Concern every year to the annual conference in the bounds of which the
   Concern is located, and every four years to the General Conference.

   John Dickens continued in the superintendence of the book business
   until 1798, when he died in peace and triumph, of the malignant fever
   which then raged with terrible destruction in the city of Philadelphia.
   His death was feelingly lamented by all who knew him, for he was a
   minister of Jesus Christ, of great power and usefulness, much beloved
   and respected by all who knew him, and had been very successful in
   printing and circulating books of the most useful character.

   In 1799, Ezekiel Cooper, who still lives, was appointed editor and
   general book steward. The Concern is greatly indebted to his skillful
   management for its increasing usefulness, as at the end of his term, in
   1808, its capital stock had increased, from almost nothing in the
   beginning, to about forty-five thousand dollars. In 1804, the Concern
   was removed from Philadelphia to the city of New York, where Ezekiel
   Cooper continued its superintendence until 1808, being assisted by John
   Wilson for the last four years. At the General Conference of 1808 Mr.
   Cooper resigned his office, the conference giving him a vote of thanks
   for the faithful and successful manner in which he had discharged his
   duty, and was succeeded by John Wilson as principal, and Daniel Hitt as
   an assistant editor and book steward. At this General Conference, on
   the recommendation of Mr. Cooper, the term of service in the agency was
   limited to eight years, a regulation which was afterward found to be
   attended with many inconveniences, so much so that in 1836 the rule was
   abrogated.

   Up to this time the agents received a station, the same as the other
   preachers, and were held responsible for the double duties of agents of
   the Book Concern and of stationed ministers, though they were relieved
   from much of their pastoral labors by their colleagues in the ministry.
   In 1808 they were entirely released from pastoral labors, only so far
   as they might be able to preach on Sabbaths, and occasionally on other
   days, that their time and attention might be more exclusively devoted
   to the interests of the Concern, in editing and publishing books; -- a
   wise regulation, as has been tested by many years of experience.

   On the 28th of January, 1810, John Wilson, who had been long afflicted
   with an obstinate asthma, died suddenly of that inveterate disease, in
   the full assurance of faith. He was indeed a most estimable man, a
   faithful minister, a skillful and diligent book agent, and was greatly
   beloved and sincerely respected by his brethren and friends. From the
   time of his lamented death until the General Conference of 1812, the
   business was carried on by Daniel Hitt alone, but by no means in so
   prosperous a way as it had been conducted heretofore. In 1812, however,
   he was elected the principal, and Thomas Ware the assistant editor and
   book steward; and the General Conference ordered the resumption of the
   Magazine in monthly numbers; but neither this order was obeyed, nor
   were the hopes of the friends of the establishment at all realized by
   the increasing prosperity of the Concern from 1812 to 1816. This fault,
   however, is not attributable to the want of good intentions or fidelity
   in the agents, but chiefly, I believe, for the lack of skill and
   harmony in its general management.

   In 1816, Joshua Soule and Thomas Mason entered upon the duties of this
   agency. They found the Concern much embarrassed with debt, with but
   scanty means to liquidate it, the number and variety of publications
   small, and the general aspect of things was quite discouraging. They,
   however, applied themselves to their work with prudence and diligence,
   and succeeded in keeping it from sinking under its own weight, and of
   infusing new energy into some of its departments, by increasing the
   variety of its publications, and lessening the amount of its debts.

   In 1818, the order for resuming the publication of the Magazine, which
   had been made again by the General Conference of 1816, was carried into
   effect, agreeably to the desire, and to the joy of thousands. Indeed,
   the appearance of this periodical, filled as it was with useful matter,
   was generally hailed with delight by the members of our Church, as the
   harbinger of brighter days, especially in regard to the revival of
   literature and sound knowledge among us as a people though it must be
   confessed that there were some then, who would even sneer at this most
   laudable attempt to diffuse useful knowledge and Scriptural piety, by
   means of the press. I could relate many anecdotes in confirmation of
   this statement, as dishonorable to their authors as they were
   mortifying to the more enlightened friends of the Church. But, as the
   day is passed, let these "times of ignorance" be "winked at" and
   forgotten, from the joy that a more bright and vigorous state of things
   has so happily succeeded.

   In 1820, Nathan Hang's succeeded Joshua Soule, and Thomas Mason was
   re-elected an assistant. He found the Concern still laboring under a
   heavy debt, and was often much embarrassed to meet the demands upon its
   resources. After looking at things as attentively and impartially as
   possible, he said to his colleague, "We must increase our debt, with a
   view to add to the number and variety of our publications, or we never
   shall succeed in answering public expectation, or of putting the
   Concern in a prosperous condition." They went to work accordingly, and
   commenced with Benson's Commentary, Clarke's Wesley Family, Lady
   Maxwell, and other works of smaller dimensions; and they likewise
   introduced into our catalogue, philosophical, historical, philological,
   and scientific works, by exchanging, and by taking parts of editions as
   publishers conjointly with other publishers; and with a view to rid the
   Concern of many old and unsaleable books on hand, the prices were
   lowered, by which means many books that had lain useless upon our
   shelves were put in circulation. Still, for the want of more
   experience, many blunders were committed, which were afterward either
   corrected or avoided. And though by these appliances the debt was
   augmented, resources to meet the pecuniary demands were created, and by
   maintaining our credit, we could always obtain money when it was
   needed.

   In 1823 the Youth's Instructor, a monthly periodical designed for the
   special benefit of youth, was commenced, and for some years it had a
   very extensive circulation, and I believe did much to increase the
   taste for reading, and to raise the tone of an enlightened piety.

   Very soon after the General Conference of 1820 measures were adopted,
   in conformity to its order, for the publication of a revised edition of
   the hymn-book, and also of a tune-book, containing tunes suited to the
   great variety of metres in which our most excellent hymns were
   composed. Hitherto, for the want, of such tunes, many of these hymns,
   the poetry and spirituality of which are of unrivaled energy and
   beauty, were left unsung by most of our congregations, and therefore
   stood useless in the hymn-book.

   Nor was the hymn-book before in use much less defective. Some of the
   hymns had been marred in unskillful hands by alterations and
   mutilations, while others, which had edified thousands in Europe by
   their strong, deep, and spiritual sentiments and highly poetical
   character, had never been introduced into our worshipping assemblies.
   These defects were now in a great measure supplied by the publication
   of these editions of the hymn and tune books; and since then the art of
   singing, that most useful and animating part of divine worship, has
   been gradually improving among the members and friends of our Church.

   Up to this time all our printing and binding had been done by the job,
   on such terms as could be agreed upon with the different printers and
   binders who did the work. In the year 1821 we were strongly urged to
   establish a bindery and printing office. After considering the subject
   for some time, it was finally concluded to make an experiment first
   with a bindery, and if this succeeded according to expectations, a
   printing office could be established at a future time. Accordingly the
   basement story of the Wesleyan Seminary in Crosby Street was rented, a
   competent binder employed, and the bindery went into operation in 1822.

   At the General Conference of 1824, the constitutional term of Thomas
   Meson having expired, John Emory was elected as an assistant to Nathan
   Bangs. Soon after, having tested the beneficial consequences of having
   a bindery under our own control, the principal, who had great
   confidence in the intelligence of his assistant, proposed the
   establishment of a printing office; and after maturely considering the
   subject, committing with the book committee and others, it was finally
   concluded to make the experiment; and in the month of September, 1824,
   the office was commenced in the second story of the same building in
   Crosby Street, and finally, during the same year, the entire premises
   were bought of the trustees of the Wesleyan Seminary for a printing
   office and bindery.

   In coming to this conclusion, however, there was great hesitation on
   the part of the book committee, arising out of a fear that the project
   would not succeed. So thoroughly convinced, however, was the writer of
   this sketch of the feasibility of the plan, and of its profitableness
   to the Concern, that, after obtaining the consent and co-operation of
   his assistant, they offered to purchase the premises and commence
   operations on their own personal responsibility; and if the next
   General Conference should not approve of the undertaking, they would
   take the entire establishment as their own, provided the Concern should
   pay them the interest on the purchase money, and the net profits of the
   printing, after deducting the usual prices paid for the work to other
   printers. This proposition, indicative of such perfect confidence in
   the successful issue of the project, silenced opposition, the purchase
   was made, and the printing office and bindery were very soon
   permanently established. The utility of the measure, in every point of
   view, though it added great additional labor and responsibility to the
   agents, became so manifest, that it was soon seen and appreciated by
   all concerned, and highly approved of by the next General Conference.

   Measures were adopted for a gradual and constant increase to the number
   and variety of our books. Hitherto Dr. Adam Clarke's Commentary had
   been published by other publishers, and was now in the hands of Abraham
   Paul, a very worthy member of our Church, and a printer of established
   reputation in the city of New York. He made an advantageous offer of
   the stereotype plates of the octavo edition, and of the numbers of the
   quarto edition which he had on hand, together with a list of his
   subscribers, with the privilege of publishing the remainder as it
   should come out. This offer was accepted by the agents, and hence this
   most valuable and deservedly popular Commentary became the property of
   the Methodist Episcopal Church, so far as such a work, a copyright of
   which could not be legally secured in this country, -- could become its
   property, and has been ever since published by this Concern.

   The printing of books from stereotype plates had recently been
   introduced into this country, by which means standard works, for which
   a constant demand might be expected, were very much cheapened. The
   first work stereotyped in this establishment was the 24mo. edition of
   the Hymn-book, soon after the General Conference of 1820. Since that
   time stereotype plates have been gradually introduced, until nearly all
   the books now issued from this press are printed from these standing
   types, -- an improvement in the art of printing as great as the
   improvement in navigation by the use of steamboats, -- more especially
   since the power of steam has been so usefully applied to printing, by
   the introduction of presses moved by this powerful agent. Of these
   improvements in book-making this Concern has wisely availed itself, as
   its means and constantly increasing demands would seem to justify.

   But to return to the narrative. Beholding the beneficial results of
   periodical literature on the intellectual, moral, and religious state
   of the people, measures were adopted by the agents; with the advice and
   concurrence of the book committee and of the New York conference, for
   issuing a weekly paper, to be called the "Christian Advocate."
   Accordingly, on the 9th of September, 1826, the first number of this
   advocate of Christian doctrines, morals, and the institutions of
   Methodism, made its appearance, much to the gratification of all the
   members and friends of the Church. As a proof of this general
   gratification, in a very short time its number of subscribers far
   exceeded every other paper published in the United States, being about
   twenty-five thousand; and it soon increased to thirty thousand, and was
   probably read by more than one hundred and twenty thousand persons,
   young and old. Though Mr. Badger was the editor of this paper, yet the
   editorial matter was chiefly furnished by the senior editor of the
   establishment, even before he was appointed its editor in 1828. Mr.
   Badger, however, displayed a good taste and correct judgment in
   selecting and arranging matter for its columns, and was therefore an
   efficient instrument in giving it a popular character; but so far as
   the editorial articles were concerned, he received more credit than he
   was entitled to, as most of those articles were furnished by the person
   named above, and some very valuable ones by his worthy and able
   assistant; and its columns were also enriched, from time to time, by
   some able and pious correspondents. These, together with the religious,
   scientific, and secular intelligence it inculcated, did much to aid the
   cause of sound knowledge and solid piety; and it was particularly
   useful in defending our doctrines and primitive usages from reproach,
   as well as in making known to our people the character and labor of the
   entire establishment. Indeed, the "Christian Advocate and Journal" soon
   became to the Book Concern like a faithful herald to a government,
   proclaiming to all its will, and making known its plans.

   This continual enlargement of the establishment, while it infused
   energy into its operations, and mightily extended the sphere of its
   usefulness among the reading community, increased also its debt; but we
   knew that it also increased the means of its liquidation, and must
   ultimately both tend to its entire emancipation from its pecuniary
   embarrassment, and enlarge its sphere of usefulness, in respect to the
   number, variety, and character of its publications.

   It should be noticed, also, that at the earnest request of our brethren
   west of the mountains, the General Conference of 1820 authorized the
   establishment of a branch of the Book Concern in Cincinnati, and Martin
   Ruter, of the New England conference, was appointed to its charge, to
   act under the direction of the agents in New York. One thing which led
   to this establishment was the depreciation, since the annihilation of
   the old bank of the United States, in 1810, of the currency in the
   west. For a number of years the Concern had several thousand dollars
   lying useless in the banks of Cincinnati, merely because it was almost
   worthless in New York; and we had no other way to realize any thing
   from it, but by authorizing our agent there to invest it in cotton and
   tobacco, and ship them to our account to New York. The cotton was sent
   to Liverpool; but the tobacco, I believe, was chiefly a dead loss, in
   consequence of the wreck of the boat in which it was shipped. [Blessed
   Loss! Which, I suspect, may have been ordered of the Lord. -- DVM]

   This branch, however, has gone on from that day to this with less or
   more prosperity; has become a publishing office, and bids fair to do
   much in diffusing useful knowledge through all that region of country.

   It has been already stated, that the debts of the Concern had very
   considerably increased; but they had been increased by the procurement
   of those means, such as an office for printing and binding, presses,
   stereotype plates, and all sorts of tools for each department, as must,
   if properly managed, finally lead to the liquidation of the debts, and
   thus place the Concern on a permanent foundation, beyond the reach of
   danger by the fluctuations of the times, so often occasioned by the
   frequent pressures of the money market. Its credit was good; its
   liabilities were always promptly met; its working hands paid; and all
   its parts were in vigorous operation.

   It was found, however, that there was on hand a large stock of old
   unsaleable books, bound and unbound, both in the general depository in
   New York, and on the circuits and stations, as well as at Cincinnati,
   which had been accumulating for years. All these, through reported from
   year to year as capital stock, were entirely unproductive; and the
   manner in which the accounts were kept, and the books sold, had a
   tendency to increase this unproductive stock, and also the amount of
   debts due to the Concern. I allude to the credit system, and the
   discount of eighteen per centum which was allowed to preachers and
   others for whatever books they might sell, merely rendering an account
   of the books remaining on hand at the end of each year, which passed to
   their credit on the settlement of their accounts. By these means the
   number and quantity of books were constantly augmenting in the
   districts, while the Concern was increasing its liabilities by being
   obliged to pay the expense of those already on hand, and for furnishing
   a fresh supply, a part of which might help to swell the amount of those
   unsold; and the longer they remained on hand, the more unsaleable they
   became.

   The question now was, What means can be devised to rid the Concern of
   this mass of unproductive stock, and more speedily and certainly
   dispose of books which may be hereafter published? In answer to this
   question, it was suggested by the assistant agent, and promptly
   assented to by the principal, that the old stock on hand, scattered
   through the country in the several circuits, should be offered at
   wholesale prices, for cash or good security, at a discount of fifty
   percent, and that her after our books should he sold to wholesale
   purchasers, whether preachers or others, at a discount of thirty-three
   and one-third percent for cash, and twenty-five percent on good
   security, payable at the next annual conference after the purchase was
   made, and if not then paid, with lawful interest until the note was
   discharged. This system was accordingly recommended to the General
   Conference of 1828, and, after mature consideration, was adopted, and
   its provisions inserted in the Discipline.

   At this conference, the constitutional term of Nathan Bangs having
   ended, he was elected editor of the Christian Advocate and Journal,
   John Emory the principal editor and book steward, and Beverly Waugh his
   assistant.

   With this broad foundation laid, and these wise plans devised and
   sanctioned, the new agents went to their work in good earnest, and soon
   succeeded in paying off the debts of the establishment, and in widening
   the sphere of their operations greatly. Wesley's and Fletcher's Works
   were published, the Methodist Magazine was improved by commencing a new
   series under the denomination of the "Methodist Magazine and Quarterly
   Review," the number of Sunday school books and tracts was multiplied,
   though these latter were under the charge of the editor of the
   Christian Advocate and Journal. The new method of selling the books
   worked admirably well, the old stock on hand was rapidly disposed of,
   and the orders for books became more numerous, and of course the and
   all profits proportionally augmented.

   This rapid increase in the business very soon led to the necessity of
   enlarging our buildings. Accordingly all the vacant ground in Crosby
   Street was occupied. But even these additions were found insufficient
   to accommodate the several departments of labor, so as to furnish the
   needful supply of books now in constantly increasing demand.

   To supply this deficiency five lots were purchased in Mulberry Street,
   between Broome and Spring streets, and one building erected in the rear
   for a printing office and bindery, intending to erect another of larger
   dimensions after the General Conference of 1832. Accordingly the plan
   of the new buildings was submitted to that conference, with an estimate
   of the probable expense, and of its utility in furthering the
   benevolent objects of the Concern. The plan was highly applauded, and
   the agents were instructed to carry it into execution.

   At this General Conference, Dr. Emory, whose wise counsels and literary
   labors had been of so much service to the Concern, and were therefore
   highly appreciated, was elected a bishop, and Beverly Waugh was
   appointed to fill his place, and T. Mason his assistant. Acting on the
   principles which had been laid down by their predecessors, they carried
   out the plans which had been suggested with great energy and effect. At
   the same conference, in consequence of the increased labors in the
   editorial department, Nathan Bangs was removed from the editorship of
   the Christian Advocate and Journal to the editorial charge of the
   Methodist Magazine and Quarterly Review and the general books, and John
   P. Durbin was elected editor of the Christian Advocate and Journal and
   Sunday school books and tracts, and Timothy Merritt his assistant. Mr.
   Durbin introduced one very important improvement into the Sunday school
   department, and that was the commencement of a Sunday School Library,
   which has now reached its two hundred and forty-fourth volume, made up
   of some of the choicest books to he found for the edification of youth.
   This division of labor had a most beneficial tendency, as it enabled
   the editors to devote themselves more exclusively to the improvement of
   the literary and scientific departments of their work.

   What an alteration in this respect! In the infancy of the Concern the
   agent did all the work of editing, packing up the books, and keeping
   the accounts, besides doing the work of a stationed preacher. In 1804
   he was allowed an assistant; but no clerk was employed until 1818,
   when, on resuming the publication of the Magazine, the agents, by the
   advice of the book committee, employed a young man to assist in packing
   the books and shipping them off. From 1820 to 1828 the writer of this
   history had the entire responsibility of the establishment on his
   shoulders, both of editing and publishing the Magazine and books, and
   overseeing its pecuniary and mercantile department. It is due, however,
   to his assistants to say, that they labored faithfully and
   indefatigably to promote the interests of the Concern, and the labor of
   keeping the books and attending to the pecuniary business devolved
   chiefly on them, under his advisement. In 1825 a clerk was first
   employed to keep the books; and after the Christian Advocate and
   Journal was commenced, and the Sunday school books and tracts began to
   multiply, it became necessary to employ several clerks to keep the
   accounts, and to pack up and send off the periodicals. In taking charge
   of the Methodist Magazine and Quarterly Review, the editor found
   himself exceedingly cramped, as he was not at liberty to offer any
   remuneration to contributors, but must take such as he could get,
   chiefly by selections from other books or furnishing matter from his
   own pen. In consequence of these embarrassments, he is free to confess
   that the character of that publication was far beneath what it should
   and might have been, had the editor been at liberty to follow his own
   convictions of duty and propriety in furnishing suitable materials for
   the work. This defect was as mortifying to him, as it was a
   disappointment to its readers and patrons; and he rejoices that his
   advice, long urged without effect, was at last adopted, and that hence
   a brighter day has dawned upon this department of our literature; for
   now, by employing able writers, the worthy editor is giving a character
   to that periodical which is likely to be equally honorable to himself
   and to the Church whose interests he is endeavoring to promote.

   Immediately after the adjournment of the conference of 1832, the new
   agents went to work, and erected the front building in Mulberry Street;
   and, in the month of September, in 1833, the entire establishment was
   removed into the new buildings. Not being able to dispose of the
   property in Crosby Street, the old edifice was taken down, and four
   neat dwelling houses were erected in its place, the rent of which is
   worth to the Concern from twelve hundred to two thousand dollars a
   year. They are intended as residences for the editors and agents; and
   if they do not choose to occupy them, they are at liberty to rent them,
   and take the avails toward defraying the expense of other houses. Thus
   the premises which were at first procured as a site for the Wesleyan
   seminary, an institution designed for the religious as well as secular
   education of youth, has become the permanent property of the Methodist
   Book Concern, and is therefore still devoted to scientific, religious,
   and literary purposes. May it never be otherwise employed!

   In this new and commodious building, with diligent and efficient agents
   and editors at work, every thing seemed to be going on prosperously and
   harmoniously, when, lo and behold, the entire property was consumed by
   fire! In this disastrous conflagration, the Methodist Church lost not
   less than two hundred and fifty thousand dollars. The buildings, all
   the printing and binding materials, a vast quantity of books, bound and
   in sheets, a valuable library, which the editor had been collecting for
   several years, were in a few hours consumed

   It is impossible to describe the sensations which were produced by this
   calamitous and mournful event. It was on a very cold night in the month
   of February, 1836, but a short time after the great fire in the city of
   New York, which destroyed about twenty million dollars' worth of
   property. I was awakened about four o'clock, A. M., by a ringing at my
   door, and a voice which apprised me that the Book Room was on fire! I
   sprung from my bed, dressed, called my two sons who were at home, and
   repaired with all possible speed to the scene of conflagration. I
   hoped, at least, to save the library. But the smoke was already issuing
   from the windows of my office, and the flames from other parts of the
   house! Here I found the agents, who were on the spot before me. The
   hydrants were frozen, and the waters were thrown but feebly, though all
   exerted themselves to their utmost. We saw that all was gone. Suddenly,
   and with a tremendous crash, the roof fell in! The flames seemed to
   ascend in curling eddies to the heavens, carrying with them fragments
   of books and papers, which the winds swept over the city to the
   eastward, as if to carry the news of the sad disaster to our distant
   friends. Indeed, a leaf of a Bible was found about three miles from the
   place, on which the following verse was but just legible: -- "Our holy
   and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burned up
   with fire; and all our pleasant things are laid waste," Isa. lxiv, 11.

   While standing upon the smoking ruins, about ten o'clock in the
   morning, a minister of the Protestant Episcopal Church informed me that
   this leaf had been picked up in the city of Brooklyn, and that it was
   in the possession of a gentleman in the lower part of the city, a
   bookseller, in Pearl Street. I requested a friend to call and ascertain
   the fact, and if possible to obtain the relic, which seemed precious in
   my estimation. He accordingly called, and found it was even so; but the
   gentleman, wishing to preserve it as a memento of this disastrous
   event, and as an evidence of the truth of his own statement, declined
   to surrender it to another.

   Our "beautiful house," and all our "pleasant things," our books and
   printing and binding apparatus -- were indeed "burned up with fire!"
   But the fire-proof vault had, by the skillful management of the
   firemen, preserved the account books, and most of the registry books
   for subscribers were saved by the timely exertions of the clerk of that
   department. The rest was gone, except about three hundred dollars'
   worth of books, and some of the iron work, stone, and brick about the
   building.

   "How did this fire originate?" This question has been asked a thousand
   times, but never satisfactorily answered, although an inquiry was
   immediately instituted, and diligent search made, with a view to
   ascertain the fact. It still lies buried in obscurity; but my own
   opinion is, that it took fire by accident in the interior of the
   building, in the second story, where the fire was first discovered by
   the man who came to open the office and make the fires for the day. The
   reasons for this opinion, though satisfactory to myself, I cannot here
   detail; and, as they do not involve any one connected with the
   establishment in blame, while it relieves us from entertaining the
   cruel suspicion that any one was wicked enough to set fire to the
   premises, it may pass for what it is worth, without injury to any
   individual concerned.

   In the deep affliction felt by the agents, and indeed all in any way
   connected with the establishment, it was no small consolation to be
   assured of the sincere and wide-spread sympathy which was both felt and
   expressed by our brethren and friends for us on account of this heavy
   loss. At a public meeting held a few days after in the city of New
   York, about twenty-five thousand dollars were subscribed toward
   relieving us in this distress, and as the news spread, similar meetings
   were held all over the country, and liberal donations and subscriptions
   were made, which mightily cheered the hearts of those more immediately
   interested in the Concern. The entire amount which has been received
   toward making up this heavy loss is $88,346.09. This, as it came in,
   enabled the agents to continue their business, and they recommenced
   building, even while the smoke gave signs that the fire was not
   entirely extinguished.

   What made this fire the more disastrous was, that the much more
   destructive one which had preceded it only about two months in the city
   of New York, had prostrated most of the insurance offices, and rendered
   them unable to pay the demands against them, and made it impossible to
   get insured in New York with any safety for some time. Most of the
   policies held by the Concern had expired about this time by their own
   limitation and such were the fears entertained abroad for New York
   fires, that it was next to impossible to get insured elsewhere on any
   terms. Hence but a small portion was under insurance at the time of the
   fire, so that only about $25,000 were realized from these sources to
   make up the loss.

   Happily, the Concern was not in debt. By hiring an office temporarily,
   and employing other printers, and accepting he kind offers of some who
   proffered their services, the agents soon resumed their business, the
   smaller works were put to press, and our herald of news, the Christian
   Advocate and Journal, soon took its flight again, though the first
   number after the fire had its wings much shortened, through the
   symbolical heavens, carrying the tidings of our loss, and of the
   liberal and steady efforts which were making to reinvigorate the
   paralyzed Concern.

   Things went on in this way till the assembling of the General
   Conference of 1836, when Beverly Waugh being elected a bishop, Thomas
   Mason was put in his place, and George Lane was elected his assistant.
   To this conference the plan of the new building was submitted, approved
   of; and the new agents entered upon their work with energy and
   perseverance. Samuel Luckey, D. D., was elected general editor, and
   John A. Collins his assistant. Of their labors I need say nothing, as
   they are before the public, and will be appreciated according to their
   worth.

   The new buildings went up with all convenient dispatch, in a much
   better style, more durable, better adapted to their use, and safer
   against fire than the former. A view of the front building may be seen
   in the engraving which accompanies this volume. [graphic not included
   with this electronic edition -- DVM] This is one hundred and twenty-one
   feet in length, and thirty in breadth, four stories high above the
   basement, with offices for the agents and editors, a book-store in the
   north end, and a committee-room in the first story above the basement
   in the south end, in which the managers of the Missionary Society meet,
   ad the corresponding secretary has his office, the other story being
   occupied for a printing office, drying and pressing the printed sheets.

   The building in the rear is sixty-five feet in length, and thirty in
   breadth, four stories high, and is used for stitching and binding, and
   storing away the printed and bound books.

   There are now, 1841, employed in the printing office eight
   power-presses, moved by steam; and the cylinder press, on which the
   Christian Advocate and Journal is printed, throws off one thousand and
   eight hundred impressions in an hour. To keep all these in operation
   requires the labor of fifty-six hands, a much less number than before
   power-presses were used, besides the superintendent of the office, to
   whose skill and diligence the Concern is much indebted for its steady
   improvement and encouraging success.

   In the bindery there are employed eighty-seven hands, besides the
   worthy superintendent, whose activity and skill in his business have
   gained him the confidence of his employers. Of these thirty-six are
   male and fifty-one are female, the latter of whom are engaged in
   folding and stitching, and the former in pressing and binding the
   books.

   Adding these to those employed in the printing office, they will make
   the whole number at present, including the editors, agents, and clerks,
   in the Book Room, one hundred and seventy-four workmen, the number
   varying either less or more, to meet the exigencies of the times.

   I need only add here, that at the last General Conference the same
   agents were continued in office, George Peck was elected editor of the
   Methodist Quarterly Review and the general books and tracts, and Thomas
   E. Bond editor of the Christian Advocate and Journal, and Sunday school
   books, and George Coles his assistant.

   In addition to this principal establishment, as I have already noticed
   in the general history, the branch establishment at Cincinnati has been
   so conducted that it has constantly increased in magnitude and
   importance, and is receiving more and more of the public patronage. A
   weekly paper, ably conducted, and with a circulation of upward of
   twelve thousand, now entered upon its seventh volume, is published
   there, besides a variety of books of the smaller class, together with a
   periodical in the German language, and another called the Ladies'
   Repository and Western Gatherer; and the agents keep on sale all the
   books which are published in New York. In addition to these, with a
   view to afford facilities for the more general circulation of both
   books, tracts, and periodicals, depositories have been established in
   Boston, Philadelphia, Richmond, Va., Charleston, S. C., Pittsburgh, and
   Nashville, at each of which places a weekly religious paper is
   published, all under the patronage of the General Conference except
   those in Boston and Philadelphia, the former being under the patronage
   of the New England, Rhode Island, Maine, and New Hampshire conferences,
   and the latter being the property of individuals. Though these several
   papers may not add any thing directly to the pecuniary resources of the
   Concern, as some of them have not heretofore supported themselves, yet
   they no doubt increase and extend its moral power and influence, and
   indirectly promote its pecuniary interests by inculcating more
   generally religious and scientific information, advertising the books,
   and thus creating, improving, and more widely diffusing a taste for
   reading, by which means a demand for books is proportionally increased
   and perpetuated.

   This imperfect narrative will enable the reader to judge of the moral
   power which this Concern has exerted, and does still exert, on the
   reading community by means of its numerous publications.

   II. Objects and Influence of the Concern -- Many have egregiously
   misapprehended the objects of this establishment. They have supposed
   that its chief object and primary design were to make money, and hence
   the virulence with which it has been at times assailed. But it has been
   affirmed over and over again, and also demonstrated by an appeal to
   facts, that this never was, and is not either the primary or secondary
   object and design of the Methodist Book Concern. It was commenced, and
   is now kept in operation for the purpose of diffusing abroad sound
   knowledge, moral and religious information, and general intelligence on
   all subjects connected with the best interests of mankind, which
   involve their present and future, their temporal and eternal
   well-being. These are its objects.

   But knowing that, if judiciously managed, it might yield something over
   and above its expenses, provision was made for the application of its
   surplus revenue for the best of all objects, namely, the spread of
   Scriptural truth and holiness through the land, by means of itinerant
   preaching. The objects, therefore, to be realized by its pecuniary
   means are identical with the preaching of the gospel, and fall in with
   the grand design for which the Saviour came into our world, and that is
   to redeem mankind "from all iniquity." And its annual avails are
   sacredly applied for the promotion of this most benevolent object.

   Our ministry differs, in respect to its means and amount of support,
   from all others. We are not, however, inquiring into the comparative
   merits or demerits of each, but simply in regard to facts. While most
   others are so amply provided for that they may lay up something for old
   age, and procure an inheritance for their children, our ministers are
   allowed what is considered barely sufficient to meet the necessary
   wants of themselves and those who are dependent on them for a support,
   and hence the appropriations are made in proportion to the age and
   number in a family, and to the expensiveness of living. But in many
   places not even this much is ever realized. Hence many come to
   conference every year more or less deficient, especially those who
   labor in the exterior parts of the work. Yet allowing that they were to
   get all that is allowed them, unless the have other means of
   accumulating property, they will "have nothing over."

   Under these circumstances, it was thought to he a sacred duty which the
   Church owed to her servants, who have worn and are wearing themselves
   out in her service, to provide something for their support and comfort
   in old age, as well as to meet the annual necessities of those who are
   most emphatically preaching "the gospel to the poor." For this purpose
   a public collection, called "the conference or fifth collection," is
   made once a year in all our congregations, the amount of which is sent
   to the annual conference, and equally divided among deficient preachers
   toward making up their disciplinary allowance; and to aid in this
   benevolent work the avail of the Book Concern are added.

   We have also on our list not less than two hundred and sixty-one
   superannuated preachers, perhaps as many wives and widows, besides a
   large number of orphan children. These are some of the "treasures of
   the Church," as a certain primitive bishop said to his heathen
   persecutors, when, in answer to their demand for his church treasures,
   he brought out the poor of his flock, and replied, "These are my
   treasures;" but they are a sort of treasure which hung us in no other
   income than what is called forth by the commiseration which they excite
   in the hearts of the people. They are nevertheless a treasure of great
   worth.

   Well, to meet the wants of these superannuated preachers, their wives,
   widows, and orphan children, the avails of the Methodist Book Concern
   are appropriated, and we rejoice that it has alway yielded a little for
   so noble and philanthropic an object. Hence this is made one of the
   many grounds on which the plea is founded, and a very strong one it is,
   even resistible to those who understand and duly appreciate it, for as
   extensive a circulation as possible of the books of this establishment.
   And then as the bishops have no legal claim upon any circuit or
   station, nor even an annual conference, for any thing more than their
   bare allowance as traveling preachers; that is, one hundred dollars a
   year for each bishop and one hundred dollars for his wife, and not over
   twenty-four dollars for each child under fourteen years of age, a
   portion of the annual dividends of the Book Concern is appropriated for
   their family and traveling expenses. These then are the objects which
   are incidentally provided for by this Concern, and it is thought that
   they are such as to commend themselves to the approbation of every
   just, generous, and benevolent mind.

   I say incidentally -- for they were not the primary, nor the chief
   object for which the Concern was instituted. If they were, they would
   not be worthy of the labor and anxiety of conducting its complicated
   affairs, inasmuch as its pecuniary benefits might, if this did not
   exist, be realized with less trouble from other sources. But when we
   take into the account its immense moral, religious, and scientific
   object, to promote which was its primary design, no man need to grudge
   the labor he bestows upon it, the sacrifices he may make to build up
   and perpetuate its interests, and to make it wield as great and
   extensive a power as possible. To guard the purity of the press, to
   promulgate sound, Scriptural doctrine, to spread the most useful
   information, and to proclaim to all within the hearing of its voice,
   "the unsearchable riches of Christ," -- these were the high, and holy,
   and enlightened purposes for which this Concern was established, and
   for which we have labored, and do still labor to keep it in operation.

   Those therefore who understand its character and objects, will be
   convinced that they who work in this Concern, editors, agents,
   printers, and binders, as well as the venders of the books, are
   subserving, in the most powerful and diffusive manner, the grand
   designs of redemption. Whatever may be the motive of any subordinate or
   principal agent in its concerns, let it be remembered that it was
   created, and has been carried forward, for the sole purpose of
   enlightening mankind by the principles of truth, whether of moral,
   philosophical, historical, or divine truth, and of saving sinners from
   the error of their ways, by pointing them to the "Lamb of God who
   taketh away the sin of the world."

   But has it accomplished this work? It has. I remember at the public
   meeting held in the city of New York in its behalf, soon after the
   disastrous fire I have before noticed, a gentleman present, a member of
   the Protestant Episcopal Church, arose and remarked, in substance, "I
   have lived heretofore in the new countries; and I remember the time
   when the people who dwelt in their log cabins had no other books to
   read but such as they obtained from Methodist itinerants, who carried
   them around their circuits in their saddle-bags, and after preaching
   sold them to the people. In this humble way the poor people in the
   wilderness were supplied both with the living word from the ups of
   God's messengers, and with reading matter for their meditation by the
   fire-side when the living teacher had taken his departure. Therefore,"
   he added, with a warmth of feeling which thrilled through the whole
   assembly and brought forth a spontaneous burst of applause, "put me
   down one thousand dollars to help rebuild the Methodist Book Room."

   This was all strictly true. Wherever the Methodist preachers went; --
   and where did they not go? -- they not only carried the glad tidings of
   salvation upon their lips, but they also "published the acceptable year
   of the Lord" by means of the press, and by circulating the best of
   books in the cheapest possible form among the people, often giving them
   away, at their own personal expense, to those who were not the to pay
   for them.

   What a mighty engine is the press! What an event was that when this
   engine was first set in motion Since then, what a revolution has been
   effected in the civilized world, in religion, in civil jurisprudence,
   in philosophy, and in every department of knowledge, human and divine!
   Mr. Wesley well knew the power of this instrument. he therefore availed
   himself of it to aid him in the great work of evangelizing the world.
   He made it speak, in clear and distinct tones, "the truth, the whole
   truth, and nothing but the truth." His sons in the gospel have had
   wisdom and perseverance enough to follow in his track, aid make this
   speaking-trumpet continue its "certain sound," and it has been, not a
   "tinkling cymbal," but a high-sounding instrument of peculiar force,
   warning the unruly, instructing the ignorant, and rejoicing the hearts,
   by its thrilling accents, of tens of thousands of immortal minds.

   Others have also imitated the example. Hence publishing establishments,
   among various sects and parties, have come into existence both in
   Europe and America, which are sending out their tracts, Sunday school
   books, Bibles, and various other publications, in every direction.
   Success to them all, so far as they are guided by the "wisdom coming
   from above," and are actuated by motives of benevolence to the souls
   and bodies of men!

   But the voice of this mighty instrument is now heard in almost every
   quarter of the globe. The men that have been raised up by the lever of
   Wesleyan Methodism have "gone out into all the world, and their words,"
   which are uttered through the press, "unto the ends of the earth." On
   both sides of the Atlantic men have been raised up, and qualified to
   hold "the pen of ready writers;" and they have wielded, and are
   wielding it, with powerful effect among the different nations of the
   earth. Portions of the works of the Wesleys, and the doctrinal tracts
   and biographies of those and others of the same connection, have been
   translated into the French, Spanish, Portuguese, German, and Dutch
   languages, and even into some of the languages of the North American
   Indians, and, by means of the press, are "flying upon the wings of the
   morning to the utmost bounds of the earth." Even at our own press,
   Bibles and Testaments, of various sizes Commentaries, -- Wesley's,
   Clarke's, Benson's, Watson's, -- sermons, from a variety of authors,
   doctrinal, experimental, and practical; tracts, to the number of upward
   of three hundred, from four to sixty pages each; biographies of
   Christian ministers, and other eminent characters, male and female;
   histories; critical dissertations on a variety of subjects; various
   periodicals, loaded with the best of matter, of a miscellaneous
   character, one of which, the Christian Advocate and Journal, is read
   probably by not less than one hundred thousand [8] people; are now
   published, and sent abroad in various directions.

   Now, who can calculate the immense moral power of this press? Besides
   the influence it exerts upon the readers of its publications, it tends
   to call forth the talents of writers who are benefiting themselves
   while they are striving to instruct others, thus increasing the moral
   and intellectual ability to do good, while the good itself is diffused
   throughout the whole community. For, indeed, these publications are
   carrying light and instruction, not only throughout our own continent,
   but to Africa, to South America, to the British provinces of North
   America, to the West Indies, and are now lifting up their voice in the
   Oregon territory, on the shores of the North Pacific.

   No wonder that its enemies have tried to cripple its energies, and to
   silence its voice. They had felt its power; they therefore feared its
   effects; but, by using it judiciously, it has made known our character
   and objects, vindicated our doctrines, institutions, and usages, and
   developed our plans of operations. Hence a comparative silence has
   succeeded to the clamorous opposition which was raised against it and
   us not many years since.

   And this demonstrates more forcibly still its vast utility. It has
   spoken so plainly, conclusively, energetically, and truly, that others
   now understand us better than formerly, and we humbly trust fellowship
   us more cordially.

   It is hoped, therefore, that neither pride nor vain-glory on the one
   hand, nor fear and man-pleasing on the other, will ever lead to the
   abuse of this high and distinguished privilege, of speaking to the
   public through the press. And may it ever be guarded against all
   impurity in doctrine and morals, and he made to utter the sentiments of
   truth and love! so shall it be like a faithful sentinel, to guard the
   walls of our Zion, and to direct the wandering traveler, who has his
   "face thitherward," into the "narrow way" and the "strait gate," which
   may safely conduct him to everlasting life.

   But it is time to bring this History to a close. I have finished my
   work, at least in this department of labor. I have done what I could to
   present facts, with such comments as seemed needful to throw light upon
   them. If I have allowed some of these facts to pass without any note of
   approbation or disapprobation, the reader is not to infer that they are
   therefore either approved or disapproved, but simply that I chose to
   let every one draw his own inferences, without any predilection from
   the opinions of the historian.

   One word, by way of apology, for the general arrangement and manner of
   the History. It is said that "history is philosophy teaching by
   example." This is true. But how does philosophy teach by example? I
   apprehend, by the facts it furnishes, and not by substituting
   philosophical disquisitions for the facts of history.
   Well-authenticated facts furnish the philosopher with his data, whence
   he draws his conclusions respecting causes and effects and their mutual
   dependence, as well as the influence they exert upon human affairs. The
   principal business of the historian, therefore, is to record facts as
   he finds them, without disguise or coloring, whether he can account for
   them or not.

   This I have endeavored to do; though not, as one has thoughtlessly
   said, by suppressing inquiry, on all proper occasions, into the causes
   which originated he facts, and of the effects which they produced on
   human society, and especially on the religious world. And could I
   conscientiously have taken the reins from the imagination, and suffered
   my reason to run mad, I might have conjured up a thousand fanciful
   theories to account for the success and influence of Methodism, without
   ascribing it to its true original cause, namely, the divine agency.
   This, however, I dare not do. But in the close of the first volume, and
   in various other places, I have endeavored, and I hope not without some
   success, to show the aptitude of the means which divine wisdom saw fit
   to employ to produce the desired results, and the suitableness of the
   instruments, and their plans of operation, to the condition and
   tendencies of human society. So far, therefore, from keeping philosophy
   if you understand by that word the art of tracing effects to their
   causes, or of inferring causes from their effects, -- under abeyance, I
   have freely availed myself of its assistance in the course of my work,
   as every one must see who reads it with attention, and does not make up
   a judgment without consulting its pages.

   I might, indeed, have omitted many of the reports and other documents
   of the General Conference, and extracts from writers on other subjects,
   and have simply stated the substance of them, in my own language, in
   few words. But this would not have answered my purpose. These documents
   I considered of great importance in settling doctrines, in establishing
   principles, and in confirming usages, and, therefore, would be often
   appealed to for or against us. Some of them had been published, and
   others given in a mutilated form, and commented upon by our opponents
   greatly to our disadvantage. Others were locked up in the General
   Conference trunk, and were of use to no one except to those who had an
   opportunity to consult them in manuscript. These are now made public in
   an authenticated form, are accessible to all who desire to read them,
   and will be of convenient reference in time of need.

   I have endeavored thus to use the discretion which the General
   Conference so generously allowed me to exercise over its documents,
   according to the best of my judgment, for the edification of the
   reader, and for the good of the general cause; and if the absence of
   all complaint, on the part of those most interested, may be considered
   an evidence of satisfaction in the selections I have made, I have
   reason to infer that I have not abused my trust.

   Had these documents and extracts been omitted, my work, I confess,
   would have had more the appearance of a continued history, faithfully
   elaborated in a uniform style; but I chose, in this respect, to
   sacrifice the reputation which such a course might have secured to the
   greater utility, and, I should hope, satisfaction, of the reader,
   arising from variety in matter and style, by adopting the method I
   have.

   I have, indeed, been much encouraged, from knowing that the former
   volumes have had an extensive circulation, that many have expressed
   themselves highly gratified in their perusal, and a hope that the
   History might be continued to the present time. And, as this is in
   conformity with my original intention, though it has lengthened on my
   hands much beyond my expectations when I commenced writing, I have
   accordingly brought it down to the year 1840. Here I close it, with an
   expression of gratitude to Almighty God for the good that he hath done
   by the humble instrumentality of the Methodist ministry, and for
   permitting me to record it to the glory of his name. Amen.

   New York, March 26, 1841.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [8] Since the establishment of the other papers before mentioned, there
   has been a falling off in the number of subscribers to this paper,
   while the aggregate number of readers has increased. Allowing twelve
   thousand to the Western Christian Advocate, and three thousand to each
   of the other five weekly papers, and twenty-six thousand to the one
   issued in New York, the whole number of subscribers will be forty-three
   thousand; and, allowing four readers to each subscriber, which probably
   is the average number, it will give one hundred and seventy-two
   thousand readers of these weekly sheets. Though this may sound large,
   yet the number is not by any means in proportion to the number of
   Church members, not being more than about one fifth of the entire
   membership. Should not every Methodist family, consisting of probably
   not less than two hundred thousand, be blessed with the visits of one
   or more of these heralds of good tidings?
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Exodus

   [1]23:20-22

   Numbers

   [2]24:5

   Isaiah

   [3]64:11

   Jeremiah

   [4]8:21-22

   John

   [5]6:64

   Acts

   [6]4:27-28

   1 Peter

   [7]1:19-20

   Jude

   [8]1:4   [9]1:4

   Revelation

   [10]22:19   [11]22:19
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * biblon: [12]1
     * ginosko: [13]1
     * gramma: [14]1
     * grapho: [15]1
     * xulon: [16]1
     * oi pulai progegrammenoi: [17]1
     * opizo: [18]1
     * poiasai: [19]1 [20]2
     * pro: [21]1 [22]2
     * progegrammenoi: [23]1
     * proegnosmenou: [24]1
     * proopizo: [25]1
     * proorizo: [26]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Coacti sunt enim in hac civitate vere adversus sanctum Filium tuum
       Jesum quem unxisti, Herodes et Pontius Pilatus cum Gentibus et
       populis Israelis, Ut facerent quaecumque manus tua et consilium
       tuum prius definierat ut fierent.: [27]1
     * Facere quaecumque: [28]1
     * Olim praescripti in hoc judicium: [29]1
     * facerent: [30]1
     * in hoc civitate: [31]1
     * prius jam olim descripti ad hanc damnationem: [32]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * Car en effet Herode et Ponce Pilate, avec les Gentils et le peuple
       d'Israel, se sont assembles contre ton saint Fils Jesus, que tu as
       oint, Pour faire toutes les choses que ta main et ton conseil
       avoient auparavant determine' devoir etre faites.: [33]1
     * Dont la condemnation est escrite depuis longtems: [34]1
     * pour faire: [35]1
     * ton saint Fils Jesus: [36]1
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=20#i-p9.2
   2. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=24&scrV=5#i-p8.1
   3. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=11#ii.ii.vii-p38.1
   4. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=21#ii.ii.iii-p215.1
   5. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=64#ii.ii.i-p46.2
   6. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=27#ii.ii.i-p48.2
   7. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#ii.ii.i-p54.2
   8. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=4#ii.ii.i-p50.2
   9. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=4#ii.ii.i-p74.2
  10. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=19#ii.ii.i-p52.2
  11. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=19#ii.ii.i-p84.1
  12. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p84.3
  13. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p85.2
  14. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p78.5
  15. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p78.4
  16. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p84.2
  17. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p78.1
  18. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p78.8
  19. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p65.2
  20. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p69.2
  21. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p78.3
  22. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p78.7
  23. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p78.2
  24. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p85.1
  25. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p78.6
  26. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p86.1
  27. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p69.1
  28. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p66.1
  29. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p81.1
  30. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p67.1
  31. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p68.1
  32. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p82.1
  33. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p65.1
  34. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p80.1
  35. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p65.3
  36. file:///ccel/b/bangs/history4/cache/history4.html3#ii.ii.i-p65.4
