     __________________________________________________________________

        Title: The Kneeling Christian
   Creator(s): Unknown Christian
CCEL Subjects: All; Classic;
   LC Call no: BV210.2
  LC Subjects:

               Practical theology

               Worship (Public and Private) Including the church year, Christian
               symbols, liturgy, prayer, hymnology

               Prayer
     __________________________________________________________________

                             THE KNEELING CHRISTIAN

                            By AN UNKNOWN CHRISTIAN
     __________________________________________________________________

                                AUTHOR'S PREFACE

   A traveller in China visited a heathen temple on a great feast-day.
   Many were the worshippers of the hideous idol enclosed in a sacred
   shrine. The visitor noticed that most of the devotees brought with them
   small pieces of paper on which prayers had been written or printed.
   These they would wrap up in little balls of stiff mud and fling at the
   idol. He enquired the reason for this strange proceeding, and was told
   that if the mud ball stuck fast to the idol, then the prayer would
   assuredly be answered; but if the mud fell off, the prayer was rejected
   by the god.

   We may smile at this peculiar way of testing the acceptability of a
   prayer. But is it not a fact that the majority of Christian men and
   women who pray to a Living God know very little about real prevailing
   prayer? Yet prayer is the key which unlocks the door of God's
   treasure-house.

   It is not too much to say that all real growth in the spiritual life--
   all victory over temptation, all confidence and peace in the presence
   of difficulties and dangers, all repose of spirit in times of great
   disappointment or loss, all habitual communion with God-- depend upon
   the practice of secret prayer.

   This book was written by request, and with much hesitancy. It goes
   forth with much prayer. May He Who said, "Men ought always to pray, and
   not to faint," "teach us to pray."
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    CONTENTS

   1. GOD'S GREAT NEED

   2. ALMOST INCREDIBLE PROMISES

   3. "ASK OF ME AND I WILL GIVE"

   4. ASKING FOR SIGNS

   5. WHAT IS PRAYER?

   6. HOW SHALL I PRAY?

   7. MUST I AGONIZE?

   8. DOES GOD ALWAYS ANSWER PRAYER?

   9. ANSWERS TO PRAYER

   10. HOW GOD ANSWERS PRAYER

   11. HINDRANCES TO PRAYER

   12. WHO MAY PRAY?
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 1: GOD'S GREAT NEED

   "GOD Wondered." This is a very striking thought! The very boldness of
   the idea ought surely to arrest the attention of every earnest
   Christian man, woman and child. A wondering God! Why, how staggered we
   might well be if we knew the cause of God's "wonder"! Yet we find it to
   be, apparently, a very little thing. But if we are willing to consider
   the matter carefully, we shall discover it to be one of the greatest
   possible importance to every believer on the Lord Jesus Christ. Nothing
   else is so momentous--so vital--to our spiritual welfare.

   God "wondered that there was no intercessor" (Isa. lix. 16)--"none to
   interpose" (R.V., marg.). But this was in the days of long ago, before
   the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ "full of grace and truth"--before
   the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, full of grace and power, "helping
   our infirmity," "Himself making intercession for us" and in us (Rom.
   viii. 26). Yes, and before the truly amazing promises of our Savior
   regarding prayer; before men knew very much about prayer; in the days
   when sacrifices for their sins loomed larger in their eyes than
   supplication for other sinners.

   Oh, how great must be God's wonder today! For how few there are among
   us who know what prevailing prayer really is! Every one of us would
   confess that we believe in prayer, yet how many of us truly believe in
   the power of, prayer? Now, before we go a step farther, may the writer
   most earnestly implore you not to read hurriedly what is contained in
   these chapters. Much--very much--depends upon the way in which every
   reader receives what is here recorded. For everything depends upon
   prayer.

   Why are many Christians so often defeated? Because they pray so little.
   Why are many church-workers so often discouraged and disheartened?
   Because they pray so little.

   Why do most men see so few brought "out of darkness to light" by their
   ministry? Because they pray so little.

   Why are not our churches simply on fire for God? Because there is so
   little real prayer.

   The Lord Jesus is as powerful today as ever before. The Lord Jesus is
   as anxious for men to be saved as ever before. His arm is not shortened
   that it cannot save: but He cannot stretch forth His arm unless we pray
   more--and more really.

   We may be assured of this--the secret of all failure is our failure in
   secret prayer.

   If God "wondered" in the days of Isaiah, we need not be surprised to
   find that in the days of His flesh our Lord "marvelled." He marvelled
   at the unbelief of some--unbelief which actually prevented Him from
   doing any mighty work in their cities (Mark vi. 6).

   But we must remember that those who were guilty of this unbelief saw no
   beauty in Him that they should desire Him, or believe on Him. What then
   must His "marvel" be today, when He sees amongst us who do truly love
   and adore Him, so few who really "stir themselves up to take hold of
   God" (Isa. lxiv. 7). Surely there is nothing so absolutely astonishing
   as a practically prayerless Christian? These are eventful and ominous
   days. In fact, there are many evidences that these are "the last days"
   in which God promised to pour out His Spirit--the Spirit of
   supplication--upon all flesh (Joel ii. 28). Yet the vast majority of
   professing Christians scarcely know what "supplication" means; and very
   many of our churches not only have no prayer-meeting, but sometimes
   unblushingly condemn such meetings, and even ridicule them.

   The Church of England, recognizing the importance of worship and
   prayer, expects her clergy to read prayers in Church every morning and
   evening.

   But when this is done, is it not often in an empty church? And are not
   the prayers frequently raced through at a pace which precludes real
   worship? "Common prayer," too, often must necessarily be rather vague
   and indefinite.

   And what of those churches where the old-fashioned weekly
   prayer-meeting is retained? Would not "weakly" be the more appropriate
   word? C. H. Spurgeon had the joy of being able to say that he conducted
   a prayer-meeting every Monday night "which scarcely ever numbers less
   than from a thousand to twelve hundred attendants."

   My brothers, have we ceased to believe in prayer? If you still hold
   your weekly gathering for prayer, is it not a fact that the very great
   majority of your church members never come near it? Yes, and never even
   think of coming near it. Why is this? Whose fault is it?

   "Only a prayer-meeting"--how often we have heard the utterance! How
   many of those reading these words really enjoy a prayer-meeting? Is it
   a joy or just a duty? Please forgive me for asking so many questions
   and for pointing out what appears to be a perilous weakness and a
   lamentable shortcoming in our churches. We are not out to
   criticize--far less to condemn. Anybody can do that. Our yearning
   desire is to stir up Christians "to take hold of" God, as never before.
   We wish to encourage, to enhearten, to uplift.

   We are never so high as when we are on our knees.

   Criticize? Who dare criticize another? When we look back upon the past
   and remember how much prayerlessness there has been in one's own life,
   words of criticism of others wither away on the lips.

   But we believe the time has come when a clarion call to the individual
   and to the Church is needed--a call to prayer.

   Now, dare we face this question of prayer? It seems a foolish query,
   for is not prayer a part and parcel of all religions? Yet we venture to
   ask our readers to look at this matter fairly and squarely. Do I really
   believe that prayer is a power? Is prayer the greatest power on earth,
   or is it not? Does prayer indeed "move the Hand that moves the world"?

   Do God's prayer-commands really concern Me? Do the promises of God
   concerning prayer still hold good? We have all been muttering
   "Yes--Yes--Yes" as we read these questions. We dare not say "No" to any
   one of them. And yet--!

   Has it ever occurred to you that our Lord never gave an unnecessary or
   an optional command? Do we really believe that our Lord never made a
   promise which He could not, or would not, fulfil? Our Savior's three
   great commands for definite action were:--

     Pray ye

     Do this

     Go ye!

   Are we obeying Him? How often His command, "Do this," is reiterated by
   our preachers today! One might almost think it was His only command!
   How seldom we are reminded of His bidding to "Pray" and to "Go." Yet,
   without obedience to the "Pray ye," it is of little or no use at all
   either to "Do this" or to "Go."

   In fact, it can easily be shown that all want of success, and all
   failure in the spiritual life and in Christian work, is due to
   defective or insufficient prayer. Unless we pray aright we cannot live
   aright or serve aright. This may appear, at first sight, to be gross
   exaggeration, but the more we think it over in the light Scripture
   throws upon it, the more convinced shall we be of the truth of this
   statement.

   Now, as we begin once more to see what the Bible has to say about this
   mysterious and wonderful subject, shall we endeavor to read some of our
   Lord's promises, as though we had never heard them before. What will
   the effect be?

   Some twenty years ago the writer was studying in a Theological College.
   One morning, early, a fellow-student--who is today one of England's
   foremost missionaries--burst into the room holding an open Bible in his
   hands. Although he was preparing for Holy Orders, he was at that time
   only a young convert to Christ.

   He had gone up to the University "caring for none of these things."
   Popular, clever, athletic--he had already won a place amongst the smart
   set of his college, when Christ claimed him. He accepted the Lord Jesus
   as a personal Savior, and became a very keen follower of his Master.
   The Bible was, comparatively, a new book to him, and as a result he was
   constantly making "discoveries." On that memorable day on which he
   invaded my quietude he cried excitedly--his face all aglow with mingled
   joy and surprise--"Do you believe this? Is it really true?" "Believe
   what?" I asked, glancing at the open Bible with some astonishment.
   "Why, this--" and he read in eager tones St. Matthew xxi. 21, 22: "If
   ye have faith and doubt not . . . all things whatsoever ye shall ask in
   prayer, believing, ye shall receive.' Do you believe it? Is it true?"
   "Yes," I replied, with much surprise at his excitement, "of course it's
   true--of course I believe it."

   Yet, through my mind there flashed all manner of thoughts! "Well,
   that's a very wonderful promise," said he. "It seems to me to be
   absolutely limitless! Why don't we pray more?" And he went away,
   leaving me thinking hard. I had never looked at those verses quite in
   that way. As the door closed upon that eager young follower of the
   Master, I had a vision of my Savior and His love and His power such as
   I never had before. I had a vision of a life of prayer--yes, and
   "limitless" power, which I saw depended upon two things only--faith and
   prayer. For the moment I was thrilled. I fell on my knees, and as I
   bowed before my Lord what thoughts surged through my mind--what hopes
   and aspirations flooded my soul! God was speaking to me in an
   extraordinary way. This was a great call to prayer. But--to my shame be
   it said--I heeded not that call.

   Where did I fail? True, I prayed a little more than before, but nothing
   much seemed to happen. Why? Was it because I did not see what a high
   standard the Savior requires in the inner life of those who would pray
   successfully?

   Was it because I had failed to measure up my life to the "perfect love"
   standard so beautifully described in the thirteenth chapter of the
   first Epistle to the Corinthians?

   For, after all, prayer is not just putting into action good resolutions
   "to pray." Like David, we need to cry, "Create in me a clean heart, O
   God" (Psa. li. 10) before we can pray aright. And the inspired words of
   the Apostle of Love need to be heeded today as much as ever before:
   "Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness toward God; and
   [then] whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him" (I John iii. 21).

   "True--and I believe it." Yes, indeed, it is a limitless promise, and
   yet how little we realize it, how little we claim from Christ. And our
   Lord "marvels" at our unbelief. But if we could only read the Gospels
   for the first time, what an amazing book it would seem! Should not we
   "marvel" and "wonder"? And today I pass on that great call to you. Will
   you give heed to it? Will you profit by it? Or shall it fall on deaf
   ears and leave you prayerless?

   Fellow-Christians, let us awake! The devil is blinding our eyes. He is
   endeavoring to prevent us from facing this question of prayer. These
   pages are written by special request. But it is many months since that
   request came.

   Every attempt to begin to write has been frustrated, and even now one
   is conscious of a strange reluctance to do so. There seems to be some
   mysterious power restraining the hand. Do we realize that there is
   nothing the devil dreads so much as prayer? His great concern is to
   keep us from praying. He loves to see us "up to our eyes" in
   work--provided we do not pray. He does not fear because we are eager
   and earnest Bible students--provided we are little in prayer. Someone
   has wisely said, "Satan laughs at our toiling, mocks at our wisdom, but
   trembles when we pray." All this is so familiar to us--but do we really
   pray? If not, then failure must dog our footsteps, whatever signs of
   apparent success there may be.

   Let us never forget that the greatest thing we can do for God or for
   man is to pray. For we can accomplish far more by our prayers than by
   our work. Prayer is omnipotent; it can do anything that God can do!
   When we pray God works. All fruitfulness in service is the outcome of
   prayer--of the worker's prayers, or of those who are holding up holy
   hands on his behalf. We all know how to pray, but perhaps many of us
   need to cry as the disciples did of old, "Lord, teach us to pray."


   O Lord, by Whom ye come to God,

   The Life, the Truth, the Way,

   The path of prayer Thyself hast trod;

   Lord, teach us now to pray.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 2: ALMOST INCREDIBLE PROMISES

   "WHEN we stand with Christ in glory, looking o'er life's finished
   story," the most amazing feature of that life as it is looked back upon
   will be its prayerlessness.

   We shall be almost beside ourselves with astonishment that we spent so
   little time in real intercession. It will be our turn to "wonder."

   In our Lord's last discourse to His loved ones, just before the most
   wonderful of all prayers, the Master again and again held out His
   kingly golden sceptre and said, as it were, "What is your request? It
   shall be granted unto you, even unto the whole of My kingdom!"

   Do we believe this? We must do so if we believe our Bibles. Shall we
   just read over very quietly and thoughtfully one of our Lord's
   promises, reiterated so many times? If we had never read them before,
   we should open our eyes in bewilderment, for these promises are almost
   incredible. From the lips of any mere man they would be quite
   unbelievable. But it is the Lord of heaven and earth Who speaks; and He
   is speaking at the most solemn moment of His life. It is the eve of His
   death and passion. It is a farewell message. Now listen!

   "Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believeth on Me, the works that
   I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do:
   because I go unto the Father. And whatsoever ye shall ask in My name,
   that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye
   shall ask anything in My name, that will I do" (John xiv. 13, 14). Now,
   could any words be plainer or clearer than these? Could any promise be
   greater or grander? Has anyone else, anywhere, at any time, ever
   offered so much?

   How staggered those disciples must have been! Surely they could
   scarcely believe their own ears. But that promise is made also to you
   and to me.

   And, lest there should be any mistake on their part, or on ours, our
   Lord repeats Himself a few moments afterwards. Yes, and the Holy Spirit
   bids St. John record those words again. "If ye abide in Me, and My
   words abide in you, ask whatsoever ye will, and it shall be done unto
   you. Herein is My Father glorified, that ye bare much fruit; and so
   shall ye be My disciples" (John xv. 7, 8).

   These words are of such grave importance, and so momentous, that the
   Savior of the world is not content even with a threefold utterance of
   them. He urges His disciples to obey His command "to ask." In fact, He
   tells them that one sign of their being His "friends" will be the
   obedience to His commands in all things (verse 14). Then He once more
   repeats His wishes: "Ye did not choose Me, but I chose you, and
   appointed you, that ye should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit
   should abide: that whatsoever ye shall ask the Father, in My name, He
   may give it you" (John xv. 16).

   One would think that our Lord had now made it plain enough that He
   wanted them to pray; that He needed their prayers, and that without
   prayer they could accomplish nothing. But to our intense surprise He
   returns again to the same subject, saying very much the same words.

   "In that day ye shall ask Me nothing"--i.e., "ask Me no question"
   (R.V., marg.)--"Verily, verily I say unto you, if ye ask anything of
   the Father, He will give it you in My name. Hitherto have ye asked
   nothing in My name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be
   fulfilled" (John xvi. 23, 24).

   Never before had our Lord laid such stress on any promise or
   command--never! This truly marvelous promise is given us six times
   over. Six times, almost in the same breath, our Savior commands us to
   ask whatsoever we will. This is the greatest--the most
   wonderful--promise ever made to man. Yet most men--Christian
   men--practically ignore it! Is it not so?

   The exceeding greatness of the promise seems to over-whelm us. Yet we
   know that He is "able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask
   or think" (Eph. iii. 20).

   So our blessed Master gives the final exhortation, before He is seized,
   and bound, and scourged, before His gracious lips are silenced on the
   cross, "Ye shall ask in My name . . . for the Father Himself loveth
   you" (John xvi. 26-27). We have often spent much time in reflecting
   upon our Lord's seven words from the cross. And it is well we should do
   so. Have we ever spent one hour in meditating upon this, our Savior's
   sevenfold invitation to pray?

   Today He sits on the throne of His Majesty on high, and He holds out to
   us the sceptre of His power. Shall we touch it and tell Him our
   desires? He bids us take of His treasures. He yearns to grant us
   "according to the riches of His glory," that we may "be strengthened
   with power through His Spirit in the inner man." He tells us that our
   strength and our fruitfulness depend upon our prayers. He reminds us
   that our very joy depends upon answered prayer (John xvi. 24).

   And yet we allow the devil to persuade us to neglect prayer! He makes
   us believe that we can do more by our own efforts than by our
   prayers--by our intercourse with men than by our intercession with God.
   It passes one's comprehension that so little heed should be given to
   our Lord's sevenfold invitation--command--promise! How dare we work for
   Christ without being much on our knees? Quite recently an earnest
   Christian "worker"--a Sunday-school teacher and communicant--wrote me,
   saying, "I have never had an answer to prayer in all my life." But why?
   Is God a liar? Is not God trustworthy? Do His promises count for
   nought. Does He not mean what He says? And doubtless there are many
   reading these words who in their hearts are saying the same thing as
   that Christian worker. Payson is right--is Scriptural--when he says:
   "If we would do much for God, we must ask much of God: we must be men
   of prayer." If our prayers are not answered--always answered, but not
   necessarily granted--the fault must be entirely in ourselves, and not
   in God. God delights to answer prayer; and He has given us His word
   that He will answer.

   Fellow-laborers in His vineyard, it is quite evident that our Master
   desires us to ask, and to ask much. He tells us we glorify God by doing
   so! Nothing is beyond the scope of prayer which is not beyond the will
   of God--and we do not desire to go beyond His will.

   We dare not say that our Lord's words are not true. Yet somehow or
   other few Christians really seem to believe them. What holds us back?
   What seals our lips? What keeps us from making much of prayer? Do we
   doubt His love? Never! He gave His life for us and to us. Do we doubt
   the Father's love? Nay. "The Father Himself loveth you," said Christ
   when urging His disciples to pray.

   Do we doubt His power? Not for a moment. Hath He not said, "All power
   hath been given unto Me in heaven and on earth. Go ye . . . and lo, I
   am with you alway . . ."? (Matt. xxviii. 18-20). Do we doubt His
   wisdom? Do we mistrust His choice for us? Not for a moment. And yet so
   very few of His followers consider prayer really worth while. Of
   course, they would deny this--but actions speak louder than words. Are
   we afraid to put God to the test? He has said we may do so. "Bring Me
   the whole tithe into the storehouse . . . and prove Me now herewith,
   saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven,
   and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to
   receive it" (Mal. iii. 10). Whenever God makes us a promise, let us
   boldly say, as did St. Paul, I believe God (Acts xxvii. 25), and trust
   Him to keep His word.

   Shall we begin today to be men of prayer, if we have never done so
   before? Let us not put it off till a more convenient season. God wants
   me to pray. The dear Savior wants me to pray. He needs my prayers. So
   much--in fact, everything--depends upon prayer. How dare we hold back?
   Let every one of us ask on our knees this question: "If no one on earth
   prayed for the salvation of sinners more fervently or more frequently
   than I do, how many of them would be converted to God through prayer?"

   Do we spend ten minutes a day in prayer? Do we consider it important
   enough for that?

   Ten minutes a day on our knees in prayer--when the Kingdom of Heaven
   can be had for the asking!

   Ten minutes? It seems a very inadequate portion of our time to spend in
   taking hold of God (Isa. lxiv. 7)!

   And is it prayer when we do "say" our prayers, or are we just repeating
   daily a few phrases which have become practically meaningless, whilst
   our thoughts are wandering hither and thither?

   If God were to answer the words we repeated on our knees this morning
   should we know it? Should we recognize the answer? Do we even remember
   what we asked for? He does answer. He has given us His word for it. He
   always answers every real prayer of faith.

   But we shall see what the Bible has to say on this point in a later
   chapter. We are now thinking of the amount of time we spend in prayer.

   "How often do you pray?" was the question put to a Christian woman.
   "Three times a day, and all the day beside," was the quick reply. But
   how many are there like that? Is prayer to me just a duty, or is it a
   privilege--a pleasure--a real joy--a necessity?

   Let us get a fresh vision of Christ in all His glory, and a fresh
   glimpse of all the "riches of His glory" which He places at our
   disposal, and of all the mighty power given unto Him. Then let us get a
   fresh vision of the world and all its needs. (And the world was never
   so needy as it is today.)

   Why, the wonder is not that we pray so little, but that we can ever get
   up from our knees if we realize our own need; the needs of our home and
   our loved ones; the needs of our pastor and the Church; the needs of
   our city--of our country--of the heathen and Mohammedan world! All
   these needs, can be met by the riches of God in Christ Jesus. St. Paul
   had no doubt about this--nor have we. Yes! "My God shall supply all
   your need according to His riches in glory, in Christ Jesus" (Phil. iv.
   19). But to share His riches we must pray, for the same Lord is rich
   unto all that call upon Him (Rom. x. 12).

   So great is the importance of prayer that God has taken care to
   anticipate all the excuses or objections we may be likely to make.

   Men plead their weakness or infirmity--or they declare they do not know
   how to pray.

   God foresaw this inability long ages ago. Did He not inspire St. Paul
   to say: "The Spirit also helpeth our infirmity, for we know not how to
   pray as we ought; but the Spirit Himself maketh intercession for us
   with groanings which cannot be uttered; and He that searcheth the
   hearts knoweth what is in the mind of the Spirit, because He maketh
   intercession for the saints according to the will of God" (Rom. viii.
   26, 27).

   Yes. Every provision is made for us. But only the Holy Spirit can "stir
   us up" to "take hold of God." And if we will but yield ourselves to the
   Spirit's promptings we shall most assuredly follow the example of the
   apostles of old, who "gave themselves to prayer," and "continued
   steadfastly in prayer" (R.V., Acts vi. 4).

   We may rest fully assured of this--a man's influence in the world can
   be gauged not by his eloquence, or his zeal, or his orthodox, or his
   energy, but by his prayers. Yes, and we will go farther and maintain
   that no man can live aright who does not pray aright.

   We may work for Christ from morn till night; we may spend much time in
   Bible study; we may be most earnest and faithful and "acceptable" in
   our preaching and in our individual dealing, but none of these things
   can be truly effective unless we are much in prayer. We shall only be
   full of good works; and not "bearing fruit in every good work" (Col. i.
   10). To be little with God in prayer is to be little for God in
   service. Much secret prayer means much public power. Yet is it not a
   fact that whilst our organizing is well nigh perfect, our agonizing in
   prayer is well nigh lost?

   Men are wondering why the Revival delays its coming. There is only one
   thing that can delay it, and that is lack of prayer. All Revivals have
   been the outcome of prayer. One sometimes longs for the voice of an
   archangel, but what would that avail if the voice of Christ Himself
   does not stir us up to pray? It seems almost impertinence for any man
   to take up the cry when our Savior has put forth His "limitless"
   promises. Yet we feel that something should be done, and we believe
   that the Holy Spirit is prompting men to remind themselves and others
   of Christ's words and power. No words of mine can impress men with the
   value of prayer, the need of prayer, and the omnipotence of prayer.

   But these utterances go forth steeped in prayer that God the Holy
   Spirit will Himself convict Christian men and women of the sin of
   prayerlessness, and drive them to their knees, to call upon God day and
   night in burning, believing, prevailing intercession! The Lord Jesus,
   now in the heavenlies, beckons to us to fall upon our knees and claim
   the riches of His grace.

   No man dare prescribe for another how long a time he ought to spend in
   prayer, nor do we suggest that men should make a vow to pray so many
   minutes or hours a day. Of course, the Bible command is to "Pray
   without ceasing." This is evidently the "attitude of prayer"--the
   attitude of one's life.

   Here we are speaking of definite acts of prayer. Have you ever timed
   your prayers? We believe that most of our readers would be amazed and
   confounded if they did time themselves!

   Some years ago the writer faced this prayer question. He felt that for
   himself at least one hour a day was the minimum time that he should
   spend in prayer. He carefully noted down every day a record of his
   prayer-life. As time went on he met a working-man who was being much
   used of God.

   When asked to what he chiefly attributed his success, this man quietly
   replied, "Well, I could not get on without two hours a day of private
   prayer."

   Then there came across my path a Spirit-filled missionary from
   overseas, who told very humbly of the wonderful things God was doing
   through his ministry. (One could see all along that God was given all
   the praise and all the glory.) "I find it necessary, oftentimes, to
   spend four hours a day in prayer," said this missionary.

   And we remember how the Greatest Missionary of all used sometimes to
   spend whole nights in prayer. Why? Our blessed Lord did not pray simply
   as an example to us: He never did things merely as an example. He
   prayed because He needed to pray. As perfect Man, prayer to Him was a
   necessity. Then how much more is it necessary to you and me?

   "Four hours a day in prayer!" exclaimed a man who is giving his whole
   life to Christian work as a medical missionary. "Four hours? Give me
   ten minutes and I'm done!" That was an honest and a brave
   confession--even if a sad one. Yet, if some of us were to speak out as
   honestly--?

   Now, it was not by accident that these men crossed my path. God was
   speaking through them. It was just another "call to prayer" from the
   "God of patience," who is also a "God of comfort" (Rom. xv. 5). and
   when their quiet message had sunk into my soul a book came into my
   hands, "by chance," as people say. It told briefly and simply the story
   of John Hyde--"Praying Hyde," as he came to be called. Just as God sent
   St. John the Baptist to prepare the way of our Lord at His first
   coming, so He sent in these last days St. John the Pray-er, to make
   straight paths for His coming again. "Praying Hyde"--what a name! As
   one read of this marvelous life of prayer, one began to ask, "Have I
   ever prayed?"

   I found others were asking the same question. One lady, who is noted
   for her wonderful intercession, wrote me, saying, "When I laid down
   this book, I began to think I had never in all my life really prayed!"

   But here we must leave the matter. Shall we get on our knees before God
   and allow His Holy Spirit to search us through and through? Are we
   sincere? Do we really desire to do God's will? Do we really believe His
   promises? If so, will it not lead us to spend more time on our knees
   before God? Do not vow to pray "so much" a day. Resolve to pray much,
   but prayer, to be of value, must be spontaneous, and not from
   constraint.

   But we must bear in mind that mere resolutions to take more time for
   prayer, and to conquer reluctance to pray, will not prove lastingly
   effective unless there is a wholehearted and absolute surrender to the
   Lord Jesus Christ. If we have never taken this step, we must take it
   now if we desire to be men of prayer.

   I am quite certain of this fact: God wants me to pray: wants you to
   pray. The question is, are we willing to pray?

   Gracious Savior, pour out upon us the fullness of the Holy Spirit, that
   we may indeed become Kneeling Christians.


   To God your every want

   In instant prayer display.

   Pray always; pray and never faint:

   Pray! Without ceasing, pray.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 3: "ASK OF ME AND I WILL GIVE"

   GOD wants me to pray, to be much in prayer--because all success in
   spiritual work is dependent on prayer.

   A preacher who prays little may see some results of his labors, but if
   he does it will be because someone, somewhere is praying for him. The
   "fruit" is the pray-er's--not the preacher's. How surprised some of us
   preachers will be one day, when the Lord shall "reward every man
   according to his works." "Lord! Those were my converts! It was I who
   conducted that mission at which so many were brought into the fold."
   Ah, yes--I did the preaching, the pleading, the persuading; but was it
   "I" who did the praying?

   Every convert is the result of the Holy Spirit's pleading in answer to
   the prayers of some believer.

   O God, grant that such surprise may not be ours. O Lord, teach us to
   pray!

   We have had a vision of a God pleadingly calling for prayer from His
   children. How am I treating that call? Can I say, with St. Paul, "I am
   not disobedient to the heavenly vision'"? Again we repeat, if there are
   any regrets in heaven, the greatest will be that we spent so little
   time in real intercession whilst we were on earth.

   Think of the wide sweep of prayer! "Ask of Me, and I will give thee the
   heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
   thy possession" (Psalm ii. 8). Yet many people do not trouble to bring
   even the little details of their own lives to God in prayer, and nine
   out of ten Christian people never think of praying for the heathen!

   One is staggered at the unwillingness of Christians to pray. Perhaps it
   is because they have never experienced, or even heard of, convincing
   answers to prayer.

   In this chapter we are setting out to do the "impossible." What is
   that? We long to bring home to the heart and conscience of every reader
   the power of prayer. We venture to describe this as "impossible." For
   if men will not believe, and act upon, our Lord's promises and
   commands, how can we expect them to be persuaded by any mere human
   exhortations?

   But do you remember that our Lord, when speaking to His disciples,
   asked them to believe that He was in the Father and the Father in Him?
   Then he added: "If you cannot believe My bare word about this, believe
   Me for the very works' sake" (John xiv. 11). It was as if He said, "If
   My Person, My sanctified life, and My wonderful words do not elicit
   belief in Me, then look at My works: surely they are sufficient to
   compel belief? Believe Me because of what I do."

   Then He went on to promise that if they would believe, they should do
   greater works than these. It was after this utterance that He gave the
   first of those six wonderful promises in regard to prayer. The
   inference surely is that those "greater works" are to be done only as
   the outcome of prayer.

   May the disciple therefore follow the Master's method? Fellow-worker,
   if you fail to grasp, fail to trust our Lord's astounding promises
   regarding prayer, will you not believe them "for the very works' sake"?
   That is, because of those "greater works" which men and women are
   performing today--or, rather, the works which the Lord Jesus is doing,
   through their prayerful co-operation?

   What are we "out for"? What is our real aim in life? Surely we desire
   most of all to be abundantly fruitful in the Master's service. We seek
   not position, or prominence, or power. But we do long to be fruitful
   servants. Then we must be much in prayer. God can do more through our
   prayers than through our preaching. A. J. Gordon once said, "You can do
   more than pray, after you have prayed, but you can never do more than
   pray until you have prayed." If only we would believe this!

   A lady in India was cast down through the failure of her life and work.
   She was a devoted missionary, but somehow or other conversions never
   resulted from her ministry.

   The Holy Spirit seemed to say to her, "Pray more." But she resisted the
   promptings of the Spirit for some time. "At length," said she, "I set
   apart much of my time for prayer. I did it in fear and trembling lest
   my fellow-workers should complain that I was shirking my work. After a
   few weeks I began to see men and women accepting Christ as their
   Savior. Moreover, the whole district was soon awakened, and the work of
   all the other missionaries was blessed as never before. God did more in
   six months than I had succeeded in doing in six years. And," she added,
   "no one ever accused me of shirking my duty." Another lady missionary
   in India felt the same call to pray. She began to give much time to
   prayer. No opposition came from without, but it did come from within.
   But she persisted, and in two years the baptized converts increased
   sixfold!

   God promised that He would "pour out the Spirit of grace and
   supplication upon all flesh" (Joel ii. 28). How much of that Spirit of
   "supplication" is ours? Surely we must get that Spirit at all costs?
   Yet if we are not willing to spend time in "supplication," God must
   perforce withhold His Spirit, and we become numbered amongst those who
   are "resisting the Spirit," and possibly "quenching" the Spirit. Has
   not our Lord promised the Holy Spirit to them that ask? (Luke xi. 13).

   Are not the very converts from heathendom putting some of us to shame?

   A few years ago, when in India, I had the great joy of seeing something
   of Pandita Ramabai's work. She had a boarding-school of 1,500 Hindu
   girls. One day some of these girls came with their Bibles and asked a
   lady missionary what St. Luke xii. 49 meant--"I came to cast fire upon
   the earth; and what will I, if it is already kindled?" The missionary
   tried to put them off with an evasive answer, not being very sure
   herself what those words meant. But they were not satisfied, so they
   determined to pray for this fire. And as they prayed--and because they
   prayed--the very fire of heaven came into their souls. A very Pentecost
   from above was granted them. No wonder they continued to pray!

   A party of these girls upon whom God had poured the "Spirit of
   supplication" came to a mission house where I spent some weeks. "May we
   stay here in your town and pray for your work?" they asked. The
   missionary did not entertain the idea with any great enthusiasm. He
   felt that they ought to be at school, and not "gadding about" the
   country. But they only asked for a hall or barn where they could pray;
   and we all value prayers on our behalf. So their request was granted,
   and the good man sat down to his evening meal, thinking. As the evening
   wore on, a native pastor came round. He broke down completely. He
   explained, with tears running down his face, that God's Holy Spirit had
   convicted him of sin, and that he felt compelled to come and openly
   confess his wrongdoing. He was quickly followed by one Christian after
   another, all under deep conviction of sin.

   There was a remarkable time of blessing. Back-sliders were restored,
   believers were sanctified, and heathen brought into the fold--all
   because a few mere children were praying.

   God is no respecter of persons. If anyone is willing to conform to His
   conditions, He for His part will assuredly fulfill His promises. Does
   not our heart burn within us, as we hear of God's wonderful power? And
   that power is ours for the asking. I know there are "conditions." But
   you and I can fulfill them all through Christ. And those of us who
   cannot have the privilege of serving God in India or any other overseas
   mission, may yet take our part in bringing down a like blessing. When
   the Revival in Wales was at its height, a Welsh missionary wrote home
   begging the people to pray that India might be moved in like manner. So
   the coal-miners met daily at the pit-mouth half an hour before dawn to
   pray for their comrade overseas. In a few weeks' time the welcome
   message was sent home: "The blessing has come."

   Isn't it just splendid to know that by our prayers we can bring down
   showers of blessing upon India, or Africa, or China, just as readily as
   we can get the few drops needed for our own little plot?

   Many of us will recall the wonderful things which God did for Korea a
   few years ago, entirely in answer to prayer. A few missionaries decided
   to meet together to pray daily at noon. At the end of the month one
   brother proposed that, "as nothing had happened," the prayer-meeting
   should be discontinued. "Let us each pray at home as we find it
   convenient," said he. The others, however, protested that they ought
   rather to spend even more time in prayer each day. So they continued
   the daily prayer-meeting for four months. Then suddenly the blessing
   began to be poured out. Church services here and there were broken up
   by weeping and confessing of sins. At length a mighty revival broke
   out. At one place during a Sunday evening service the leading man in
   the church stood up and confessed that he had stolen one hundred
   dollars in administering a widow's legacy. Immediately conviction of
   sin swept the audience. That service did not end till 2 o'clock on
   Monday morning. God's wondrous power was felt as never before. And when
   the Church was purified, many sinners found salvation.

   Multitudes flocked to the churches out of curiosity. Some came to mock,
   but fear laid hold of them, and they stayed to pray. Amongst the
   "curious" was a brigand chief, the leader of a robber band. He was
   convicted and converted. He went straight off to the magistrate and
   gave himself up. "You have no accuser," said the astonished official,
   "yet you accuse yourself! We have no law in Korea to meet your case."
   So he dismissed him.

   One of the missionaries declared, "It paid well to have spent several
   months in prayer, for when God gave the Holy Spirit, He accomplished
   more in half a day than all the missionaries together could have
   accomplished in half a year." In less than two months, more than 2,000
   heathen were converted. The burning zeal of those converts has become a
   byword. Some of them gave all they had to build a church, and wept
   because they could not give more. Needless to say, they realized the
   power of prayer. Those converts were themselves baptized with the
   "Spirit of supplication." In one church it was announced that a daily
   prayer-meeting would be held at 4:30 every morning. The very first day
   400 people arrived long before the stated hour--eager to pray! The
   number rapidly increased to 600 as days went on. At Seoul, 1,100 is the
   average attendance at the weekly prayer-meeting.

   Heathen people came--to see what was happening. They exclaimed in
   astonishment, "The living God is among you." Those poor heathen saw
   what many Christians fail to see. Did not Christ say, "Where two or
   three are gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of
   them"? (Matt. xviii. 20). What is possible in Korea is possible here.
   God is "no respecter" of nations. He is longing to bless us, longing to
   pour His Spirit upon us.

   Now, if we--here in this so-called Christian country--really believed
   in prayer, i.e., in our Lord's own gracious promises, should we avoid
   prayer-meetings? If we had any genuine concern for the lost condition
   of thousands in our own land and tens of thousands in heathen lands,
   should we withhold our prayers? Surely we do not think, or we should
   pray more. "Ask of Me--I will give," says an almighty, all-loving God,
   and we scarcely heed His words!

   Verily, converts from heathendom put us to shame. In my journeyings I
   came to Rawal Pindi, in N.W. India. What do you think happened there?
   Some of Pandita Ramabai's girls went there to camp. But a little while
   before this, Pandita Ramabai had said to her girls, "If there is any
   blessing in India, we may have it. Let us ask God to tell us what we
   must do in order to have the blessing."

   As she read her Bible she paused over the verse, "Wait for the promise
   of the Father . . . ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is
   come upon you" (Acts i. 4-8). "Wait'! Why, we have never done this,"
   she cried. "We have prayed, but we have never expected any greater
   blessing today than we had yesterday!" Oh, how they prayed! One
   prayer-meeting lasted six hours. And what a marvelous blessing God
   poured out in answer to their prayers.

   Whilst some of these girls were at Rawal Pindi, a lady missionary,
   looking out of her tent towards midnight, was surprised to see a light
   burning in one of the girls' tents--a thing quite contrary to rules.
   She went to expostulate, but found the youngest of those ten girls--a
   child of fifteen--kneeling in the farthest corner of the tent, holding
   a little tallow candle in one hand and a list of names for intercession
   in the other. She had 500 names on her list--500 out of the 1,500 girls
   in Pandita Ramabai's school. Hour after hour she was naming them before
   God. No wonder God's blessing fell wherever those girls went, and upon
   whomsoever those girls prayed for.

   Pastor Ding Li Mei, of China, has the names of 1,100 students on his
   prayer-list. Many hundreds have been won to Christ through his prayers.
   And so out-and-out are his converts that many scores of them have
   entered the Christian ministry.

   It would be an easy matter to add to these amazing and inspiring
   stories of blessing through prayer. But there is no need to do so. I
   know that God wants me to pray. I know that God wants you to pray.

   "If there is any blessing in England we may have it." Nay, more--if
   there is any blessing in Christ we may have it. "Blessed be the God and
   Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with every
   spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ" (Eph. i. 3). God's
   great storehouse is full of blessings. Only prayer can unlock that
   storehouse. Prayer is the key, and faith both turns the key and opens
   the door, and claims the blessing. Blessed are the pure in heart, for
   they shall see God. And to see Him is to pray aright.

   Listen! We have come--you and I--once more to the parting of the ways.
   All our past failure, all our past inefficiency and insufficiency, all
   our past unfruitfulness in service, can be banished now, once and for
   all, if we will only give prayer its proper place. Do it today. Do not
   wait for a more convenient time.

   Everything worth having depends upon the decision we make. Truly God is
   a wonderful God! And one of the most wonderful things about Him is that
   He puts His all at the disposal of the prayer of faith. Believing
   prayer from a wholly-cleansed heart never fails. God has given us His
   word for it. Yet vastly more wonderful is the amazing fact that
   Christian men and women should either not believe God's word, or should
   fail to put it to the test.

   When Christ is "all in all"--when He is Savior and Lord and King of our
   whole being, then it is really He Who prays our prayers. We can then
   truthfully alter one word of a well-known verse and say that the Lord
   Jesus ever liveth to make intercession in us. Oh, that we might make
   the Lord Jesus "marvel" not at our unbelief but at our faith! When our
   Lord shall again "marvel," and say of us, "Verily . . . I have not
   found so great faith, no, not in Israel" (Matt. viii. 10), then indeed
   shall "palsy"--paralysis--be transformed into power.

   Has not our Lord come to "cast fire" upon us? Are we "already kindled"?
   Can He not use us as much as he used those mere children of Khedgaon?
   God is no respecter of persons. If we can humbly and truthfully say,
   "To me to live is Christ" (Phil. i. 21), will He not manifest forth His
   mighty power in us?

   Some of us have been reading about Praying Hyde. Truly, his
   intercession changed things. Men tell us that they were thrilled when
   John Hyde prayed. They were stirred to their inmost being when he just
   pleaded the name "Jesus!--Jesus!--Jesus!" and a baptism of love and
   power came upon them.

   But it was not John Hyde, it was the Holy Spirit of God whom one
   consecrated man, filled with that Spirit, brought down upon all around
   him. May we not all become "Praying Hydes"? Do you say "No! He had a
   special gift of prayer"? Very well--how did he get it? He was once just
   an ordinary Christian man--just like any of us.

   Have you noticed that, humanly speaking, he owed his prayer-life to the
   prayers of his father's friend? Now get hold of this point. It is one
   of greatest importance, and one which may profoundly affect your whole
   life. Perhaps I may be allowed to tell the story fully, for so much
   depends upon it. Shall we quote John Hyde himself? He was on board a
   ship sailing for India, whither he was going as a missionary. He says,
   "My father had a friend who greatly desired to be a foreign missionary,
   but was not permitted to go. This friend wrote me a letter directed in
   care of the ship. I received it a few hours out of New York harbor. The
   words were not many, but the purport of them was this: I shall not
   cease praying for you, dear John, until you are filled with the Holy
   Spirit.' When I had read the letter I crumpled it up in anger and threw
   it on the deck. Did this friend think I had not received the baptism of
   the Spirit, or that I would think of going to India without this
   equipment? I was angry. But by and by better judgment prevailed, and I
   picked up the letter, and read it again. Possibly I did need something
   which I had not yet received. I paced up and down the deck, a battle
   raging within. I felt uncomfortable: I loved the writer; I knew the
   holy life he lived, and down in my heart there was a conviction that he
   was right, and that I was not fit to be a missionary. . . . This went
   on for two, or three days, until I felt perfectly miserable. . . . At
   last, in a kind of despair, I asked the Lord to fill me with the Holy
   Spirit; and the moment I did this . . . I began to see myself, and what
   a selfish ambition I had."

   But he did not yet receive the blessing sought. He landed in India and
   went with a fellow-missionary to an open-air service. "The missionary
   spoke," said John Hyde, "and I was told that he was speaking about
   Jesus Christ as the real Savior from sin. When he had finished his
   address, a respectable-looking man, speaking good English, asked the
   missionary whether he himself had been thus saved? The question went
   home to my heart; for if it had been asked me, I would have had to
   confess that Christ had not fully saved me, because I knew there was a
   sin in my life which had not been taken away. I realized what a
   dishonor it would be on the name of Christ to have to confess that I
   was preaching a Christ that had not delivered me from sin, though I was
   proclaiming to others that He was a perfect Savior. I went back to my
   room and shut myself in, and told the Lord that it must be one of two
   things: either He must give me victory over all my sins, and especially
   over the sin that so easily beset me, or I must return to America and
   seek there for some other work. I said I could not stand up to preach
   the Gospel until I could testify of its power in my own life. I . . .
   realized how reasonable this was, and the Lord assured me that He was
   able and willing to deliver me from all sin. He did deliver me, and I
   have not had a doubt of this since."

   It was then, and then only, that John Hyde became Praying Hyde. And it
   is only by such a full surrender and such a definite claiming to be
   delivered from the power of sin in our lives that you and I can be men
   of prevailing prayer. The point we wish to emphasize, however, is the
   one already mentioned. A comparatively unknown man prays for John Hyde,
   who was then unknown to the world, and by his prayers brings down such
   a blessing upon him that everyone knows of him now as "Praying Hyde."
   Did you say in your heart, dear reader, a little while ago, that you
   could not hope to be a Praying Hyde? Of course we cannot all give so
   much time to prayer. For physical or other reasons we may be hindered
   from long-continued praying. But we may all have his spirit of prayer.
   And may we not all do for others what the unnamed friend did for John
   Hyde?

   Can we not pray the blessing down upon others--upon your vicar or
   pastor? Upon your friend? Upon your family? What a ministry is ours, if
   we will but enter it! But to do so, we must make the full surrender
   which John Hyde made. Have we done it? Failure in prayer is due to
   fault in the heart. Only the "pure in heart" can see God. And only
   those who "call on the Lord out of a pure heart" (II Tim. ii. 22) can
   confidently claim answers to their prayers.

   What a revival would break out, what a mighty blessing would come down
   if only everyone who read these words would claim the fullness of the
   Holy Spirit now!

   Do you not see why it is that God wants us to pray? Do you now see why
   everything worth having depends upon prayer? There are several reasons,
   but one stands out very clearly and vividly before us after reading
   this chapter. It is just this: if we ask and God does not give, then
   the fault is with us. Every unanswered prayer is a clarion call to
   search the heart to see what is wrong there; for the promise is
   unmistakable in its clearness: "If ye shall ask anything in My name,
   that will I do" (John xiv. 14).


   Truly he who prays puts, not God, but his own spiritual life to the
   test!

   Let me come closer to Thee, Jesus,

   Oh, closer every day;

   Let me lean harder on Thee, Jesus,

   Yes, harder all the way.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 4: ASKING FOR SIGNS

   "DOES God indeed answer prayer?" is a question often on the lips of
   people, and oftener still in their inmost hearts. "Is prayer of any
   real use?" Somehow or other we cannot help praying; but then even pagan
   savages cry out to someone or something to aid them in times of danger
   and disaster and distress.

   And those of us who really do believe in prayer are soon faced with
   another question: "Is it right to put God to the test?" Moreover, a
   further thought flashes into our minds: "Dare we put God to the test?"
   For there is little doubt that failure in the prayer-life is
   often--always?--due to failure in the spiritual life. So many people
   harbor much unbelief in the heart regarding the value and effectiveness
   of prayer; and without faith, prayer is vain.

   Asking for signs? Putting God to the test? Would to God we could
   persuade Christian men and women to do so. Why, what a test this would
   be of our own faith in God, and of our own holiness of life. Prayer is
   the touchstone of true godliness. God asks our prayers, values our
   prayers, needs our prayers. And if those prayers fail, we have only
   ourselves to blame. We do not mean by this that effective prayer always
   gets just what it asks for. Now, the Bible teaches us that we are
   allowed to put God to the test. The example of Gideon in Old Testament
   days is sufficient to show us that God honors our faith even when that
   faith is faltering. He allows us to "prove Him" even after a definite
   promise from Himself. This is a very great comfort to us.

   Gideon said unto God, "If Thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as Thou
   hast said, behold, I will put a fleece of wool on the floor; and if the
   dew be on the fleece only . . . then shall I know that Thou wilt save
   Israel by mine hand, as Thou has said." Yet, although there was a "bowl
   full of water" in the fleece the next morning, this did not satisfy
   Gideon! He dares to put God to the test the second time, and to ask
   that the fleece should be dry instead of wet the following night. "And
   God did so that night" (Judges vi. 40).

   It is all very wonderful, the Almighty God just doing what a hesitating
   man asks Him to do! We catch our breath and stand amazed, scarcely
   knowing which startles us the more--the daring of the man, or the
   condescension of God! Of course, there is more in the story than meets
   the eye. No doubt Gideon thought that the "fleece" represented himself,
   Gideon.

   If God would indeed fill him with His Spirit, why, salvation was
   assured. But as he wrung the fleece out, he began to compare himself
   with the saturated wool. "How unlike this fleece am I! God promises
   deliverance, but I do not feel full of the Spirit of God. No inflow of
   the mighty power of God seems to have come into me. Am I indeed fit for
   this great feat?" No! But then, it is "Not I, but God." "O God, let the
   fleece be dry--canst Thou still work? Even if I do not feel any
   superhuman power, any fullness of spiritual blessing within me: even if
   I feel as dry as this fleece, canst Thou still deliver Israel by my
   arm?" (Little wonder that he prefaced his prayer with the words, "Let
   not Thine anger be hot against me"!) "And God did so that night: for it
   was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground"
   (verse 40).

   Yes, there is more in the story than can be seen at a glance. And is it
   not so in our own case? The devil so often assures us that our prayers
   cannot claim an answer because of the "dryness" of our souls. Answers
   to prayer, however, do not depend upon our feelings, but upon the
   trustworthiness of the Promiser.

   Now, we are not urging that Gideon's way of procedure is for us, or for
   anyone, the normal course of action. It seems to reveal much hesitation
   to believe God's Word. In fact, it looks gravely like doubting God. And
   surely it grieves God when we show a faith in Him which is but partial.

   The higher and better and safer way is to "ask, nothing doubting." But
   it is very comforting and assuring to us to know that God allowed
   Gideon to put Him to the test. Nor is this the only such case mentioned
   in Scripture. The most surprising instance of "proving God" happened on
   the Sea of Galilee. St. Peter put our Lord Himself to the test. "If it
   be Thou--" yet our Savior had already said, "It is I." "If it be Thou,
   bid me come unto Thee on the water." And our Lord said, "Come," and
   Peter "walked on the water" (Matt. xiv. 28, 29). But this
   "testing-faith" of Peter's soon failed him. "Little faith" (verse 31)
   so often and so quickly becomes "doubt." Remember that Christ did not
   reprove him for coming. Our Lord did not say, "Wherefore didst thou
   come?" but "Wherefore didst thou doubt?"

   To put God to the test is, after all, not the best method. He has given
   us so many promises contingent on believing prayer, and has so often
   proved His power and His willingness to answer prayer, that we ought,
   as a rule, to hesitate very much before we ask Him for signs as well as
   for wonders!

   But, someone may be thinking, does not the Lord God Almighty Himself
   bid us to put Him to the test? Did He not say, "Bring ye the whole
   tithe into the storehouse . . . and prove Me now herewith, saith the
   Lord of Hosts, if I will not open unto you the windows of heaven, and
   pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive
   it"? (Mal. iii. 10).

   Yes that is true: God does say, "Prove Me: test Me." But it is really
   we ourselves who are thus tested. If the windows of heaven are not
   opened when we pray, and this blessing of fullness-to-overflowing is
   not bestowed upon us, it can only be because we are not whole-tithers.
   When we are in very deed wholly yielded to God--when we have brought
   the whole tithe into the storehouse for God--we shall find such a
   blessing that we shall not need to put God to any test! This is a thing
   we shall have to speak about when we come to the question of unanswered
   prayer.

   Meanwhile we want every Christian to ask, "Have I ever fairly tested
   prayer?" How long is it since you last offered up a definite prayer?
   People pray for "a blessing" upon an address, or a meeting, or a
   mission; and some blessing is certain to come, for others are also
   pleading with God about the matter. You ask for relief from pain or
   healing of sickness: but Godless people, for whom no one appears to be
   praying, often recover, and sometimes in a seemingly miraculous way.
   And we may feel that we might have got better even if no prayer had
   been offered on our behalf. It seems to me that so many people cannot
   put their finger upon any really definite and conclusive answer to
   prayer in their own experience. Most Christians do not give God a
   chance to show His delight in granting His children's petitions; for
   their requests are so vague and indefinite. If this is so, it is not
   surprising that prayer is so often a mere form--an almost mechanical
   repetition, day by day, of certain phrases; a few minutes' "exercise"
   morning and evening.

   Then there is another point. Have you, when in prayer, ever had the
   witness borne in upon you that your request was granted? Those who know
   something of the private life of men of prayer are often amazed at the
   complete assurance which comes over them at times that their prayers
   are answered, long before the boon they seek is actually in their
   possession. One prayer-warrior would say, "A peace came over my soul. I
   was confident my request was granted me." He then just thanked God for
   what he was quite sure God had done for him. And his assurance would
   prove to be absolutely well founded.

   Our Lord Himself always had this assurance, and we should ever bear in
   mind that, although He was God, He lived His earthly life as a perfect
   Man, depending upon the Holy Spirit of God.

   When He stood before the opened tomb of Lazarus, before He had actually
   called upon the dead to come forth, He said, "Father, I thank Thee that
   Thou hast heard Me. And I know that Thou hearest Me always" (John xi.
   41, 42). Why, then, did He utter His thanks? "Because of the people
   which stand by I said it, that they may believe that Thou hast sent
   Me." If Christ is dwelling in our hearts by faith: if the Holy Spirit
   is breathing into us our petitions, and we are "praying in the Holy
   Ghost," ought we not to know that the Father "hears" us? (Jude 20). And
   will not those who stand by begin to recognize that we, too, are
   God-sent?

   Men of prayer and women of prayer will agonize before God for something
   which they know is according to His will, because of some definite
   promise on the page of Scripture. They may pray for hours, or even for
   days, when suddenly the Holy Spirit reveals to them in no uncertain way
   that God has granted their request; and they are confident that they
   need no longer send up any more petitions to God about the matter. It
   is as if God said in clear tones: "Thy prayer is heard and I have
   granted thee the desire of thy heart." This is not the experience of
   only one man, but most men to whom prayer is the basis of their life
   will bear witness to the same fact. Nor is it a solitary experience in
   their lives: it occurs again and again.

   Then prayer must give place to action. God taught Moses this:
   "Wherefore criest thou unto Me? Speak unto the children of Israel that
   they go forward" (Exod. xiv. 15).

   We are not surprised to find that Dr. Goforth, a much-used missionary
   in China, often has this assurance given him that his petitions are
   granted. "I knew that God had answered. I received definite assurance
   that He would open the way." For why should anyone be surprised at
   this? The Lord Jesus said, "Ye are My friends, if ye do the things I
   command you. No longer do I call you servants; for the servant knoweth
   not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends" (John xv. 14,
   15). Do you think it surprising, then, if the Lord lets us, His
   "friends," know something of His plans and purposes?

   The question at once arises, does God mean this to be the experience of
   only a few chosen saints, or does He wish all believers to exercise a
   like faith, and to have a like assurance that their prayers are
   answered?

   We know that God is no respecter of persons, and therefore we know that
   any true believer in Him may share His mind and will. We are His
   friends if we do the things He commands us. One of those things is
   "prayer." Our Savior begged His disciples to "have faith in God" (the
   literal translation is "Have the faith of God"). Then, He declares, you
   can say to a mountain, "Be thou taken up and cast into the sea," and if
   you believe and doubt not, it shall come to pass. Then He gives this
   promise: "All things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye
   have received them [that is, in heaven], and ye shall have them [on
   earth]" (Mark xi. 24). Now, this is exactly the experience we have been
   talking about. This is just what real men of prayer do. Such things
   naturally pass the comprehension of unbelievers. Such things are
   perplexing to the half-believers. Our Lord, however, desires that men
   should know that we are His disciples, sent as He was sent (John xvii.
   18 and xx. 21). They will know this if we love one another (John xiii.
   35). But another proof is provided, and it is this: if we know and they
   see that "God heareth us always" (John xi. 42).

   Some of us at once recall to mind George Mller's wonderful
   prayer-life. On one occasion, when crossing from Quebec to Liverpool,
   he had prayed very definitely that a chair he had written to New York
   for should arrive in time to catch the steamer, and he was quite
   confident that God had granted his petition. About half an hour before
   the tender was timed to take the passengers to the ship, the agents
   informed him that no chair had arrived, and that it could not possibly
   come in time for the steamer. Now, Mrs. Muller suffered much from
   sea-sickness, and it was absolutely essential that she should have the
   chair. Yet nothing would induce Mr. Muller to buy another one from a
   shop near by. "We have made special prayer that our Heavenly Father
   would be pleased to provide it for us, and we will trust Him to do so,"
   was his reply; and he went on board absolutely sure that his trust was
   not misplaced, and would not miscarry. Just before the tender left, a
   van drove up, and on the top of the load it carried was Mr. Muller's
   chair. It was hurried on board and placed into the hands of the very
   man who had urged George Mller to buy another one! When he handed it
   to Mr. Muller, the latter expressed no surprise, but quietly removed
   his hat and thanked his Heavenly Father. To this man of God such an
   answer to prayer was not wonderful, but natural. And do you not think
   that God allowed the chair to be held back till the very last minute as
   a lesson to Mr. Muller's friends-and to us? We should never have heard
   of that incident but for that delay.

   God does all He can to induce us to pray and to trust, and yet how slow
   we are to do so! Oh, what we miss through lack of faith and want of
   prayer! No one can have very real and deep communion with God who does
   not know how to pray so as to get answers to prayer.

   If one has any doubt as to God's willingness to be put to the test, let
   him read a little book called Nor Scrip (Marshall, Morgan and Scott,
   Ltd.). Miss Amy Wilson Carmichael tells us in its pages how again and
   again she "proved God." One gets the impression from the book that it
   was no accident that led her to do so. Surely God's hand was in it? For
   instance, in order to rescue a Hindu child from a life of "religious"
   shame, it was necessary to spend a hundred rupees. Was she justified in
   doing so? She could help many girls for such a sum: ought she to spend
   it on one? Miss Wilson Carmichael felt led to pray that God would send
   her the round sum of a hundred rupees--no more, no less--if it was His
   will that the money should be spent in this way. The money came--the
   exact amount--and the sender of it explained that she had sat down to
   write a check for a broken sum, but had been impelled to make it just a
   hundred rupees.

   That happened over fifteen years ago, and since that time this same
   missionary has put God to the test over and over again, and He has
   never failed her. This is what she says: "Never once in fifteen years
   has a bill been left unpaid; never once has a man or woman been told
   when we were in need of help; but never once have we lacked any good
   thing. Once, as if to show what could be done if it were required, 25
   pounds came by telegram! Sometimes a man would emerge from the
   clamoring crowd at a railway station, and slip some indispensable gift
   of money into the hand, and be lost in the crowd again before the giver
   could be identified."

   Is it wonderful? Wonderful! Why, what does St. John say, speaking by
   the Spirit of God? "And this is the boldness which we have towards Him,
   that if we ask anything, according to His will, He heareth us; and if
   we know that He heareth us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the
   petitions which we have asked of Him" (I John v. 14, 15). Have you and
   I such "boldness"? If not, why not?

   To call it wonderful is to show our want of faith. It is natural to God
   to answer prayer: normal, not extraordinary.

   The fact is--let us be quite honest and straightforward about it--the
   fact is so many of us do not believe God. We may just as well be quite
   candid about it. If we love God we ought to pray, because He wants us
   to pray, and commands us to pray. If we believe God we shall pray
   because we cannot help doing so: we cannot get on without it.
   Fellow-Christian, you believe in God, and you believe on Him (John iii.
   16), but have you advanced far enough in the Christian life to believe
   Him; that is, to believe what He says and all He says? Does it not
   sound blasphemous to ask such a thing of a Christian man? Yet how few
   believers really believe God!--God forgive us! Has it ever struck you
   that we trust the word of our fellow-man more easily than we trust
   God's word? And yet, when a man does "believe God," what miracles of
   grace God works in and through him! No man ever lived who has been
   revered and respected by so many peoples and tongues as that man of
   whom we are told three times over in the New Testament that "He
   believed God" (Rom. iv. 3; Gal. iii. 6; James ii. 23). Yes, "Abraham
   believed God, and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness." And
   today, Christian and Jew and Moslem vie with each other in honoring his
   name. We implore every believer on Christ Jesus never to rest till he
   can say, "I believe God, and will act on that belief" (Acts xxvii. 25).

   But before we leave the question of testing God, we should like to
   point out that sometimes God leads us on "to prove Him." Sometimes God
   has put it into the heart of Miss Wilson Carmichael to ask for things
   she saw no need for. Yet she felt impelled by the Holy Spirit to ask.
   Not only were they granted her, but they also proved an inestimable
   boon. Yes, God knows what things we have need of, whether we want them
   or not, before we ask (Matt. vi. 8). Has not God said, "I will in no
   wise fail thee"?

   Oftentimes the temptation would come to Miss Wilson Carmichael to let
   others know of some special need. But always the inner assurance would
   come, as in the very voice of God, "I know, and that is enough." And,
   of course, God was glorified. During the trying days of the war, even
   the heathen used to say, "Their God feeds them." "Is it not known all
   the country round," said a worldly heathen, "that your God hears
   prayer?"

   Oh, what glory to God was brought about by their simple faith! Why do
   not we believe God? Why do we not take God at His word? Do believers or
   unbelievers ever say of us, "We know your prayers are answered"? Ye
   missionaries the wide world over, listen! (Oh, that these words might
   reach every ear, and stir every heart!) It is the yearning desire of
   God--of our loving Savior Jesus Christ--that every one of us should
   have the same strong faith as that devoted lady missionary we are
   speaking about.

   Our loving Father does not wish any child of His to have one moment's
   anxiety or one unsatisfied need. No matter how great our need may be;
   no matter how numerous our requirements, if we only "prove Him" in the
   manner He bids us, we shall never have room enough to receive all the
   blessing He will give (Mal. iii. 10).


   Oh, what peace we often forfeit !

   Oh, what needless pain we bear!

   All because we do not carry

   Everything to God in prayer;

   or all because, when we do "carry it," we do not believe God's word.
   Why is it we find it so hard to trust Him? Has He ever failed us? Has
   He not said over and over and over again that He will grant all
   petitions offered out of a pure heart, "in His name"? "Ask of Me";
   "Pray ye"; "Prove Me"; "Try Me." The Bible is full of answers to
   prayer--wonderful answers, miraculous answers; and yet somehow our
   faith fails us, and we dishonor God by distrusting Him!


   If our faith were but more simple

   We should take Him at His word,

   And our lives would be all sunshine

   In the bounties of our Lord.

   But our eye must be "single" if our faith is to be simple and our
   "whole body full of light" (Matt. vi. 22). Christ must be the sole
   Master. We cannot expect to be free from anxiety if we are trying to
   serve God and Mammon (Matt. vi. 24, 25). Again we are led back to the
   Victorious Life! When we indeed present our bodies "a living sacrifice,
   holy, acceptable to God" (Rom. xii. 1); when we present our members "as
   servants to righteousness and sanctification" (Rom. vi. 19); then He
   presents Himself to us and fills us with all the fullness of God (Eph.
   iii. 19).

   Let us ever bear in mind that real faith not only believes that God
   can, but that He does answer prayer. We may be slothful in prayer, but
   "the Lord is not slack concerning His promise" (II Peter iii. 9). Is
   not that a striking expression?

   Perhaps the most extraordinary testing of God which that Dohnavur
   missionary tells us of is the following. The question arose of
   purchasing a rest-house in the hills near by. Was it the right thing to
   do? Only God could decide. Much prayer was made. Eventually the
   petition was offered up that if it was God's will that the house should
   be purchased, the exact sum of 100 pounds should be received. That
   amount came at once. Yet they still hesitated. Two months later they
   asked God to give them again the same sign of His approval of the
   purchase. That same day another check for 100 pounds came. Even now
   they scarcely liked to proceed in the matter. In a few days' time,
   however, another round sum of 100 pounds was received, earmarked for
   the purchase of such a house. Does it not flood our hearts with joy to
   remember that our gracious Savior is so kind? It is St. Luke the
   physician who tells us that God is kind (Luke vi. 35). Love is always
   "kind" (I Cor. xiii. 4); and God is Love. Think over it when you pray.
   Our Lord is "kind." It will help us in our intercessions. He bears so
   patiently with us when our faith would falter. "How precious is Thy
   lovingkindness, O God" (Psalm xxxvi. 7); "Thy lovingkindness is better
   than life" (Psalm lxiii. 3).

   The danger is that we read of such simple faith in prayer, and say,
   "How wonderful!" and forget that God desires every one of us to have
   such faith and such prayer. God has no favorites! He wants me to pray;
   He wants you to pray. He allows such things to happen as we have
   described above, and suffers them to come to our knowledge, not to
   surprise us, but to stimulate us. One sometimes wishes that Christian
   people would forget all the man-made rules with which we have hedged
   prayer about! Let us be simple. Let us be natural. Take God at His
   word. Let us remember that "the kindness of God our Savior, and His
   love toward man," has appeared (Titus iii. 4). God sometimes leads men
   into the prayer-life. Sometimes, however, God has to drive us into such
   a life.

   As some of us look back over our comparatively prayerless life, what a
   thrill of wonder and of joy comes over us as we think of the kindness
   and "patience of Christ" (II Thess. iii. 5). Where should we have been
   without that? We fail Him, but, blessed be His name, He has never
   failed us, and He never will do so. We doubt Him, we mistrust His love
   and His providence and His guidance; we "faint because of the way"; we
   murmur because of the way; yet all the time He is there blessing us,
   and waiting to pour out upon us a blessing so great that there shall
   not be room to receive it.

   The promise of Christ still holds good: "Whatsoever ye shall ask in My
   name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son"
   (John xiv. 14).


   Prayer changes things--and yet how blind

   And slow we are to taste and see

   The blessedness that comes to those

   Who trust in Thee.

   But henceforth we will just believe God.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 5: WHAT IS PRAYER?

   MR. MOODY was once addressing a crowded meeting of children in
   Edinburgh. In order to get their attention he began with a question:
   "What is prayer?"--looking for no reply, and expecting to give the
   answer himself.

   To his amazement scores of little hands shot up all over the hall. He
   asked one lad to reply; and the answer came at once, clear and correct,
   "Prayer is an offering up of our desires unto God for things agreeable
   to His will, in the name of Christ, with confession of our sins and
   thankful acknowledgment of His mercies." Mr. Moody's delighted comment
   was, "Thank God, my boy, that you were born in Scotland." But that was
   half a century ago. What sort of answer would he get today? How many
   English children could give a definition of prayer? Think for a moment
   and decide what answer you yourself would give.

   What do we mean by prayer? I believe the vast majority of Christians
   would say, "Prayer is asking things from God." But surely prayer is
   much more than merely "getting God to run our errands for us," as
   someone puts it. It is a higher thing than the beggar knocking at the
   rich man's door.

   The word "prayer" really means "a wish directed towards," that is,
   towards God. All that true prayer seeks is God Himself, for with Him we
   get all we need. Prayer is simply "the turning of the soul to God."
   David describes it as the lifting up of the living soul to the living
   God. "Unto Thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul" (Psa. xxv. 1). What a
   beautiful description of prayer that is! When we desire the Lord Jesus
   to behold our souls, we also desire that the beauty of holiness may be
   upon us.

   When we lift up our souls to God in prayer it gives God an opportunity
   to do what He will in us and with us. It is putting ourselves at God's
   disposal. God is always on our side, but we are not always on His side.
   When man prays, it is God's opportunity. The poet says:


   Prayer is the soul's sincere desire,

   Uttered or unexpressed,

   The motion of a hidden fire

   That trembles in the breast.

   "Prayer," says an old Jewish mystic, "is the moment when heaven and
   earth kiss each other."

   Prayer, then, is certainly not persuading God to do what we want God to
   do. It is not bending the will of a reluctant God to our will. It does
   not change His purpose, although it may release His power. "We must not
   conceive of prayer as overcoming God's reluctance," says Archbishop
   Trench, "but as laying hold of His highest willingness."

   For God always purposes our greatest good. Even the prayer offered in
   ignorance and blindness cannot swerve Him from that, although, when we
   persistently pray for some harmful thing, our wilfulness may bring it
   about, and we suffer accordingly. "He gave them their request," says
   the Psalmist, "but sent leanness into their soul" (Psa. cvi. 15). They
   brought this "leanness" upon themselves. They were "cursed with the
   burden of a granted prayer."

   Prayer, in the minds of some people, is only for emergencies! Danger
   threatens, sickness comes, things are lacking, difficulties arise--then
   they pray. Like the infidel down a coal mine: when the roof began to
   fall he began to pray. An old Christian standing by quietly remarked,
   "Aye, there's nowt like cobs of coal to make a man pray."

   Prayer is, however, much more than merely asking God for something,
   although that is a very valuable part of prayer if only because it
   reminds us of our utter dependence upon God. It is also communion with
   God--intercourse with God--talking with (not only to) God. We get to
   know people by talking with them. We get to know God in like manner.
   The highest result of prayer is not deliverance from evil, or the
   securing of some coveted thing, but knowledge of God. "And this is life
   eternal, that they should know Thee, the only true God" (John xvii. 3).
   Yes, prayer discovers more of God, and that is the soul's greatest
   discovery. Men still cry out, "O, that I knew where I might find Him,
   that I might come even to His seat" (Job xxiii. 3).

   The kneeling Christian always "finds" Him, and is found of Him. The
   heavenly vision of the Lord Jesus blinded the eyes of Saul of Tarsus on
   his downward course, but he tells us, later on, that when he was
   praying in the temple at Jerusalem he fell into a trance and saw Jesus.
   "I . . . saw him" (Acts xxii. 18). Then it was that Christ gave him his
   great commission to go to the Gentiles. Vision is always a precursor of
   vocation and venture. It was so with Isaiah. "I saw the Lord high and
   lifted up, and his train filled the temple" (Isa vi. 1). The prophet
   was evidently in the sanctuary praying when this happened. This vision
   also was a prelude to a call to service, "Go . . . ." Now, we cannot
   get a vision of God unless we pray. And where there is no vision the
   soul perishes.

   A vision of God! Brother Lawrence once said, "Prayer is nothing else
   than a sense of God's presence"--and that is just the practice of the
   presence of God.

   A friend of Horace Bushnell was present when that man of God prayed.
   There came over him a wonderful sense of God's nearness. He says: "When
   Horace Bushnell buried his face in his hands and prayed, I was afraid
   to stretch out my hand in the darkness, lest I should touch God." Was
   the Psalmist of old conscious of such a thought when he cried, "My
   soul, wait thou only upon God"? (Psa. lxii. 5.) I believe that much of
   our failure in prayer is due to the fact that we have not looked into
   this question, "What is prayer?" It is good to be conscious that we are
   always in the presence of God. It is better to gaze upon Him in
   adoration. But it is best of all to commune with Him as a Friend--and
   that is prayer.

   Real prayer at its highest and best reveals a soul athirst for
   God--just for God alone. Real prayer comes from the lips of those whose
   affection is set on things above. What a man of prayer Zinzendorf was.
   Why? He sought the Giver rather than His gifts. He said: "I have one
   passion: it is He, He alone." Even the Mohammedan seems to have got
   hold of this thought. He says that there are three degrees in prayer.
   The lowest is that spoken only by the lips. The next is when, by a
   resolute effort, we succeed in fixing our thoughts on Divine things.
   The third is when the soul finds it hard to turn away from God. Of
   course, we know that God bids us "ask" of Him. We all obey Him so far;
   and we may rest well assured that prayer both pleases God and supplies
   all our need. But he would be a strange child who only sought his
   father's presence when he desired some gift from him! And do we not all
   yearn to rise to a higher level of prayer than mere petition? How is it
   to be done?

   It seems to me that only two steps are necessary--or shall we say two
   thoughts? There must be, first of all, a realization of God's glory,
   and then of God's grace. We sometimes sing:


   Grace and glory flow from Thee;

   Shower, O shower them, Lord, on me.

   Nor is such a desire fanciful, although some may ask what God's glory
   has to do with prayer.

   But ought we not to remind ourselves Who He is to Whom we pray? There
   is logic in the couplet:


   Thou art coming to a King;

   Large petitions with thee bring.

   Do you think that any one of us spends enough time in pondering over,
   yes, and marveling over, God's exceeding great glory? And do you
   suppose that any one of us has grasped the full meaning of the word
   "grace"? Are not our prayers so often ineffective and powerless--and
   sometimes even prayerless--because we rush unthinkingly and
   unpreparedly into God's presence, without realizing the majesty and
   glory of the God Whom we are approaching, and without reflecting upon
   the exceeding great riches of His glory in Christ Jesus, which we hope
   to draw upon? We must "think magnificently of God."

   May we then suggest that before we lay our petitions before God we
   first dwell in meditation upon His glory and then upon His grace--for
   He offers us both. We must lift up the soul to God. Let us place
   ourselves, as it were, in the presence of God and direct our prayer to
   the King of kings, and Lord of lords, Who only hath immortality,
   dwelling in light unapproachable . . . to Whom be honor and power
   eternal (I Tim. vi. 16). Let us then give Him adoration and praise
   because of His exceeding great glory. Consecration is not enough. There
   must be adoration.

   "Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts," cry the seraphim; "the whole
   earth is full of his glory" (Isa. vi. 3). "Glory to God in the
   highest," cries the "whole multitude of the heavenly host" (Luke ii.
   14). Yet some of us try to commune with God without stopping to "put
   off our shoes from off our feet" (Exod. iii. 5).


   Lips cry "God be merciful"

   That ne'er cry "God be praised."

   O come let us adore Him!

   And we may approach His glory with boldness. Did not our Lord pray that
   His disciples might behold His glory? (John xvii. 24). Why? And why is
   "the whole earth full of His glory"? The telescope reveals His infinite
   glory. The microscope reveals His uttermost glory. Even the unaided eye
   sees surpassing glory in landscape, sunshine, sea and sky. What does it
   all mean? These things are but a partial revelation of God's glory. It
   was not a desire for self-display that led our Lord to pray, "Father,
   glorify Thy Son" . . . "O Father, glorify Thou Me" (John xvii. 1, 3).
   Our dear Lord wants us to realize His infinite trustworthiness and
   unlimited power, so that we can approach Him in simple faith and trust.

   In heralding the coming of Christ the prophet declared that "glory of
   the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together" (Isa.
   xl. 5). Now we must get a glimpse of that glory before we can pray
   aright. So our Lord said, "When ye pray, say Our Father, Who art in
   heaven [the realm of glory], hallowed be Thy name." There is nothing
   like a glimpse of glory to banish fear and doubt. Before we offer up
   our petitions may it not help us to offer up our adoration in the words
   of praise used by some of the saints of old? Some devout souls may not
   need such help. We are told that Francis of Assisi would frequently
   spend an hour or two in prayer on the top of Mount Averno, whilst the
   only word which escaped his lips would be "God" repeated at intervals.
   He began with adoration--and often stopped there!

   But most of us need some help to realize the glory of the invisible God
   before we can adequately praise and adore Him. Old William Law said,
   "When you begin to pray, use such expressions of the attributes of God
   as will make you sensible of His greatness and power."

   This point is of such tremendous importance that we venture to remind
   our readers of helpful words. Some of us begin every day with a glance
   heavenwards whilst saying, "Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and
   to the Holy Ghost." The prayer, "O Lord God most holy, O Lord most
   mighty, O holy and merciful Savior!" is often enough to bring a solemn
   awe and a spirit of holy adoration upon the soul. The Gloria in
   Excelsis of the Communion Service is most uplifting: "Glory be to God
   on high and in earth peace. . . . We praise Thee; we bless Thee; we
   worship Thee; we glorify Thee; we give thanks to Thee for Thy great
   glory, O Lord God, heavenly King, God the Father Almighty." Which of us
   can from the heart utter praise like that and remain unmoved,
   unconscious of the very presence and wondrous majesty of the Lord God
   Almighty? A verse of a hymn may serve the same purpose.


   My God. how wonderful Thou art!

   Thy majesty how bright.

   How beautiful Thy mercy-seat

   In depths of burning light!

   How wonderful, how beautiful

   The sight of Thee must be;

   Thine endless wisdom, boundless power

   And awful purity.

   This carries us into the very heavenlies, as also do the words:

   Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty,

   All Thy works shall praise Thy name

   In earth, and sky, and sea.

   We need to cry out, and to cry often, "My soul doth magnify the Lord,
   and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior" (Luke i. 46, 47). Can we
   catch the spirit of the Psalmist and sing, "Bless the Lord, O my soul,
   and all that is within me, bless His holy name"? (Psa. ciii. 1.) "Bless
   the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, Thou art very great; Thou are
   clothed with honor and majesty" (Psa. civ. 1). When shall we learn that
   "in His temple everything saith Glory!" (Psa. xxix. 9, R.V.) Let us,
   too, cry, Glory!

   Such worship of God, such adoration and praise and thanksgiving, not
   only put us into the spirit of prayer, but in some mysterious way they
   help God to work on our behalf. Do you remember those wonderful words,
   "Whoso offereth the sacrifice of thanksgiving, glorifyeth Me and
   prepareth a way that I may show him the salvation of God"?, (Psa. l.
   23, R.V., marg.) Praise and thanksgiving not only open the gates of
   heaven for me to approach God, but also "prepare a way" for God to
   bless me. St. Paul cries, "Rejoice evermore!" before he says, "Pray
   without ceasing." So then our praise, as well as our prayers, is to be
   without ceasing.

   At the raising of Lazarus our Lord's prayer had as its first utterance
   a note of thanksgiving. "Father, I thank Thee that Thou heardest Me"
   (John xi. 41). He said it for those around to hear. Yes, and for us to
   hear.

   You may perhaps be wondering why it is that we should specially give
   thanks to God for His great glory when we kneel in prayer; and why we
   should spend any time in thinking of and gazing upon that glory. But is
   He not the King of Glory? All He is and all He does is glory. His
   holiness is "glorious" (Exod. xv. 11). His name is glorious (Deut.
   xxviii. 58). His work is "glorious" (Psa. cxi. 3). His power is
   glorious (Col. i. 11). His voice is glorious (Isa. xxx. 30).


   All things bright and beautiful

   All creatures great and small.

   All things wise and wonderful,

   The Lord God made them all.

   for His glory.

   "For of him and through him and unto him are all things; to whom be
   glory for ever" (Rom. xi. 36). And this is the God who bids us come to
   Him in prayer. This God is our God, and He has "gifts for men" (Psa.
   lxviii. 18). God says that everyone that is called by His name has been
   created for His glory (Isa. xliii. 7). His Church is to be a "glorious"
   Church--holy and without blemish (Eph. v. 27). Have you ever fully
   realized that the Lord Jesus desires to share with us the glory we see
   in Him? This is His great gift to you and me, His redeemed ones.
   Believe me, the more we have of God's glory, the less shall we seek His
   gifts. Not only in that day "when he shall come to be glorified in his
   saints" (II Thess. i. 10) is there glory for us, but here and
   now--today. He wishes us to be partakers of His glory. Did not our Lord
   Himself say so? "The glory which thou has given me, I have given unto
   them," He declares (John xvii. 22). What is God's command? "Arise,
   shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
   thee." Nay, more than this: "His glory shall be seen upon thee," says
   the inspired prophet (Isa. lx. 1, 2).

   God would have people say of us as St. Peter said of the disciples of
   old: "The Spirit of Glory and the Spirit of God resteth upon you" (I
   Peter iv. 14). Would not that be an answer to most of our prayers?
   Could we ask for anything better? How can we get this glory? How are we
   to reflect it? Only as the result of prayer. It is when we pray, that
   the Holy Spirit takes of the things of Christ and reveals them unto us
   (John xvi. 15).

   It was when Moses prayed, "Show me, I pray thee, thy glory," that he
   not only saw somewhat of it, but shared something of that glory, and
   his own face shone with the light of it (Exod. xxxiii. 18, xxxiv. 29).
   And when we, too, gaze upon the "glory of God in the face of Jesus
   Christ" (II Cor. iv. 6), we shall see not only a glimpse of that glory,
   but we shall gain something of it ourselves.

   Now, that is prayer, and the highest result of prayer. Nor is there any
   other way of securing that glory, that God may be glorified in us (Isa.
   lx. 21).

   Let us often meditate upon Christ's glory--gaze upon it and so reflect
   it and receive it. This is what happened to our Lord's first disciples.
   They said in awed tones, "We beheld his glory!" Yes, but what followed?
   A few plain, unlettered, obscure fishermen companied with Christ a
   little while, seeing His glory; and lo! they themselves caught
   something of that glory. And then others marveled and "took knowledge
   of them that they had been with Jesus" (Acts iv. 13). And when we can
   declare, with St. John, "Yea, and our fellowship is with the Father and
   with His Son Jesus Christ" (I John i. 3), people will say the same of
   us: "They have been with Jesus!"

   As we lift up our soul in prayer to the living God, we gain the beauty
   of holiness as surely as a flower becomes beautiful by living in the
   sunlight. Was not our Lord Himself transfigured when He prayed? And the
   "very fashion" of our countenance will change, and we shall have our
   Mount of Transfiguration when prayer has its rightful place in our
   lives. And men will see in our faces "the outward and visible sign of
   an inward and spiritual grace." Our value to God and to man is in exact
   proportion to the extent in which we reveal the glory of God to others.

   We have dwelt so much upon the glory of Him to Whom we pray, that we
   must not now speak of His grace.

   What is prayer? It is a sign of spiritual life. I should as soon expect
   life in a dead man as spiritual life in a prayerless soul! Our
   spirituality and our fruitfulness are always in proportion to the
   reality of our prayers. If, then, we have at all wandered away from
   home in the matter of prayer, let us today resolve, "I will arise and
   go unto my Father, and say unto Him, Father--."

   At this point I laid down my pen, and on the page of the first paper I
   picked up were these words: "The secret of failure is that we see men
   rather than God. Romanism trembled when Martin Luther saw God. The
   great awakening' sprang into being when Jonathan Edwards saw God. The
   world became the parish of one man when John Wesley saw God. Multitudes
   were saved when Whitfield saw God. Thousands of orphans were fed when
   George Mller saw God. And He is the same yesterday, today, and
   forever.' "

   Is it not time that we got a new vision of God--of God in all His
   glory? Who can say what will happen when the Church sees God? But let
   us not wait for others. Let us, each one for himself, with unveiled
   face and unsullied heart, get this vision of the glory of the Lord.

   "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God" (Matt. v. 8).
   No missioner whom it has been my joy to meet ever impressed me quite as
   much as Dr. Wilbur Chapman. He wrote to a friend: "I have learned some
   great lessons concerning prayer. At one of our missions in England the
   audiences were exceedingly small. But I received a note saying that an
   American missionary . . . was going to pray God's blessing down upon
   our work. He was known as Praying Hyde.' Almost instantly the tide
   turned. The hall became packed, and at my first invitation fifty men
   accepted Christ as their Savior. As we were leaving I said, Mr. Hyde, I
   want you to pray for me.' He came to my room, turned the key in the
   door, and dropped on his knees, and waited five minutes without a
   single syllable coming from his lips. I could hear my own heart
   thumping and his beating. I felt the hot tears running down my face. I
   knew I was with God. Then, with upturned face, down which the tears
   were streaming, he said O God!' Then for five minutes at least he was
   still again; and then, when he knew that he was talking with God . . .
   there came up from the depth of his heart such petitions for men as I
   had never heard before. I rose from my knees to know what real prayer
   was. We believe that prayer is mighty, and we believe it as we never
   did before."

   Dr. Chapman used to say, "It was a season of prayer with John Hyde that
   made me realize what real prayer was. I owe to him more than I owe to
   any man for showing me what a prayer-life is, and what a real
   consecrated life is. . . . Jesus Christ became a new Ideal to me, and I
   had a glimpse of His prayer-life; and I had a longing which has
   remained to this day to be a real praying man." And God the Holy Spirit
   can so teach us.


   Oh, ye who sigh and languish

   And mourn your lack of power,

   Hear ye this gentle whisper:

   "Could ye not watch one hour?"

   For fruitfulness and blessing

   There is no royal road;

   The power for holy service

   Is intercourse with God.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 6: HOW SHALL I PRAY?

   How shall I pray? Could there be a more important question for a
   Christian man to ask? How shall I approach the King of Glory?

   When we read Christ's promises regarding prayer we are apt to think
   that He puts far too great a power into our hands--unless, indeed, we
   hastily conclude that it is impossible for Him to act as He promises.
   He says, ask "anything," "whatsoever," "what ye will," and it shall be
   done.

   But then He puts in a qualifying phrase. He says that we are to ask in
   His name. That is the condition, and the only one, although, as we
   shall remind ourselves later on, it is sometimes couched in different
   words.

   If, therefore, we ask and do not receive, it can only be that we are
   not fulfilling this condition. If then, we are true disciples of
   His--if we are sincere--we shall take pains (infinite pains, if need
   be) to discover just what it means to ask in His name; and we shall not
   rest content until we have fulfilled that condition. Let us read the
   promise again to be quite sure about it. "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
   name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If
   ye shall ask anything in my name, I will do it" (John xiv. 13, 14).

   This was something quite new, for our Lord said so. "Hitherto ye have
   asked nothing in my name," but now, "ask and ye shall receive, that
   your joy may be full" (John xvi. 24).

   Five times over our Lord repeats this simple condition, "In my name"
   (John xiv. 13, 14; xv. 16; xvi. 23, 24, 26). Evidently something very
   important is here implied. It is more than a condition--it is also a
   promise, an encouragement, for our Lord's biddings are always His
   enablings. What, then, does it mean to ask in His name? We must know
   this at all costs, for it is the secret of all power in prayer. And it
   is possible to make a wrong use of those words. Our Lord said, "Many
   shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ,' and shall deceive many"
   (Matt. xxiv. 5). He might well have said, "And many shall think they
   are praying to the Father in my name, whilst deceiving themselves."

   Does it mean just adding the words, "and all this we ask in the name of
   Jesus Christ," at the end of our prayers?

   Many people apparently think that it does. But have you never heard--or
   offered--prayers full of self-will and selfishness which ended up in
   that way, "for Christ's sake. Amen"?

   God could not answer the prayers St. James refers to in his epistle
   just because those who offered them added, "we ask these things in the
   name of our Lord Jesus Christ." Those Christians were asking "amiss"
   (James iv. 3). A wrong prayer cannot be made right by the addition of
   some mystic phrase!

   And a right prayer does not fail if some such words are omitted. No! It
   is more than a question of words. Our Lord is thinking about faith and
   facts more than about some formula. The chief object of prayer is to
   glorify the Lord Jesus. We are to ask in Christ's name "that the Father
   may be glorified in the Son" (John xiv. 13). Listen! We are not to seek
   wealth or health, prosperity or success, ease or comfort, spirituality
   or fruitfulness in service simply for our own enjoyment or advancement
   or popularity, but only for Christ's sake--for His glory. Let us take
   three steps to a right understanding of those important words, "in my
   name."

   (1) There is a sense in which some things are done only "for Christ's
   sake"--because of His atoning death. Those who do not believe in the
   atoning death of Christ cannot pray "in His name." They may use the
   words, but without effect. For we are "justified by His blood" (Rom. v.
   9), and "we have redemption through His blood, even the forgiveness of
   sins" (Eph. i. 7; Col. i. 14). In these days when Unitarianism under
   its guileful name of Modernism has invaded all sects, it is most
   important to remember the place and work of the shed blood of Christ,
   or "prayer"--so-called--becomes a delusion and a snare.

   Let us illustrate this point by an experience which happened quite
   early in Mr. Moody's ministry. The wife of an infidel judge--a man of
   great intellectual gifts--begged Mr. Moody to speak to her husband.
   Moody, however, hesitated at arguing with such a man, and told him so
   quite frankly. "But," he added, "if ever you are converted will you
   promise to let me know?" The judge laughed cynically, and replied, "Oh,
   yes, I'll let you know quick enough if I am ever converted!" Moody went
   his way, relying upon prayer. That judge was converted, and within a
   year. He kept his promise and told Moody just how it came about. "I
   began to grow very uneasy and miserable one night when my wife was at a
   prayer-meeting. I went to bed before she came home. I could not sleep
   all that night. Getting up early the next morning, I told my wife I
   should not need any breakfast, and went off to my office. Telling the
   clerks they could take a holiday, I shut myself up in my private room.
   But I became more and more wretched. Finally, I fell on my knees and
   asked God to forgive me my sins, but I would not say for Jesus' sake,'
   for I was Unitarian, and I did not believe in the atonement. In an
   agony of mind I kept praying, O God, forgive me my sins,' but no answer
   came. At last, in desperation, I cried, O God, for Christ's sake
   forgive my sins.' Then I found peace at once."

   That judge had no access to the presence of God until he sought it in
   the name of Jesus Christ. When he came in Christ's name he was at once
   heard and forgiven. Yes, to pray "in the name" of the Lord Jesus is to
   ask for things which the blood of Christ has secured--"purchased"--for
   us. We have "boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus"
   (Heb. x. 19). There is entrance by no other way.

   But this is not all that those words "In my Name" mean.

   (2) The most familiar illustration of coming "in the name" of Christ is
   that of drawing money from a bank by means of a check. I can draw from
   my bank account only up to the amount of my deposit there. In my own
   name, I can go no farther. In the Bank of England I have no money
   whatsoever, and can therefore draw nothing therefrom. But suppose a
   very wealthy man who has a big account there gives me a blank check
   bearing his signature, and bids me fill it in to any amount I choose.
   He is my friend. What shall I do? Shall I just satisfy my present need,
   or shall I draw as much as I dare? I shall certainly do nothing to
   offend my friend, or to lower myself in his esteem.

   Well, we are told by some that heaven is our bank. God is the Great
   Banker, for "every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and
   cometh down from the Father" (James i. 17). We need a "check" wherewith
   to "draw" upon this boundless store. The Lord Jesus gives us a blank
   check in prayer. "Fill it in," says He, "to any amount; ask anything,'
   what ye will,' and you shall have it. Present your check in My name,
   and your request will be honored." Let me put this in the words of a
   well-known evangelist of today. "That is what happens when I go to the
   bank of heaven-when I go to God in prayer. I have nothing deposited
   there; I have no credit there; and if I go in my own name I will get
   absolutely nothing. But Jesus Christ has unlimited credit in heaven,
   and He has granted me the privilege of going with His name on my
   checks; and when I thus go my prayers will be honored to any extent. To
   pray, then, in the name of Christ is to pray, not on the ground of my
   credit, but His."

   This is all very delightful, and, in a sense, very true.

   If the check were drawn on a Government account, or upon some wealthy
   corporation, one might be tempted to get all one could. But remember we
   are coming to a loving Father to Whom we owe all, and Whom we love with
   all our heart, and to Whom we may come repeatedly. In cashing our
   checks at the bank of heaven we desire chiefly His honor and His glory.
   We wish to do only that which is pleasing in His sight. To cash some of
   our "checks"--to answer some of our prayers--would only bring dishonor
   to His name, and discredit and discomfort to us. True, His resources
   are unlimited; but His honor is assailable.

   But experience makes argument unnecessary! Dear reader, have we
   not--all of us--often tried this method only to fail?

   How many of us dare say we have never come away from the bank of heaven
   without getting what we asked for, although we have apparently asked
   "in Christ's name"? Wherein do we fail? Is it because we do not seek to
   learn God's will for us? We must not try to exceed His will.

   May I give a personal experience of my own which has never been told in
   public, and which is probably quite unique? It happened over thirty
   years ago, and now I see why. It makes such a splendid illustration of
   what we are now trying to learn about prayer.

   A well-to-do friend, and an exceedingly busy one, wished to give me one
   pound towards a certain object. He invited me to his office, and
   hastily wrote out a check for the amount. He folded the check and
   handed it to me, saying, "I will not cross it. Will you kindly cash it
   at the bank?" On arriving at the bank I glanced at my name on the check
   without troubling to verify the amount, endorsed it, and handed it to a
   clerk. "This is rather a big sum to cash over the counter," he said,
   eyeing me narrowly. "Yes," I replied laughingly, "one pound!" "No,"
   said the clerk: "this is made out for one thousand pounds!' "

   And so it was! My friend was, no doubt, accustomed to writing big
   checks; and he had actually written "one thousand" instead of "one"
   pound. Now, what was my position legally? The check was truly in his
   name. The signature was all right. My endorsement was all right. Could
   I not demand the 1,000 pounds, provided there was sufficient in the
   account? The check was written deliberately, if hurriedly, and freely
   to me--why should I not take the gift? Why not?

   But I was dealing with a friend--a generous friend to whom I owed many
   deeds of lovingkindness. He had revealed his mind to me. I knew his
   wishes and desires.

   He meant to give me one pound, and no more. I knew his intention, his
   "mind," and at once took back the all-too-generous check, and in due
   time I received just one pound, according to his will. Had that donor
   given me a blank check the result would have been exactly the same. He
   would have expected me to write in one pound, and my honor would have
   been at stake in my doing so. Need we draw the lesson? God has His will
   for each one of us, and unless we seek to know that will we are likely
   to ask for "a thousand," when He knows that "one" will be best for us.
   In our prayers we are coming to a Friend--a loving Father. We owe
   everything to Him. He bids us come to Him whenever we like for all we
   need. His resources are infinite.

   But He bids us to remember that we should ask only for those things
   that are according to His will--only for that which will bring glory to
   His name. John says, "If we ask anything according to His will, He
   heareth us" (I John v. 14). So then our Friend gives us a blank check,
   and leaves us to fill in "anything"; but He knows that if we truly love
   Him we shall never put down--never ask for--things He is not willing to
   give us, because they would be harmful to us.

   Perhaps with most of us the fault lies in the other direction. God
   gives us a blank check and says, Ask for a pound--and we ask for a
   shilling! Would not my friend have been insulted had I treated him
   thus? Do we ask enough? Do we dare to ask "according to His riches in
   glory"?

   The point we are dwelling upon, however, is this--we cannot be sure
   that we are praying "in His name" unless we learn His will for us.

   (3) But even now we have not exhausted the meaning of those words, "In
   my Name." We all know what it is to ask for a thing "in the name" of
   another. But we are very careful not to allow anyone to use our name
   who is not to be trusted, or he might abuse our trust and discredit our
   name. Gehazi, the trusted servant, dishonestly used Elisha's name when
   he ran after Naaman. In Elisha's name he secured riches, but also
   inherited a curse for his wickedness.

   A trusted clerk often uses his employer's name and handles great sums
   of money as if they were his own. But this he does only so long as he
   is thought to be worthy of such confidence in him. And he uses the
   money for his master, and not for himself. All our money belongs to our
   Master, Christ Jesus. We can go to God for supplies in His name if we
   use all we get for His glory.

   When I go to cash a check payable to me, the banker is quite satisfied
   if the signature of his client is genuine and that I am the person
   authorized to receive the money. He does not ask for references to my
   character. He has no right whatever to enquire whether I am worthy to
   receive the money or to be trusted to use it aright. It is not so with
   the Bank of Heaven. Now, this is a point of greatest importance. Do not
   hurry over what is now to be said.

   When I go to heaven's bank in the name of the Lord Jesus, with a check
   drawn upon the unsearchable riches of Christ, God demands that I shall
   be a worthy recipient. Not "worthy" in the sense that I can merit or
   deserve anything from a holy God--but worthy in the sense that I am
   seeking the gift not for my own glory or self-interest, but only for
   the glory of God.

   Otherwise I may pray and not get. "Ye ask and receive not, because ye
   ask amiss that ye may spend it in your pleasures" (James iv. 3, R.V.).

   The great Heavenly Banker will not cash checks for us if our motives
   are not right. Is not this why so many fail in prayer? Christ's name is
   the revelation of His character.

   To pray "in His name" is to pray in His character, as His
   representative sent by Him: it is to pray by His Spirit and according
   to His will; to have His approval in our asking, to seek what He seeks,
   to ask help to do what He Himself would wish to be done, and to desire
   to do it not for our own glorification, but for His glory alone. To
   pray "in His name" we must have identity of interests and purpose. Self
   and its aims and desires must be entirely controlled by God's Holy
   Spirit, so that our wills are in complete harmony with Christ's will.

   We must reach the attitude of St. Augustine when he cried, "O Lord,
   grant that I may do Thy will as if it were my will, so that Thou mayest
   do my will as if it were Thy will."

   Child of God, does this seem to make prayer "in His name" quite beyond
   us? That was not our Lord's intention. He is not mocking us! Speaking
   of the Holy Spirit our Lord used these words: "The Comforter . . . Whom
   the Father will send in my name" (John xiv. 26). Now, our Savior wants
   us to be so controlled by the Holy Spirit that we may act in Christ's
   name. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
   God" (Rom. viii. 14). And only sons can say, "Our Father."

   Our Lord said of Saul of Tarsus: "He is a chosen vessel unto Me to bear
   My name before the Gentiles and kings, and the children of Israel"
   (Acts ix. 15). Not to them, but before them. So St. Paul says: "It
   pleased God to reveal his Son in me." We cannot pray in Christ's name
   unless we bear that name before people. And this is only possible so
   long as we "abide in" Him and His words abide in us. So we come to
   this--unless the heart is right the prayer must be wrong.

   Christ said, "If ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ye shall
   ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you" (John xv. 7).

   Those three promises are really identical--they express the same
   thought in different words. Look at them--

   Ask anything in my name, I will do it (John xiv. 13, 14).

   Ask what ye will (if ye abide in me and my words abide in you), and it
   shall be done (John xv. 7).

   Ask anything, according to his will, we have the petitions (I John v.
   14).

   And we could sum them all up in the words of St. John, "Whatsoever we
   ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments and do the
   things which are pleasing in his sight" (I John iii. 22). When we do
   what He bids, He does what we ask! Listen to God and God will listen to
   you. Thus our Lord gives us "power of attorney" over His kingdom, the
   kingdom of heaven, if only we fulfil the condition of abiding in Him.

   Oh, what a wonder is this! How eagerly and earnestly we should seek to
   know His "mind," His wish, His will!--How amazing it is that any one of
   us should by our own self-seeking miss such unsearchable riches! We
   know that God's will is the best for us. We know that He longs to bless
   us and make us a blessing. We know that to follow our own inclination
   is absolutely certain to harm us and to hurt us and those whom we love.
   We know that to turn away from His will for us is to court disaster. O
   child of God, why do we not trust Him fully and wholly? Here we are,
   then, once again brought face to face with a life of holiness. We see
   with the utmost clearness that our Savior's call to prayer is simply a
   clarion call to holiness. "Be ye holy!" for without holiness no man can
   see God, and prayer cannot be efficacious.

   When we confess that we "never get answers to our prayers," we are
   condemning not God, or His promises, or the power of prayer, but
   ourselves. There is no greater test of spirituality than prayer. The
   man who tries to pray quickly discovers just where he stands in God's
   sight.

   Unless we are living the Victorious Life we cannot truly pray "in the
   name" of Christ, and our prayer-life must of necessity be feeble,
   fitful and oft-times unfruitful.

   And "in His name" must be "according to His will." But can we know His
   will? Assuredly we can. St. Paul not only says, "Let this mind be in
   you which was in Christ Jesus . . ." (Phil. ii. 5); he also boldly
   declares, "We have the mind of Christ" (I Cor. ii. 16). How, then, can
   we get to know God's will?

   We shall remember that "the secret of the Lord is with them that fear
   him" (Psa. xxv. 14).

   In the first place, we must not expect God to reveal His will to us
   unless we desire to know that will and intend to do that will.
   Knowledge of God's will and the performance of that will go together.
   We are apt to desire to know God's will so that we may decide whether
   we will obey or not. Such an attitude is disastrous. "If any man
   willeth to do His will, he shall know of the teaching" (John vii. 17).

   God's will is revealed in His Word in Holy Scriptures. What He promises
   in His Word I may know to be according to His will.

   For example, I may confidently ask for wisdom, because His Word says,
   "If any . . . lack wisdom, let him ask of God . . . and it shall be
   given him" (James i. 5). We cannot be men of prevailing prayer unless
   we study God's Word to find out His will for us.

   But it is the Holy Spirit of God Who is prayer's great Helper. Read
   again those wonderful words of St. Paul: "In the same way the Spirit
   also helps us in our weakness; for we do not know what prayers to offer
   nor in what way to offer them, but the Spirit Himself pleads for us in
   yearnings that can find no words, and the Searcher of hearts knows what
   the Spirit's meaning is, because His intercessions for God's people are
   in harmony with God's will" (Rom. viii. 26, 27; Weymouth).

   What comforting words! Ignorance and helplessness in prayer are indeed
   blessed things if they cast us upon the Holy Spirit. Blessed be the
   name of the Lord Jesus! We are left without excuse. Pray we must: pray
   we can.

   Remember our Heavenly Father is pledged to give the Holy Spirit to them
   that ask Him (Luke xi. 13)--and any other "good thing" too (Matt. vii.
   11).

   Child of God, you have often prayed. You have, no doubt, often bewailed
   your feebleness and slackness in prayer. But have you really prayed in
   His name?

   It is when we have failed and know not "what prayers to offer" or "in
   what way," that the Holy Spirit is promised as our Helper.

   Is it not worth while to be wholly and whole-heartedly yielded to
   Christ? The half-and-half Christian is of very little use either to God
   or man. God cannot use him, and man has no use for him, but considers
   him a hypocrite. One sin allowed in the life wrecks at once our
   usefulness and our joy, and robs prayer of its power.

   Beloved, we have caught a fresh glimpse of the grace and the glory of
   our Lord Jesus Christ. He is willing and waiting to share with us both
   His glory and His grace. He is willing to make us channels of blessing.
   Shall we not worship God in sincerity and truth, and cry eagerly and
   earnestly, "Lord, what shall I do?" (Acts xxii. 10, R.V.) and then, in
   the power of His might, do it?

   St. Paul once shot up that prayer to heaven; "What shall I do?" What
   answer did he get? Listen! He tells us in his counsel to believers
   everywhere just what it meant to him, and should mean to us: "Beloved,
   put on . . . a heart of compassion, kindness, humility, long-suffering;
   . . .above all things put on love and let the peace of Christ rule in
   your hearts. . . . Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
   wisdom. . . . And whatsoever ye do, in word or deed, do all in the name
   of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him" (Col.
   iii. 12-17).

   It is only when whatsoever we do is done in His name that He will do
   whatsoever we ask in His name.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 7: MUST I AGONIZE?

   PRAYER is measured, not by time, but by intensity. Earnest souls who
   read of men like Praying Hyde are today anxiously asking, "Am I
   expected to pray like that?"

   They hear of others who sometimes remain on their knees before God all
   day or all night, refusing food and scorning sleep, whilst they pray
   and pray and pray. They naturally wonder, "Are we to do the same? Must
   all of us follow their examples?" We must remember that those men of
   prayer did not pray by time. They continued so long in prayer because
   they could not stop praying.

   Some have ventured to think that in what has been said in earlier
   chapters I have hinted that we must all follow in their train. Child of
   God, do not let any such thought--such fear?--distress you. Just be
   willing to do what He will have you do--what He leads you to do. Think
   about it; pray about it. We are bidden by the Lord Jesus to pray to our
   loving Heavenly Father. We sometimes sing, "Oh, how He loves!" And
   nothing can fathom that love.

   Prayer is not given us as a burden to be borne, or an irksome duty to
   fulfil, but to be a joy and power to which there is no limit. It is
   given us that we "may find grace to help us in time of need" (Heb. iv.
   16, R.V.). And every time is a "time of need." "Pray ye" is an
   invitation to be accepted rather than a command to be obeyed. Is it a
   burden for a child to come to his father to ask for some boon? How a
   father loves his child, and seeks its highest good! How he shields that
   little one from any sorrow or pain or suffering! Our heavenly Father
   loves us infinitely more than any earthly father. The Lord Jesus loves
   us infinitely more than any earthly friend. God forgive me if any words
   of mine, on such a precious theme as prayer, have wounded the hearts or
   consciences of those who are yearning to know more about prayer. "Your
   heavenly Father knoweth," said our Lord: and if He knows, we can but
   trust and not be afraid.

   A schoolmaster may blame a boy for neglected homework, or unpunctual
   attendance, or frequent absence; but the loving father in the home
   knows all about it. He knows all about the devoted service of the
   little laddie in the home circle, where sickness or poverty throws so
   many loving tasks in his way. Our dear, loving Father knows all about
   us. He sees. He knows how little leisure some of us have for prolonged
   periods of prayer.

   For some of us God makes leisure. He makes us lie down (Psa. xxiii. 2)
   that He may make us look up. Even then, weakness of body often prevents
   prolonged prayer. Yet I question if any of us, however great and
   reasonable our excuses, spend enough thought over our prayers. Some of
   us are bound to be much in prayer. Our very work demands it. We may be
   looked upon as spiritual leaders; we may have the spiritual welfare or
   training of others. God forbid that we should sin against the Lord in
   ceasing to pray enough for them (I Sam. xii. 23). Yes, with some it is
   our very business--almost our life's work-to pray, Others--


   Have friends who give them pain,

   Yet have not sought a friend in Him.

   For them they cannot help praying. If we have the burden of souls upon
   us we shall never ask, "How long need I pray?"

   But how well we know the difficulties which surround the prayer-life of
   many! A little pile of letters lies before me as I write. They are full
   of excuses, and kindly protests, and reasonings it is true. But is that
   why they are written? No! No! Far from it. In every one of them there
   is an undercurrent of deep yearning to know God's will, and how to obey
   the call to prayer amid all the countless claims of life.

   Those letters tell of many who cannot get away from others for times of
   secret prayer; of those who share even bedrooms; of busy mothers, and
   maids, and mistresses who scarcely know how to get through the endless
   washing and cooking, mending and cleaning, shopping and visiting; of
   tired workers who are too weary to pray when the day's work is done.

   Child of God, our heavenly Father knows all about it. He is not a
   taskmaster. He is our Father. If you have no time for prayer, or no
   chance of secret prayer, why, just tell Him all about it--and you will
   discover that you are praying!

   To those who seem unable to get any solitude at all, or even the
   opportunity of stealing into a quiet church for a few moments, may we
   point to the wonderful prayer-life of St. Paul ? Did it ever occur to
   you that he was in prison when he wrote most of those marvelous prayers
   of his which we possess? Picture him. He was chained to a Roman soldier
   day and night, and was never alone for a moment. Epaphias was there
   part of the time, and caught something of his master's passion for
   prayer. St. Luke may have been there. What prayer-meetings! No
   opportunity for secret prayer. No! but how much we owe to the uplifting
   of those chained hands! You and I may be never, or rarely ever, alone,
   but at least our hands are not fettered with chains, and our hearts are
   not fettered, nor our lips.

   Can we make time for prayer? I may be wrong, but my own belief is that
   it is not God's will for most of us--and perhaps not for any of us--to
   spend so much time in prayer as to injure our physical health through
   getting insufficient food or sleep. With very many it is a physical
   impossibility, because of bodily weakness, to remain long in the spirit
   of intense prayer.

   The posture in which we pray is immaterial. God will listen whether we
   kneel, or stand, or sit, or walk, or work.

   I am quite aware that many have testified to the fact that God
   sometimes gives special strength to those who curtail their hours of
   rest in order to pray more. At one time the writer tried getting up
   very early in the morning--and every morning--for prayer and communion
   with God. After a time he found that his daily work was suffering in
   intensity and effectiveness, and that it was difficult to keep awake
   during the early evening hours! But do we pray as much as we might do?
   It is a lasting regret to me that I allowed the days of youth and vigor
   to pass by without laying more stress upon those early hours of prayer.

   Now, the inspired command is clear enough: "Pray without ceasing" (I
   Thess. v. 17). Our dear Lord said, "Men ought always to pray, and not
   to faint"--"and never lose heart" (Weymouth) (Luke xviii. 1).

   This, of course, cannot mean that we are to be always on our knees. I
   am convinced that God does not wish us to neglect rightful work in
   order to pray. But it is equally certain that we might work better and
   do more work if we gave less time to work and more to prayer.

   Let us work well. We are to be "not slothful in business" (Rom. xii.
   11). St. Paul says, "We exhort you, brethren, that ye abound more and
   more; and that ye. . . do your own business, and to work with your
   hands. . . that ye may walk honestly . . . and have need of nothing" (I
   Thess. iv. 11, 12). "If any will not work, neither let him eat" (II
   Thess. iii. 10).

   But are there not endless opportunities during every day of "lifting,
   up holy hands"--or at least holy hearts--in prayer to our Father? Do we
   seize the opportunity, as we open our eyes upon each new day, of
   praising and blessing our Redeemer? Every day is an Easter day to the
   Christian. We can pray as we dress. Without a reminder we shall often
   forget. Stick a piece of stamp-paper in the corner of your
   looking-glass, bearing the words,--"Pray without ceasing." Try it. We
   can pray as we go from one duty to another. We can often pray at our
   work. The washing and the writing, the mending and the minding, the
   cooking and the cleaning will be done all the better for it.

   Do not children, both young and old, work better and play better when
   some loved one is watching? Will it not help us ever to remember that
   the Lord Jesus is always with us, watching? Aye, and helping. The very
   consciousness of His eye upon us will be the consciousness of His power
   within us.

   Do you not think that St. Paul had in his mind this habitual praying
   rather than fixed seasons of prayer when he said, "The Lord is at
   hand"--i.e., is near (Weymouth). "In nothing be anxious, but in
   everything, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your
   requests be made known unto God" (Phil. iv. 5, 6)? Does not "in
   everything" suggest that, as thing after thing befalls us, moment by
   moment, we should then and there make it a "thing" of prayer and praise
   to the Lord Who is near? (Why should we limit this "nearness" to the
   Second Advent?)

   What a blessed thought: prayer is to a near-God. When our Lord sent His
   disciples forth to work, He said, "Lo, I am with you alway."

   Sir Thomas Browne, the celebrated physician, had caught this spirit. He
   made a vow "to pray in all places where quietness inviteth; in any
   house, highway or street; and to know no street in this city that may
   not witness that I have not forgotten God and my Savior in it; and that
   no town or parish where I have been may not say the like. To take
   occasion of praying upon the sight of any church which I see as I ride
   about. To pray daily and particularly for my sick patients, and for all
   sick people, under whose care soever. And at the entrance into the
   house of the sick to say, The peace and the mercy of God be upon this
   house.' After a sermon to make a prayer and desire a blessing, and to
   pray for the minister."

   But we question if this habitual communion with our blessed Lord is
   possible unless we have times--whether long or brief--of definite
   prayer. And what of these prayer seasons? We have said earlier that
   prayer is as simple as a little child asking something of its father.
   Nor would such a remark need any further comment were it not for the
   existence of the evil one.

   There is no doubt whatever that the devil opposes our approach to God
   in prayer, and does all he can to prevent the prayer of faith. His
   chief way of hindering us is to try to fill our minds with the thought
   of our needs, so that they shall not be occupied with thoughts of God,
   our loving Father, to Whom we pray. He wants us to think more of the
   gift than of the Giver. The Holy Spirit leads us to pray for a brother.
   We get as far as "O God, bless my brother"--and away go our thoughts to
   the brother, and his affairs, and his difficulties, his hopes and his
   fears, and away goes prayer!

   How hard the devil makes it for us to concentrate our thoughts upon
   God! This is why we urge people to get a realization of the glory of
   God, and the power of God, and the presence of God, before offering up
   any petition. If there were no devil there would be no difficulty in
   prayer, but it is the evil one's chief aim to make prayer impossible.
   That is why most of us find it hard to sympathize with those who
   profess to condemn what they call "vain repetitions" and "much
   speaking" in prayer--quoting our Lord's words in His sermon on the
   mount.

   A prominent London vicar said quite recently, "God does not wish us to
   waste either His time or ours with long prayers. We must be
   business-like in our dealings with God, and just tell Him plainly and
   briefly what we want, and leave the matter there." But does our friend
   think that prayer is merely making God acquainted with our needs? If
   that is all there is in it, why, there is no need of prayer! "For your
   Father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye ask him," said our
   Lord when urging the disciples to pray.

   We are aware that Christ Himself condemned some "long prayers" (Matt.
   xxiii. 14). But they were long prayers made "for a pretense," "for a
   show" (Luke xx. 47). Dear praying people, believe me, the Lord would
   equally condemn many of the "long prayers" made every week in some of
   our prayer-meetings--prayers which kill the prayer-meeting, and which
   finish up with a plea that God would hear these "feeble breathings," or
   "unworthy utterings."

   But he never condemns long prayers that are sincere. Let us not forget
   that our Lord sometimes spent long nights in prayer. We are told of one
   of these--we do not know how frequently they were (Luke vi. 12). He
   would sometimes rise a "great while before day" and depart to a
   solitary place for prayer (Mark i. 35). The perfect Man spent more time
   in prayer than we do. It would seem an undoubted fact that with God's
   saints in all ages nights of prayer with God have been followed by days
   of power with men.

   Nor did our Lord excuse Himself from prayer--as we, in our ignorance,
   might think He could have done--because of the pressing calls to
   service and boundless opportunities of usefulness. After one of His
   busiest days, at a time when His popularity was at its highest, just
   when everyone sought His company and His counsel, He turned His back
   upon them all and retired to a mountain to pray (Matt. xiv. 23).

   We are told that once "great multitudes came together to hear Him, and
   to be healed of their infirmities." Then comes the remark, "But Jesus
   himself constantly withdrew into the desert, and there prayed" (Luke v.
   15, 16, Weymouth). Why? Because He knew that prayer was then far more
   potent than "service."

   We say we are too busy to pray. But the busier our Lord was, the more
   He prayed. Sometimes He had no leisure so much as to eat (Mark iii.
   20); and sometimes He had no leisure for needed rest and sleep (Mark
   vi. 31). Yet He always took time to pray. If frequent prayer, and, at
   times, long hours of prayer, were necessary for our Savior, are they
   less necessary for us?

   I do not write to persuade people to agree with me: that is a very
   small matter. We only want to know the truth. Spurgeon once said:
   "There is no need for us to go beating about the bush, and not telling
   the Lord distinctly what it is that we crave at His hands. Nor will it
   be seemly for us to make any attempt to use fine language; but let us
   ask God in the simplest and most direct manner for just the things we
   want. . . . I believe in business prayers. I mean prayers in which you
   take to God one of the many promises which He has given us in His Word,
   and expect it to be fulfilled as certainly as we look for the money to
   be given us when we go to the bank to cash a check. We should not think
   of going there, lolling over the counter chattering with the clerks on
   every conceivable subject except the one thing for which we had gone to
   the bank, and then coming away without the coin we needed; but we
   should lay before the clerk the promise to pay the bearer a certain
   sum, tell him in what form we wished to take the amount, count the cash
   after him, and then go on our way to attend to other business. That is
   just an illustration of the method in which we should draw supplies
   from the Bank of Heaven." Splendid!

   But--? By all means let us be definite in prayer; by all means let us
   put eloquence aside--if we have any! By all means let us avoid needless
   "chatter," and come in faith, expecting to receive.

   But would the bank clerk pass me the money over the counter so readily
   if there stood by my side a powerful, evil-countenanced, well-armed
   ruffian whom he recognized to be a desperate criminal waiting to snatch
   the money before my weak hands could grasp it? Would he not wait till
   the ruffian had gone? This is no fanciful picture. The Bible teaches us
   that, in some way or other, Satan can hinder our prayers and delay the
   answer. Does not St. Peter urge certain things upon Christians, that
   their "prayers be not hindered"? (I Peter iii. 7.) Our prayers can be
   hindered. "Then cometh the evil one and snatcheth away that which hath
   been sown in the heart" (Matt. xiii. 19, R.V.).

   Scripture gives us one instance--probably only one out of many--where
   the evil one actually kept back--delayed--for three weeks an answer to
   prayer. We only mention this to show the need of repeated prayer,
   persistence in prayer, and also to call attention to the extraordinary
   power which Satan possesses. We refer to Daniel x. 12, 13: "Fear not,
   Daniel, for from the first day that thou didst set thine heart to
   understand, and to humble thyself before God, thy words were heard: and
   I am come for thy word's sake. But the prince of the kingdom of Persia
   withstood me one and twenty days. But lo, Michael, one of the chief
   princes, came to help me."

   We must not overlook this Satanic opposition and hindrance to our
   prayers. If we were to be content to ask God only once for some
   promised thing or one we deemed necessary, these chapters would never
   have been written. Are we never to ask again? For instance, I know that
   God willeth not the death of a sinner. So I come boldly in prayer: "O
   God, save my friend." Am I never to ask for his conversion again?
   George Mller prayed daily--and oftener--for sixty years for the
   conversion of a friend. But what light does the Bible throw upon
   "business-like" prayers? Our Lord gave two parables to teach
   persistence and continuance in prayer. The man who asked three loaves
   from his friend at midnight received as many as he needed "because of
   his importunity"--or persistency (Weymouth), i.e., his "shamelessness,"
   as the word literally means (Luke xi. 8). The widow who "troubled" the
   unjust judge with her "continual coming" at last secured redress. Our
   Lord adds "And shall not God avenge his elect which cry unto him day
   and night, and he is long-suffering over them?" (Luke xviii. 7, R.V.)

   How delighted our Lord was with the poor Syro-Phoenician woman who
   would not take refusals or rebuffs for an answer! Because of her
   continual request He said: "O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto
   thee even as thou wilt" (Matt. xv. 28). Our dear Lord, in His agony in
   Gethsemane, found it necessary to repeat even His prayer. "And he left
   them and went away and prayed a third time, saying again the same
   words" (Matt. xxvi. 44). And we find St. Paul, the apostle of prayer,
   asking God time after time to remove his thorn in the flesh.
   "Concerning this thing," says he, "I besought the Lord thrice that it
   might depart from me" (II Cor. xii. 8).

   God cannot always grant our petitions immediately. Sometimes we are not
   fitted to receive the gift. Sometimes He says "No" in order to give us
   something far better. Think, too, of the days when St. Peter was in
   prison. If your boy was unjustly imprisoned, expecting death at any
   moment, would you--could you--be content to pray just once, a
   "business-like" prayer: "O God, deliver my boy from the hands of these
   men"? Would you not be very much in prayer and very much in earnest?

   This is how the Church prayed for St. Peter. "Long and fervent prayer
   was offered to God by the Church on his behalf" (Acts xii. 5,
   Weymouth). Bible students will have noticed that the A.V. rendering,
   "without ceasing," reads "earnestly" in the R.V. Dr. Torrey points out
   that neither translation gives the full force of the Greek. The word
   means literally "stretched-out-ed-ly." It represents the soul on the
   stretch of earnest and intense desire. Intense prayer was made for St.
   Peter. The very same word is used of our Lord in Gethsemane: "And being
   in an agony he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat became as it were
   great drops of blood falling down upon the ground" (Luke xxii. 44).

   Ah! there was earnestness, even agony in prayer. Now, what about our
   prayers? Are we called upon to agonize in prayer? Many of God's dear
   saints say "No!" They think such agonizing in us would reveal great
   want of faith. Yet most of the experiences which befell our Lord are to
   be ours. We have been crucified with Christ, and we are risen with Him.
   Shall there be, with us, no travailing for souls?

   Come back to human experience. Can we refrain from agonizing in prayer
   over dearly beloved children who are living in sin? I question if any
   believer can have the burden of souls upon him--a passion for
   souls--and not agonize in prayer.

   Can we help crying out, like John Knox, "O God, give me Scotland or I
   die"? Here again the Bible helps us. Was there no travail of soul and
   agonizing in prayer when Moses cried out to God, "O, this people have
   sinned a great sin, and have made gods of gold. Yet now, if thou wilt
   forgive their sin--; and if not, blot, me, I pray thee, out of thy
   book"? (Exod. xxxii. 32.)

   Was there no agonizing in prayer when St. Paul said, "I could
   wish"--("pray," R.V. marg.)--"that I myself were anathema from Christ
   for my brethren's sake"? (Rom. ix. 3.)

   We may, at all events, be quite sure that our Lord, Who wept over
   Jerusalem, and Who "offered up prayers and supplications with strong
   crying and tears" (Heb. v. 7), will not be grieved if He sees us
   weeping over erring ones. Nay, will it not rather gladden His heart to
   see us agonizing over the sin which grieves Him? In fact, may not the
   paucity of conversions in so many a ministry be due to lack of
   agonizing in prayer?

   We are told that "As soon as Zion travailed she brought forth her
   children" (Isa. lxvi. 8). Was St. Paul thinking of this passage when he
   wrote to the Galatians, "My little children, of whom I am again in
   travail until Christ be formed in you"? (Gal. iv. 19.) And will not
   this be true of spiritual children? Oh, how cold our hearts often are!
   How little we grieve over the lost! And shall we dare to criticise
   those who agonize over the perishing? God forbid! No; there is such a
   thing as wrestling in prayer. Not because God is unwilling to answer,
   but because of the opposition of the "world-rulers of this darkness"
   (Eph. vi. 12, R.V.).

   The very word used for "striving" in prayer means "a contest." The
   contest is not between God and ourselves. He is at one with us in our
   desires. The contest is with the evil one, although he is a conquered
   foe (I John iii. 8). He desires to thwart our prayers.

   "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
   against the world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts
   of wickedness in the heavenly places" (Eph. vi. 12). We, too, are in
   these "heavenly places in Christ" (Eph. i. 3); and it is only in Christ
   that we can be victorious. Our wrestling may be a wrestling of our
   thoughts from thinking Satan's suggestions, and keeping them fixed on
   Christ our Savior--that is, watching as well as praying (Eph. vi. 18);
   "watching unto prayer."

   We are comforted by the fact that "the Spirit helpeth our infirmities:
   for we know not how to pray as we ought" (Rom. viii. 26) How does the
   Spirit "help" us, teach us, if not by example as well as by precept?
   How does the Spirit "pray"? "The Spirit Himself maketh intercession for
   us with groanings which cannot be uttered (Rom. viii. 26). Does the
   Spirit "agonize" in prayer as the Son did in Gethsemane?

   If the Spirit prays in us, shall we not share His "groanings" in
   prayer? And if our agonizing in prayer weakens our body at the time,
   will angels come to strengthen us, as they did our Lord? (Luke xxii.
   43.) We may, perhaps, like Nehemiah, weep, and mourn, and fast when we
   pray before God (Neh. i. 4). "But," one asks, "may not a godly sorrow
   for sin and a yearning desire for the salvation of others induce in us
   an agonizing which is unnecessary, and dishonoring to God?"

   May it not reveal a lack of faith in God's promises? Perhaps it may do
   so. But there is little doubt that St. Paul regarded prayer--at least
   sometimes--as a conflict (see Rom. xv. 30). In writing to the Colossian
   Christians he says: "I would have you know how greatly I strive for you
   . . . and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh; that their
   hearts may be comforted" (Col. ii. 1, 2). Undoubtedly he refers to his
   prayers for them.

   Again, he speaks of Epaphras as one who is "always striving for you in
   his prayers, that ye may stand perfect, and fully assured in all the
   will of God" (Col. iv. 12).

   The word for "strive" is our word "agonize," the very word used of our
   Lord being "in an agony" when praying Himself (Luke xxii. 44).

   The apostle says again, Epaphras "hath much labor for you," that is, in
   his prayers. St. Paul saw him praying there in prison, and witnessed
   his intense striving as he engaged in a long, indefatigable effort on
   behalf of the Colossians. How the Praetorian guard to whom St. Paul was
   chained must have wondered--yes, and have been deeply touched--to see
   these men at their prayers. Their agitation, their tears, their earnest
   supplications as they lifted up chained hands in prayer must have been
   a revelation to him! What would they think of our prayers?

   No doubt St. Paul was speaking of his own custom when he urged the
   Ephesian Christians and others "to stand," "with all prayer and
   supplication, praying at all seasons in the Spirit, and watching
   thereunto in all perseverance and supplication for all saints, and on
   my behalf . . . an ambassador in chains." (Eph. vi. 18-20). That is a
   picture of his own prayer-life, we may be sure.

   So then prayer meets with obstacles, which must be prayed away. That is
   what men mean when they talk about praying through. We must wrestle
   with the machinations of Satan. It may be bodily weariness or pain, or
   the insistent claims of other thoughts, or doubt, or the direct
   assaults of spiritual hosts of wickedness. With us, as with St. Paul,
   prayer is something of a "conflict," a "wrestle," at least sometimes,
   which compels us to "stir" ourselves up "to lay hold on God" (Isa.
   lxiv. 7). Should we be wrong if we ventured to suggest that very few
   people ever wrestle in prayer? Do we? But let us never doubt our Lord's
   power and the riches of His grace.

   The author of The Christian's Secret of a Happy Life told a little
   circle of friends, just before her death, of an incident in her own
   life. Perhaps I may be allowed to tell it abroad. A lady friend who
   occasionally paid her a visit for two or three days was always a great
   trial, a veritable tax upon her temper and her patience. Every such
   visit demanded much prayer-preparation. The time came when this
   "critical Christian" planned a visit for a whole week! She felt that
   nothing but a whole night of prayer could fortify her for this great
   testing. So, providing herself with a little plate of biscuits, she
   retired in good time to her bedroom, to spend the night on her knees
   before God, to beseech Him to give her grace to keep sweet and loving
   during the impending visit. No sooner had she knelt beside her bed than
   there flashed into her mind the words of Phil. iv. 19: "God shall
   supply all your need according to His riches in glory by Christ Jesus."
   Her fears vanished. She said, "When I realized that, I gave Him thanks
   and praised Him for His goodness. Then I jumped into bed and slept the
   night through. My guest arrived the next day, and I quite enjoyed her
   visit."

   No one can lay down hard and fast rules of prayer, even for himself.
   God's gracious Holy Spirit alone can direct us moment by moment. There,
   however, we must leave the matter. God is our judge and our Guide. But
   let us remember that prayer is a many-sided thing. As Bishop Moule
   says, "True prayer can be uttered under innumerable circumstances."
   Very often


   Prayer is the burden of a sigh

   The falling of a tear,

   The upward glancing of an eye

   When none but God is near.

   It may be just letting your request be made known unto God (Phil. iv.
   6). We cannot think that prayer need always be a conflict and a
   wrestle. For if it were, many of us would soon become physical wrecks,
   suffering from nervous breakdown, and coming to an early grave.

   And with many it is a physical impossibility to stay any length of time
   in a posture of prayer. Dr. Moule says: "Prayer, genuine and
   victorious, is continually offered without the least physical effort or
   disturbance. It is often in the deepest stillness of soul and body that
   it wins its longest way. But there is another side of the matter.
   Prayer is never meant to be indolently easy, however simple and reliant
   it may be. It is meant to be an infinitely important transaction
   between man and God. And therefore, very often . . . it has to be
   viewed as a work involving labor, persistence, conflict, if it would be
   prayer indeed."

   No one can prescribe for another. Let each be persuaded in his own mind
   how to pray, and the Holy Spirit will inspire us and guide us how long
   to pray. And let us all be so full of the love of God our Savior that
   prayer, at all times and in all places, may be a joy as well as a means
   of grace.


   Shepherd Divine, our wants relieve

   In this and every day;

   To all Thy tempted followers give

   The power, to watch and pray.

   The spirit of interceding grace

   Give us the faith to claim;

   To wrestle till we see Thy face

   And know Thy hidden Name.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 8: DOES GOD ALWAYS ANSWER PRAYER?

   WE now come to one of the most important questions that any man can
   ask. Very much depends upon the answer we are led to give. Let us not
   shrink from facing the question fairly and honestly. Does God always
   answer prayer? Of course, we all grant that He does answer prayer--some
   prayers, and sometimes. But does He always answer true prayer. Some
   so-called prayers He does not answer, because He does not hear them.
   When His people were rebellious, He said, "When ye make many prayers, I
   will not hear" (Isa. i. 15).

   But a child of God ought to expect answers to prayer. God means every
   prayer to have an answer; and not a single real prayer can fail of its
   effect in heaven.

   And yet that wonderful declaration of St. Paul: "All things are yours,
   for ye are Christ's" (I Cor. iii. 21), seems so plainly and so
   tragically untrue for most Christians. Yet it is not so. They are ours,
   but so many of us do not possess our possessions. The owners of Mount
   Morgan, in Queensland, toiled arduously for years on its barren slopes,
   eking out a miserable existence, never knowing that under their feet
   was one of the richest sources of gold the world has ever known. There
   was wealth, vast, undreamt of, yet unimagined and unrealized. It was
   "theirs," yet not theirs.

   The Christian, however, knows of the riches of God in glory in Christ
   Jesus, but he does not seem to know how to get them.

   Now, our Lord tells us that they are to be had for the asking. May He
   indeed give us all a right judgment in "prayer-things." When we say
   that no true prayer goes unanswered we are not claiming that God always
   gives just what we ask for. Have you ever met a parent so foolish as to
   treat his child like that? We do not give our child a red-hot poker
   because he clamors for it! Wealthy people are the most careful not to
   allow their children much pocket-money.

   Why, if God gave us all we prayed for, we should rule the world, and
   not He! And surely we would all confess that we are not capable of
   doing that. Moreover, more than one ruler of the world is an absolute
   impossibility!

   God's answer to prayer may be "Yes," or it may be "No." It may be
   "Wait," for it may be that He plans a much larger blessing than we
   imagined, and one which involves other lives as well as our own.

   God's answer is sometimes "No." But this is not necessarily a proof of
   known and wilful sin in the life of the suppliant, although there may
   be sins of ignorance. He said "No" to St. Paul sometimes (II Cor. xii.
   8, 9). More often than not the refusal is due to our ignorance or
   selfishness in asking. "For we know not how to pray as we ought" (Rom.
   viii. 26). That was what was wrong with the mother of Zebedee's
   children. She came and worshipped our Lord and prayed to Him. He
   quickly replied, "Ye know not what ye ask" (Matt. xx. 22). Elijah, a
   great man of prayer, sometimes had "No" for an answer. But when he was
   swept up to glory in a chariot of fire, did he regret that God said
   "No" when he cried out "O Lord, take away my life"?

   God's answer is sometimes "Wait." He may delay the answer because we
   are not yet fit to receive the gift we crave--as with wrestling Jacob.
   Do you remember the famous prayer of Augustine--"O God, make me pure,
   but not now"? Are not our prayers sometimes like that? Are we always
   really willing to "drink the cup"--to pay the price of answered prayer?
   Sometimes He delays so that greater glory may be brought to Himself.

   God's delays are not denials. We do not know why He sometimes delays
   the answer and at other times answers "before we call" (Isa. lxv. 24).
   George Muller, one of the greatest men of prayer of all time, had to
   pray over a period of more than sixty-three years for the conversion of
   a friend! Who can tell why? "The great point is never to give up until
   the answer comes," said Muller. "I have been praying for sixty-three
   years and eight months for one man's conversion. He is not converted
   yet, but he will be! How can it be otherwise? There is the unchanging
   promise of Jehovah, and on that I rest." Was this delay due to some
   persistent hindrance from the devil? (Dan. x. 13). Was it a mighty and
   prolonged effort on the part of Satan to shake or break Muller's faith?
   For no sooner was Muller dead than his friend was converted--even
   before the funeral.

   Yes, his prayer was granted, though the answer tarried long in coming.
   So many of George Mller's petitions were granted him that it is no
   wonder that he once exclaimed, "Oh, how good, kind, gracious and
   condescending is the One with Whom we have to do! I am only a poor,
   frail, sinful man, but He has heard my prayers ten thousands of times."

   Perhaps some are asking, How can I discover whether God's answer is
   "No" or "Wait"? We may rest assured that He will not let us pray
   sixty-three years to get a "No"! Muller's prayer, so long repeated, was
   based upon the knowledge that God "willeth not the death of a sinner";
   "He would have all men to be saved" (I Tim. ii. 4).

   Even as I write, the postman brings me an illustration of this. A
   letter comes from one who very rarely writes me, and did not even know
   my address--one whose name is known to every Christian worker in
   England. A loved one was stricken down with illness. Is he to continue
   to pray for her recovery? Is God's answer "No," or is it, "Go on
   praying--wait"? My friend writes: "I had distinct guidance from God
   regarding my beloved . . . that it was the will of God she should be
   taken . . . I retired into the rest of surrender and submission to His
   will. I have much to praise God for." A few hours later God took that
   loved one to be with Him in glory.

   Again may we urge our readers to hold on to this truth: true prayer
   never goes unanswered.

   If we only gave more thought to our prayers we should pray more
   intelligently. That sounds like a truism. But we say it because some
   dear Christian people seem to lay their common sense and reason aside
   before they pray. A little reflection would show that God cannot grant
   some prayers. During the war every nation prayed for victory. Yet it is
   perfectly obvious that all countries could not be victorious. Two men
   living together might pray, the one for rain and the other for fine
   weather. God cannot give both these things at the same time in the same
   place!

   But the truthfulness of God is at stake in this matter of prayer. We
   have all been reading again those marvelous prayer-promises of our
   Lord, and have almost staggered at those promises--the wideness of
   their scope, the fullness of their intent, the largeness of the one
   word "Whatsoever." Very well! "Let God be found true" (Rom. iii. 4). He
   certainly will always be "found true."

   Do not stop to ask the writer if God has granted all his prayers. He
   has not. To have said "Yes" to some of them would have spelt curse
   instead of blessing. To have answered others was, alas! a spiritual
   impossibility--he was not worthy of the gifts he sought. The granting,
   of some of them would but have fostered spiritual pride and
   self-satisfaction. How plain all these things seem now, in the fuller
   light of God's Holy Spirit!

   As one looks back and compares one's eager, earnest prayers with one's
   poor, unworthy service and lack of true spirituality, one sees how
   impossible it was for God to grant the very things He longed to impart!
   It was often like asking God to put the ocean of His love into a
   thimble-heart! And yet, how God just yearns to bless us with every
   spiritual blessing! How the dear Savior cries again and again, "How
   often would I . . . but ye would not"! (Matt. xxiii. 37.) The sadness
   of it all is that we often ask and do not receive because of our
   unworthiness--and then we complain because God does not answer our
   prayers! The Lord Jesus declares that God gives the Holy Spirit--who
   teaches us how to pray--just as readily as a father gives good gifts to
   his children. But no gift is a "good gift" if the child is not fit to
   use that gift. God never gives us something that we cannot, or will
   not, use for His glory (I am not referring to talents, for we may abuse
   or "bury" those, but to spiritual gifts).

   Did you ever see a father give his baby boy a razor when he asked for
   it, because he hoped the boy would grow into a man and then find the
   razor useful? Does a father never say to his child, "Wait till you are
   older, or bigger, or wiser, or better, or stronger"? May not our loving
   heavenly Father also say to us, "Wait"? In our ignorance and blindness
   we must surely sometimes say,


   In very love refuse

   Whate'er Thou seest

   Our weakness would abuse.

   Rest assured that God never bestows tomorrow's gift today. It is not
   unwillingness on His part to give. It is not that God is ever
   straitened in Himself. His resources are infinite, and His ways are
   past finding out. It was after bidding His disciples to ask that our
   Lord goes on to hint not only at His providence, but at His resources.
   "Look at the wild birds" (Matt. vi. 26, Moffatt); "your heavenly Father
   feedeth them." How simple it sounds. Yet have you ever reflected that
   not a single millionaire, the wide world over, is wealthy enough to
   feed all "the birds of the air," even for one day? Your heavenly Father
   feedeth them every day, and is none the poorer for it. Shall He not
   much more feed you, clothe you, take care of you?

   Oh, let us rely more upon prayer! Do we not know that "He is a Rewarder
   of them that diligently seek Him"? (Hebrews xi. 6.) The "oil" of the
   Holy Spirit will never cease to flow so long as there are empty vessels
   to receive it (II Kings iv. 6). It is always we who are to blame when
   the Spirit's work ceases. God cannot trust some Christians with the
   fullness of the Holy Spirit. God cannot trust some workers with
   definite spiritual results in their labors. They would suffer from
   pride and vainglory. No! we do not claim that God grants every
   Christian everything he prays for.

   As we saw in an earlier chapter, there must be purity of heart, purity
   of motive, purity of desire, if our prayers are to be in His name. God
   is greater than His promises, and often gives more than either we
   desire or deserve--but He does not always do so. So, then, if any
   specific petition is not granted, we may feel sure that God is calling
   us to examine our hearts. For He has undertaken to grant every prayer
   that is truly offered in His name. Let us repeat His blessed words once
   more--we cannot repeat them too often--"Whatsoever ye shall ask in My
   name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If
   ye shall ask anything in My name, that will I do" (John xiv. 13, 14).

   Remember that it was impossible for Christ to offer up any prayer which
   was not granted. He was God--He knew the mind of God--He had the mind
   of the Holy Spirit.

   Does He once say, "Father, if it be possible, let. . ." as He kneels in
   agony in Gethsemane's garden, pouring out strong crying and tears? Yes,
   and "He was heard for His reverential awe" (Heb. v. 7, Dr. Moule).
   Surely not the "agony," but the son-like fear, gained the answer? Our
   prayers are heard not so much because they are importunate but because
   they are filial.

   Brother Christian, we cannot fully understand that hallowed scene of
   dreadful awe and wonder. But this we know--that our Lord never yet made
   a promise which He cannot keep, or does not mean to fulfil. The Holy
   Spirit maketh intercession for us (Rom. viii. 26), and God cannot say
   Him "Nay." The Lord Jesus makes intercession for us (Hebrews vii. 25),
   and God cannot say Him "Nay." His prayers are worth a thousand of ours,
   but it is He who bids us pray!

   "But was not St. Paul filled with the Holy Spirit?" you ask, "and did
   he not say, We have the mind of Christ?' Yet he asked thrice over that
   God would remove the thorn' in his flesh--and yet God distinctly tells
   him He would not do so."

   It is a very singular thing, too, that the only petition recorded of
   St. Paul seeking something for his own individual need was refused! The
   difficulty, however, is this: Why did St. Paul, who had the "mind" of
   Christ, ask for something which he soon discovered was contrary to
   God's wishes? There are doubtless many fully-consecrated Christians
   reading these words who have been perplexed because God has not given
   some things they prayed for.

   We must remember that we may be filled with the Spirit and yet err in
   judgment or desire. We must remember, too, that we are never filled
   with God's Holy Spirit once for all. The evil one is always on the
   watch to put his mind into us, so as to strike at God through us. At
   any moment we may become disobedient or unbelieving, or may be betrayed
   into some thought or act contrary to the Spirit of love.

   We have an astonishing example of this in the life of St. Peter. At one
   moment, under the compelling influence of God's Holy Spirit, he cries,
   "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God!" Our Lord turns, and
   with words of high commendation says, "Blessed art thou, Simon, for
   flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but My Father, which is
   in heaven." Yet, a very little while after, the devil gets his mind
   into St. Peter, and our Lord turns and says unto him, "Get thee behind
   me, Satan!" (Matt. xvi. 17, 23.) St. Peter was now speaking in the name
   of Satan! Satan still "desires to have" us.

   St. Paul was tempted to think that he could do far better work for his
   beloved Master if only that "thorn" could be removed. But God knew that
   Paul would be a better man with the "thorn" than without it.

   Is it not a comfort to us to know that we may bring more glory to God
   under something which we are apt to regard as a hindrance or handicap,
   than if that undesired thing was removed? "My grace is sufficient for
   thee: for My power is made perfect in weakness" (II Cor. xii. 9).
   Remember that


   God nothing does, nor suffers to be done,

   But what thou would'st thyself

   Did'st thou but see

   The end of all He does as well as He.

   St. Paul was not infallible--nor was St. Peter, or St. John; nor is the
   Pope or any other man. We may--and do--offer up mistaken prayers. The
   highest form of prayer is not, "Thy way, O God, not mine," but "My way,
   O God, is Thine!" We are taught to pray, not "Thy will be changed," but
   "Thy will be done."

   May we, in conclusion, give the testimony of two who have proved that
   God can be trusted?

   Sir H. M. Stanley, the great explorer, wrote: "I for one must not dare
   to say that prayers are inefficacious. Where I have been in earnest, I
   have been answered. When I prayed for light to guide my followers
   wisely through the perils that beset them, a ray of light has come upon
   the perplexed mind, and a clear road to deliverance has been pointed
   out. You may know when prayer is answered, by the glow of content which
   fills one who has flung his cause before God, as he rises to his feet.
   I have evidence, satisfactory to myself, that prayers are granted."

   Mary Slessor, the story of whose life in West Africa has surely
   thrilled us all, was once asked what prayer meant to her. She replied,
   "My life is one long, daily, hourly record of answered prayer for
   physical health, for mental overstrain, for guidance given marvelously,
   for errors and dangers averted, for enmity to the Gospel subdued, for
   food provided at the exact hour needed, for everything that goes to
   make up life and my poor service. I can testify with a full and often
   wonder-stricken awe that I believe God answers prayer. I know God
   answers prayer!"
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 9: ANSWERS TO PRAYER

   MERE human nature would choose a more startling title to this chapter.
   Remarkable answers--wonderful answers--amazing answers. But we must
   allow God to teach us that it is as natural to Him to answer prayer as
   it is for us to ask. How He delights to hear our petitions, and how He
   loves to answer them! When we hear of some wealthy person giving a
   treat to poverty-stricken people, or wiping out some crushing deficit
   in a missionary society, we exclaim, "How nice to be able to do a thing
   like that!" Well, if it is true that God loves us--and we know it is
   true--do you not think it gives Him great joy to give us what we ask?
   We should like, therefore, to recount one or two answers to prayer out
   of very many which have come to our notice, so that we may have greater
   boldness in coming to the Throne of Grace. God saves men for whom we
   pray. Try it.

   In talking over this question with a man of prayer a few days ago, he
   suddenly asked me, "Do you know St. M--'s Church, L--?"

   "Quite well--have been there several times."

   "Let me tell you what happened when I lived there. We had a
   prayer-meeting each Sunday before the 8 o'clock communion service. As
   we rose from our knees one Sunday a sidesman said, Vicar, I wish you
   would pray for my boy. He is twenty-two years old now, and has not been
   to church for years.' We can spare five minutes now,' replied the
   vicar. They knelt down again and offered up earnest supplication on
   behalf of that man. Although nothing was said to him about this, that
   youth came to church that same evening. Something in the sermon
   convicted him of sin. He came into the vestry broken-hearted, and
   accepted Jesus Christ as, his Savior."

   On Monday morning my friend, who was working as a Church Army captain
   in the parish, was present at the weekly meeting of the staff. He said
   to the vicar, "That conversion last night is a challenge to prayer--a
   challenge from God. Shall we accept it?" "What do you mean?" asked the
   vicar. "Well," said he, "shall we single out the worst man in the
   parish and pray for him?" By unanimous consent they fixed upon K--as
   the worst man they knew. So they "agreed" in prayer for his conversion.
   At the end of that week, as they were conducting a Saturday night
   prayer-meeting in the mission hall, and whilst his very name was on
   their lips, the door swung open and in staggered K--, much the worse
   for liquor. He had never been in that mission hall before. Without
   thinking of removing his cap he sank on a chair near the door and
   buried his face in his hands. The prayer-meeting suddenly became an
   enquiry-room. Even as he was--in drink--he sought the Lord Who was
   seeking him. Nor did he ever go back. Today he is one of the finest
   dockyard missioners in the land.

   Oh, why do we not pray for our unconverted friends? They may not listen
   to us when we plead with them, but they cannot hold out if we pray for
   them. Let two or three agree in prayer over the salvation of the worst,
   and then see what God will do! Tell God and then trust God. God works
   in a wonderful way, as well as in a "mysterious" way, His wonders to
   perform.

   Dan Crawford told us recently that when returning to his mission field
   after a furlough, it was necessary to make all possible haste. But a
   deep stream, which had to be crossed, was in flood, and no boats were
   available, or usable, for that matter. So he and his party camped and
   prayed. An infidel might well have laughed aloud. How could God get
   them across that river! But, as they prayed, a tall tree which had
   battled with that river for scores of years began to totter and fall.
   It fell clear across the stream! As Mr. Crawford says, "The Royal
   Engineers of heaven had laid a pontoon bridge for God's servants."

   Many young people will be reading these prayer-stories. May we remind
   them that God still hears the voice of the lad--yes, and the lass?
   (Gen. xxi. 17.) For them may we be allowed to add the following story,
   with the earnest desire that prayer may be their heritage, their very
   life; and that answered prayer may be their daily experience.

   Some little time ago, a Chinese boy of twelve years old, named
   Ma-Na-Si, a boarder in the mission school at Chefoo, went home for the
   holidays. He is the son of a native pastor.

   Whilst standing on the doorstep of his father's house he espied a
   horseman galloping towards him. The man--a heathen--was in a great
   state of perturbation. He eagerly enquired for the "Jesus-man"--the
   pastor. The boy told him that his father was away from home. The poor
   man was much distressed, and hurriedly explained the cause of his
   visit. He had been sent from a heathen village some miles away to fetch
   the "holy man" to cast a devil out of the daughter-in-law of a heathen
   friend. He poured out his sad story of this young woman, torn by
   devils, raving and reviling, pulling out her hair, clawing her face,
   tearing her clothes, smashing up furniture, and dashing away dishes of
   food. He told of her spirit of sacrilege, and outrageous impiety, and
   brazen blasphemy, and how these outbursts were followed by foaming at
   the mouth, and great exhaustion, both physical and mental. "But my
   father is not at home," the boy kept reiterating. At length the
   frenzied man seemed to understand. Suddenly he fell on his knees, and,
   stretching out his hands in desperation, cried, "You, too, are a
   Jesus-man; will you come ?"

   Think of it--a boy of twelve! Yes, but even a lad, when fully yielded
   to his Savior, is not fearful of being used by that Savior. There was
   but one moment of surprise, and a moment of hesitation, and then the
   laddie put himself wholly at his Master's disposal. Like little Samuel
   of old he was willing to obey God in all things. He accepted the
   earnest entreaty as a call from God. The heathen stranger sprang into
   the saddle, and, swinging the Christian boy up behind him, he galloped
   away.

   Ma-Na-Si began to think over things. He had accepted an invitation to
   cast out a devil in the name of Christ Jesus. But was he worthy to be
   used of God in this way? Was his heart pure and his faith strong? As
   they galloped along he carefully searched his own heart for sin to be
   confessed and repented of. Then he prayed for guidance what to say and
   how to act, and tried to recall Bible instances of demoniacal
   possession and how they were dealt with. Then he simply and humbly cast
   himself upon the God of power and of mercy, asking His help for the
   glory of the Lord Jesus. On arrival at the house they found that some
   of the members of the family were by main force holding down the
   tortured woman upon the bed. Although she had not been told that a
   messenger had gone for the native pastor, yet as soon as she heard
   footsteps in the court outside she cried, "All of you get out of my way
   quickly, so that I can escape. I must flee! A Jesus-man' is coming. I
   cannot endure him. His name is Ma-Na-Si."

   Ma-Na-Si entered the room, and after a ceremonial bow knelt down and
   began to pray. Then he sang a Christian hymn to the praise of the Lord
   Jesus. Then, in the name of the Risen Lord, glorified and omnipotent,
   he commanded the demon to come out of the woman. At once she was calm,
   though prostrate with weakness. From that day she was perfectly whole.
   She was amazed when they told her that she had uttered the name of the
   Christian boy, for she had never heard of it or read of it before, for
   the whole of that village was heathen. But that day was veritably a
   "beginning of days" to those people, for from it the Word of the Lord
   had free course and was glorified.

   Beloved reader, I do not know how this little narrative affects you. It
   is one that moves me to the very depths of my being. It seems to me
   that most of us know so little of the power of God--so little of His
   overwhelming, irresistible love. Oh, what love is His! Now, every time
   we pray, that wonderful love envelops us in a special way.

   If we really loved our blessed Savior, should we not oftener seek
   communion with Him in prayer? Fellow Christian, is it because we pray
   so little that we criticise so much? Oh, let us remember that we, like
   our dear Savior, are not sent into the world to condemn, to judge, the
   world, "but that the world should be saved through Him" (John iii. 17).

   Will any thoughtless word of criticism of anyone move anyone nearer to
   Christ? Will it even help the utterer of that fault-finding to be more
   like the Master? Oh, let us lay aside the spirit of criticism, of
   blaming, of fault-finding, of disparaging others or their work. Would
   not St. Paul say to us all, "And such were some of you, but ye are
   washed"? (I Cor. vi. 11.)

   Do you see what we are aiming at? All the evil dispositions and
   failings we detect in others are due to the devil. It is the evil one
   in the heart who causes those words and deeds which we are so ready to
   condemn and to exaggerate. Demon-possession is not unknown in England,
   but it takes a different form, perhaps. Our very friends and
   acquaintances, so kindly and lovable, are often tied and bound by some
   besetting sin--"whom Satan hath bound, lo, these many years."

   We may plead with them in vain. We may warn them in vain. Courtesy and
   charity--and our own failings and shortcomings--forbid us standing over
   them like Ma-Na-Si and exercising the evil spirit! But have we tried
   prayer--prayer always backed up by love which cannot be "provoked"? (I
   Cor. xiii. 5.)

   God answers prayer from old and young, when there is a clean heart, a
   holy life, and a simple faith. God answers prayer. We are but frail and
   faulty servants at the best. Sincere as we may be, we shall sometimes
   ask amiss. But God is faithful that promised, and He will guard us from
   all harm and supply every need.


   Can I have the things I pray for?

   God knows best;

   He is wiser than His children.

   I can rest.

   "Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness toward God; and
   whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments,
   and do those things that are pleasing in his sight" (I John iii. 21.)
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 10: HOW GOD ANSWERS PRAYER

   FOR man fully to understand God and all His dealings with us is an
   utter impossibility. "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
   the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
   past tracing out!" (Rom. xi. 33.) True, but we need not make
   difficulties where none exists. If God has all power and all knowledge,
   surely prayer has no difficulties, though occasionally there may be
   perplexities. We cannot discover God's method, but we know something of
   His manner of answering prayer.

   But at the very outset may we remind ourselves how little we know about
   ordinary things? Mr. Edison, whose knowledge is pretty profound, wrote
   in August, 1921, "We don't know the millionth part of one per cent
   about anything. We don't know what water is. We don't know what light
   is. We don't know what gravitation is. We don't know what enables us to
   keep on our feet to stand up. We don't know what electricity is. We
   don't know what heat is. We don't know anything about magnetism. We
   have a lot of hypotheses, but that is all." But we do not allow our
   ignorance about all these things to deprive us of their use! We do not
   know much about prayer, but surely this need not prevent us from
   praying! We do know what our Lord has taught us about prayer. And we do
   know that He has sent the Holy Spirit to teach us all things (John xiv.
   26). How, then, does God answer prayer? One way is just this:--

   He reveals His mind to those who pray. His Holy Spirit puts fresh ideas
   into the minds of praying people. We are quite aware that the devil and
   his angels are busy enough putting bad thoughts into our minds. Surely,
   then, God and His holy angels can give us good thoughts? Even poor,
   weak, sinful men and women can put good thoughts into the minds of
   others. That is what we try to do in writing! We do not stop to think
   what a wonderful thing it is that a few peculiar-shaped black marks on
   this white paper can uplift and inspire, or depress and cast down, or
   even convict of sin! But, to an untutored savage, it is a stupendous
   miracle. Moreover, you and I can often read people's thoughts or wishes
   from an expression on the face or a glance of the eye. Even thought
   transference between man and man is a commonplace today. And God can in
   many ways convey His thoughts to us. A remarkable instance of this was
   related by a speaker last year at Northfield. Three or four years ago,
   he met an old whaling captain who told him this story.

   "A good many years ago, I was sailing in the desolate seas off Cape
   Horn, hunting whales. One day we were beating directly south in the
   face of a hard wind. We had been tacking this way and that all the
   morning, and were making very little headway. About 11 o'clock, as I
   stood at the wheel, the idea suddenly came into my mind, Why batter the
   ship against these waves? There are probably as many whales to the
   north as to the south. Suppose we run with the wind instead of against
   it? In response to that sudden idea I changed the course of the ship,
   and began to sail north instead of south. One hour later, at noon, the
   look-out at the masthead shouted Boats ahead!' Presently we overtook
   four lifeboats, in which were fourteen sailors, the only survivors of
   the crew of a ship which had burned to the water's edge ten days
   before. Those men had been adrift in their boats ever since, praying
   God frantically for rescue; and we arrived just in time to save them.
   They could not have survived another day."

   Then the old whaler added, "I don't know whether you believe in
   religion or not, but I happen to be a Christian. I have begun every day
   of my life with prayer that God would use me to help someone else, and
   I am convinced that God, that day, put the idea into my mind to change
   the course of my ship. That idea was the means of saving fourteen
   lives."

   God has many things to say to us. He has many thoughts to put into our
   minds. We are apt to be so busy doing His work that we do not stop to
   listen to His Word. Prayer gives God the opportunity of speaking to us
   and revealing His will to us. May our attitude often be: "Speak, Lord,
   Thy servant heareth."

   God answers other prayers by putting new thoughts into the minds of
   those we pray for. At a series of services dealing with the Victorious
   Life, the writer one afternoon urged the congregation to "make up"
   their quarrels if they really desired a holy life. One lady went
   straight home, and after very earnest prayer wrote to her sister, with
   whom, owing to some disagreement, she had had nothing to do for twenty
   years! Her sister was living thirty miles away. The very next morning
   the writer of that note received a letter from that very sister asking
   forgiveness and seeking reconciliation. The two letters had crossed in
   the post. While the one sister was praying to God for the other, God
   was speaking to that other sister, putting into her mind the desire for
   reconciliation.

   You may say, Why did not God put that desire there before? It may be
   that He foresaw that it would be useless for the distant sister to
   write asking forgiveness until the other sister was also willing to
   forgive. The fact remains that, when we pray for others, somehow or
   other it opens the way for God to influence those we pray for. God
   needs our prayers, or He would not beg us to pray.

   A little time back, at the end of a weekly prayer-meeting, a godly
   woman begged those present to pray for her husband, who would never go
   near a place of worship. The leader suggested that they should continue
   in prayer then and there. Most earnest prayers were offered up. Now,
   the husband was devoted to his wife, and frequently came to meet her.
   He did so that night, and arrived at the hall while the prayer-meeting
   was still in progress. God put it into his mind to open the door and
   wait inside--a thing he had never done before. As he sat on a chair
   near the door, leaning his head upon his hand, he overheard those
   earnest petitions. During the homeward walk he said, "Wife, who was the
   man they were praying for tonight?" "Oh," she replied, "it is the
   husband of one of our workers." "Well, I am quite sure he will be
   saved," said he; "God must answer prayers like that." A little later in
   the evening he again asked, "Who was the man they were praying for?"
   She replied in similar terms as before. On retiring to rest he could
   not sleep. He was under deep conviction of sin. Awaking his wife, he
   begged her to pray for him.

   How clearly this shows us that when we pray, God can work! God could
   have prompted that man to enter that prayer-meeting any week. But had
   he done so it is a question whether any good at all would have come
   from it. When once those earnest, heartfelt petitions were being
   offered up on his behalf God saw that they would have a mighty
   influence upon that poor man.

   It is when we pray that God can help us in our work and strengthen our
   resolves. For we can answer many of our own prayers. One bitter winter
   a prosperous farmer was praying that God would keep a neighbor from
   starving. When the family prayers were over, his little boy said,
   "Father, I don't think I should have troubled God about that." "Why
   not?" he asked. "Because it would be easy enough for you to see that
   they don't starve!" There is not the slightest doubt that if we pray
   for others we shall also try to help them.

   A young convert asked his vicar to give him some Christian work. "Have
   you a chum?" "Yes," replied the boy. "Is he a Christian?" "No, he is as
   careless as I was." "Then go and ask him to accept Christ as his
   Savior." "Oh, no!" said the lad, "I could never do that. Give me
   anything but that." "Well," said the vicar, "promise me two things:
   that you will not speak to him about his soul, and that you will pray
   to God twice daily for his conversion." "Why, yes, I'll gladly do
   that," answered the boy. Before a fortnight was up he rushed round to
   the vicarage. "Will you let me off my promise? I must speak to my
   chum!" he cried. When he began to pray God could give him strength to
   witness. Communion with God is essential before we can have real
   communion with our fellow-man. My belief is that men so seldom speak to
   others about their spiritual condition because they pray so little for
   them.

   The writer has never forgotten how his faith in prayer was confirmed
   when, as a lad of thirteen, he earnestly asked God to enable him on a
   certain day to secure twenty new subscribers for missions overseas.
   Exactly twenty new names were secured before night closed in. The
   consciousness that God would grant that prayer was an incentive to
   eager effort, and gave an unwonted courage in approaching others.

   A cleric in England suggested to his people that they should each day
   pray for the worst man or woman and then go to them and tell them about
   Jesus. Only six agreed to do so. On arrival home he began to pray. Then
   he said, "I must not leave this to my people. I must take it up myself.
   I don't know the bad people. I'll have to go out and enquire."
   Approaching a rough-looking man at a street corner, he asked, "Are you
   the worst man in this district?" "No, I'm not." "Would you mind telling
   me who is?" "I don't mind. You'll find him at No. 7, down that street."

   He knocked at No. 7 and entered. "I'm looking for the worst man in my
   parish. They tell me it might be you?" "Whoever told you that? Fetch
   him here, and I'll show him who's the worst man! No, there are lots
   worse than me." "Well, who is the worst man you know?" "Everybody knows
   him. He lives at the end house in that court. He's the worst man." So
   down the court he went and knocked at the door. A surly voice cried,
   "Come in!"

   There were a man and his wife. "I hope you'll excuse me, but I'm the
   minister of the chapel along the round. I'm looking for the worst man
   in my district, because I have something to tell him. Are you the worst
   man?" The man turned to his wife and said, "Lass, tell him what I said
   to you five minutes ago." "No, tell him yourself." "What were you
   saying?" enquired the visitor. "Well, I've been drinking for twelve
   weeks. I've had the D.T's and have pawned all in the house worth
   pawning. And I said to my wife a few minutes ago, Lass, this thing has
   to stop, and if it doesn't, I'll stop it myself--I'll go and drown
   myself.' Then you knocked at the door! Yes, sir, I'm the very worst
   man. What have you got to say to me?" "I'm here to tell you that Jesus
   Christ is the greatest Savior, and that He can make out of the worst
   man one of the best. He did it for me, and He will do it for you."
   "D'you think He can do it even for me?" "I'm sure He can. Kneel down
   and ask Him."

   Not only was the poor drunkard saved from his sins, but he is today a
   radiant Christian man, bringing other drunken people to the Lord Jesus
   Christ.

   Surely none of us finds it difficult to believe that God can, in answer
   to prayer, heal the body, send rain or fair weather, dispel fogs, or
   avert calamities?

   We have to do with a God whose knowledge is infinite. He can put it
   into the mind of a doctor to prescribe a certain medicine, or diet, or
   method of cure. All the doctor's skill is from God. "He knoweth our
   frame"--for He made it. He knows it far better than the cleverest
   doctor or surgeon. He made, and He can restore. We believe that God
   desires us to use medical skill, but we also believe that God, by His
   wonderful knowledge, can heal, and sometimes does heal, without human
   co-operation. And God must be allowed to work in His own way. We are so
   apt to tie God down to the way we approve of. God's aim is to glorify
   His name in answering our prayers. Sometimes He sees that our desire is
   right, but our petition wrong. St. Paul thought he could bring more
   glory to God if only the thorn in the flesh could be removed. God knew
   that he would be a better man and do better work with the thorn than
   without it. So God said No-No-No to his prayer, and then explained why!

   So it was with Monica, who prayed so many years for the conversion of
   Augustine, her licentious son. When he was determined to leave home and
   cross the seas to Rome she prayed earnestly, even passionately, that
   God would keep him by her side, and under her influence. She went down
   to a little chapel on the seashore to spend the night in prayer close
   by where the ship lay at anchor. But, when morning came, she found that
   the ship had sailed even while she prayed! Her petition was refused,
   but her real desire was granted. For it was in Rome that Augustine met
   the sainted Ambrose, who led him to Christ. How comforting it is to
   know that God knows what is best!

   But we should never think it unreasonable that God should make some
   things dependent upon our prayers. Some people say that if God really
   loves us He would give us what is best for us whether we ask Him or
   not. Dr. Fosdick has so beautifully pointed out that God has left man
   many things to do for himself. He promises seedtime and harvest. Yet
   man must prepare the soil, sow, and till, and reap in order to allow
   God to do His share. God provides us with food and drink. But He leaves
   us to take, and eat, and drink. There are some things God cannot, or at
   least will not, do without our help. God cannot do some things unless
   we think. He never emblazons His truth upon the sky. The laws of
   science have always been there. But we must think, and experiment, and
   think again if we would use those laws for our own good and God's
   glory.

   God cannot do some things unless we work. He stores the hills with
   marble, but He has never built a cathedral. He fills the mountains with
   iron ore, but He never makes a needle or a locomotive. He leaves that
   to us. We must work.

   If, then, God has left many things dependent upon man's thinking and
   working, why should He not leave some things dependent upon man's
   praying? He has done so. "Ask and ye shall receive." And there are some
   things God will not give us unless we ask. Prayer is one of the three
   ways in which man can co-operate with God; and the greatest of these is
   prayer.

   Men of power are without exception men of prayer. God bestows His Holy
   Spirit in His fullness only on men of prayer. And it is through the
   operation of the Spirit that answers to prayer come. Every believer has
   the Spirit of Christ dwelling in him. For "if any have not the Spirit
   of Christ, he is none of his." But a man of prevailing prayer must be
   filled with the Spirit of God.

   A lady missionary wrote recently that it used to be said of Praying
   Hyde that he never spoke to an unconverted man but that he was soundly
   converted. But if he ever did fail at first to touch a heart for God,
   he went back to his room and wrestled in prayer till he was shown what
   it was in himself that had hindered his being used by God. Yes, when we
   are filled with the Spirit of God, we cannot help influencing others
   God-ward. But, to have power with men, we must have power with God.

   The momentous question for you and me is not, however, "How does God
   answer prayer?" The question is, "Do I really pray?" What a marvelous
   power God places at our disposal! Do we for a moment think that
   anything displeasing to God is worth our while holding on to?
   Fellow-Christian, trust Christ wholly, and you will find Him wholly
   true.

   Let us give God the chance of putting His mind into us, and we shall
   never doubt the power of prayer again.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 11: HINDRANCES TO PRAYER

   THE poet said, and we often sing--


   What various hindrances we meet

   In coming to the mercy-seat.

   Yes, indeed, they are various. But here again, most of those hindrances
   are our own making.

   God wants me to pray. The devil does not want me to pray, and does all
   he can to hinder me. He knows that we can accomplish more through our
   prayers than through our work. He would rather have us do anything else
   than pray.

   We have already referred to Satan's opposition to prayer:


   Angels our march oppose

   Who still in strength excel

   Our secret, sworn, relentless foes,

   Countless, invisible.

   But we need not fear them, nor heed them, if our eyes are ever unto the
   Lord. The holy angels are stronger than fallen angels, and we can leave
   the celestial hosts to guard us. We believe that to them--the hosts of
   evil--we owe those wandering thoughts which so often wreck prayer. We
   no sooner kneel than we "recollect" something that should have been
   done, or something which had better be seen to at once.

   These thoughts come from without, and are surely due to the promptings
   of evil spirits. The only cure for wandering thoughts is to get our
   minds fixed upon God. Undoubtedly a man's worst foe is himself. Prayer
   is for a child of God--and one who is living as a child of God should
   pray.

   The great question is: Am I harboring any foes in my heart? Are there
   traitors within? God cannot give us His best spiritual blessings unless
   we fulfil conditions of trust, obedience and service. Do we not often
   ask earnestly for the highest spiritual gifts, without even any thought
   of fulfilling the necessary requirements? Do we not often ask for
   blessings we are not fitted to receive? Dare we be honest with
   ourselves, alone in the presence of God? Dare we say sincerely, "Search
   me, O God, and see--"? Is there anything in me which is hindering God's
   blessing for me and through me? We discuss the "problem of prayer"; we
   are the problem that needs discussing or dissecting! Prayer is all
   right! There is no problem in prayer to the heart which is absolutely
   stayed on Christ.

   Now, we shall not quote the usual Bible texts which show how prayer may
   be frustrated. We merely desire that everyone should get a glimpse of
   his own heart. No sin is too small to hinder prayer, and perhaps to
   turn the very prayer itself into sin, if we are not willing to renounce
   that sin. The Moslems in West Africa have a saying, "If there is no
   purity, there is no prayer; if there is no prayer, there is no drinking
   of the water of heaven." This truth is so clearly taught in Scripture
   that it is amazing that any should try to retain both sin and prayer.
   Yet very many do this. Even David cried, long ages ago, "If I regard
   iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear" (Psa. lxvi. 18).

   And Isaiah says, "Your iniquities have separated between you and your
   God, and your sins have hid his face from you" (Isa. lix. 2). Surely we
   must all agree that it is sin in us, and not the unwillingness of
   Christ to hear, that hinders prayer. As a rule, it is some little sin,
   so-called, that mars and spoils the prayer-life. There may be:

   (1) Doubt. Now, unbelief is possibly the greatest hindrance to prayer.
   Our Lord said that the Holy Spirit would convict the world of sin--"of
   sin because they believe not on Me" (St. John xvi. 9). We are not "of
   the world," yet is there not much practical unbelief in many of us? St.
   James, writing to believers, says: "Ask in faith, nothing doubting; for
   he that doubteth . . . let not that man think he shall receive anything
   of the Lord" (St. James i. 6-8). Some have not because they ask not.
   Others "have not" because they believe not. Did you think it a little
   strange that we spent so much time over adoration and thanksgiving
   before we came to the "asking"? But surely, if we get a glimpse of the
   glorious majesty of our Lord, and the wonders of His love and grace,
   unbelief and doubt will vanish away as mists before the rising sun? Was
   this not the reason that Abraham "staggered not," "wavered not through
   unbelief," in that he gave God the glory due unto His name, and was
   therefore "fully assured that what He had promised He was able also to
   perform"? (Rom. iv. 20, 21). Knowing what we do of God's stupendous
   love, is it not amazing that we should ever doubt?

   (2) Then there is Self--the root of all sin. How selfish we are prone
   to be even in our "good works"! How we hesitate to give up anything
   which "self" craves for. Yet we know that a full hand cannot take
   Christ's gifts. Was this why the Savior, in the prayer He first taught,
   coupled us with everything else? "Our" is the first word. "Our Father
   . . . give us . . . forgive us . . . deliver us . . ."

   Pride prevents prayer, for prayer is a very humbling thing. How hateful
   pride must be in the sight of God! It is God who gives us all things
   "richly to enjoy." "What hast thou that thou didst not receive?" asks
   St. Paul (I Cor. iv. 7). Surely, surely we are not going to let pride,
   with its hateful, ugly sister, jealousy, ruin our prayer-life? God
   cannot do great things for us whereby we may be glad if they are going
   to "turn our heads." Oh, how foolish we can be! Sometimes, when we are
   insistent, God does give us what we ask, at the expense of our
   holiness. "He gave them their request, but sent leanness into their
   soul" (Psa. cvi. 15). O God, save us from that--save us from self!
   Again, self asserts itself in criticising others. Let this thought burn
   itself into your memory--the more like Jesus Christ a man becomes, the
   less he judges other people. It is an infallible test. Those who are
   always criticising others have drifted away from Christ. They may still
   be His, but have lost His Spirit of love. Beloved reader, if you have a
   criticising nature, allow it to dissect yourself and never your
   neighbor. You will be able to give it full scope, and it will never be
   unemployed! Is this a harsh remark? Does it betray a tendency to commit
   the very sin--for it is sin--it condemns? It would do so were it spoken
   to any one individual. But its object is to pierce armor which is
   seemingly invulnerable. And no one who, for one month, has kept his
   tongue "from picking and stealing" the reputation of other people will
   ever desire to go back again to back-biting. "Love suffereth long and
   is kind" (I Cor. xiii. 4). Do we? Are we?

   We are ourselves no better because we have managed to paint other
   people in worse colors than ourselves. But, singularly enough, we
   enhance our own spiritual joy and our own living witness for Christ
   when we refuse to pass on disparaging information about others, or when
   we refrain from "judging" the work or lives of other people. It may be
   hard at first, but it soon brings untold joy, and is rewarded by the
   love of all around. It is most hard to keep silent in the face of
   "modern" heresies. Are we not told to "contend earnestly for the faith
   which was once for all delivered unto the saints"? (Jude 3.) Sometimes
   we must speak out--but let it always be in the spirit of love. "Rather
   let error live than love die."

   Even in our private prayers fault-finding of others must be resolutely
   avoided. Read once more the story of John Hyde praying for the "cold
   brother." Believe me, a criticising spirit destroys holiness of life
   more easily than anything else, because it is such an eminently
   respectable sin, and makes such easy victims of us. We need scarcely
   add that when a believer is filled with the Spirit of Christ--who is
   Love--he will never tell others of the un-Christian behavior he may
   discern in his friends. "He was most rude to me"; "He is too
   conceited"; "I can't stand that man"; and such-like remarks are surely
   unkind, unnecessary, and often untrue.

   Our dear Lord suffered the contradiction of sinners against Himself,
   but He never complained or published abroad the news to others. Why
   should we do so? Self must be dethroned if Christ is to reign supreme.
   There must be no idols in the heart. Do you remember what God said of
   some leaders of religion? "These men have taken their idols into their
   heart . . . ; should I be inquired of at all by them?" (Ezek. xiv. 3.)

   When our aim is solely the glory of God, then God can answer our
   prayers. Christ Himself rather than His gifts should be our desire.
   "Delight thyself in the Lord and He shall give thee the petitions of
   thine heart" (Psa. xxxvii. 4, R.V., marg.).

   "Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness toward God; and
   whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments
   and do the things that are pleasing in his sight" (I John iii. 21, 22).

   It is as true today as in the early days of Christianity that men ask,
   and receive not, because they ask amiss that they may spend it on their
   pleasures--i.e., self (James iv. 3).

   (3) Unlove in the heart is possibly the greatest hindrance to prayer. A
   loving spirit is a condition of believing prayer. We cannot be wrong
   with man and right with God. The spirit of prayer is essentially the
   spirit of love. Intercession is simply love at prayer.


   He prayeth best who loveth best

   All things both great and small;

   For the great God Who loveth us,

   He made and loveth all.

   Dare we hate or dislike those whom God loves? If we do, can we really
   possess the Spirit of Christ? We really must face these elementary
   facts in our faith if prayer is to be anything more than a mere form.
   Our Lord not only says, "And pray for those that persecute you; that ye
   may be sons of your Father who is in heaven" (Matt. v. 44, 45).

   We venture to think that large numbers of so-called Christians have
   never faced this question. To hear how many Christian workers--and
   prominent ones, too--speak of others from whom they disagree, one must
   charitably suppose they have never heard that command of our Lord!

   Our daily life in the world is the best indication of our power in
   prayer. God deals with my prayers not according to the spirit and tone
   which I exhibit when I am praying in public or private, but according
   to the spirit I show in my daily life.

   Hot-tempered people can make only frigid prayers. If we do not obey our
   Lord's command and love one another, our prayers are well-nigh
   worthless. If we harbor an unforgiving spirit it is almost wasted time
   to pray. Yet a prominent Dean of one of our cathedrals was recently
   reported to have said that there are some people we can never forgive!
   If so, we trust that he uses an abridged form of the Lord's prayer.
   Christ taught us to say "Forgive us . . . as we forgive." And He goes
   farther than this. He declares, "If ye forgive not men their
   trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive your trespasses"
   (Matt. vi. 15). May we ever exhibit the Spirit of Christ, and not
   forfeit our own much-needed forgiveness. How many of our readers who
   have not the slightest intention of forgiving their enemies, or even
   their offending friends, repeated the Lord's prayer today?

   Many Christians have never given prayer a fair chance. It is not
   through conscious insincerity, but from want of thought. The blame for
   it really rests upon those of us who preach and teach. We are prone to
   teach doctrines rather than doings. Most men desire to do what is
   right, but they regard the big things rather than the little failings
   in the life of love.

   Our Lord goes so far as to say that even our gifts are not to be
   presented to God if we remember that our brother "hath aught against
   us" (Matt. v. 23). If He will not accept our gifts, is it likely He
   will answer our prayers? It was when Job ceased contending with his
   enemies (whom the Bible calls his "friends") that the Lord "turned his
   captivity" and gave him twice as much as he had before (Job xlii. 10).

   How slow we are--how unwilling we are--to see that our lives hinder our
   prayers! And how unwilling we are to act on love-lines. Yes, we desire
   to "win" men. Our Lord shows us one way. Don't publish abroad his
   wrongdoings. Speak to him alone, and "thou hast gained thy brother"
   (Matt. xviii. 15). Most of us have rather pained our brothers!

   Even the home-life may hinder the prayer-life. See what Peter says
   about how we should so live in the home that our "prayers be not
   hindered" (I Peter iii. 1-10). We would venture to urge every reader to
   ask God to search his heart once again and to show him if there is "any
   root of bitterness" towards anyone. We all desire to do what is
   pleasing to God. It would be an immense gain to our spiritual life if
   we would resolve not to attempt to pray until we had done all in our
   power to make peace and harmony between ourselves and any with whom we
   have quarreled. Until we do this as far as lies in our power, our
   prayers are just wasted breath. Unkindly feelings towards another
   hinder God from helping us in the way He desires.

   A loving life is an essential condition of believing prayer. God
   challenges us again, today, to become fit persons to receive His
   superabundant blessings. Many of us have to decide whether we will
   choose a bitter, unforgiving spirit, or the tender mercies and
   loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ. Is it not amazing that any
   man can halt between two opinions with such a choice in the balance?
   For bitterness harms the bitter more than anyone else.

   "Whensoever ye stand praying, forgive if ye have aught against anyone;
   that your Father also, who is in heaven, may forgive you" (Mark xi.
   25). So said the blessed Master. Must we not then either forgive, or
   cease trying to pray? What shall it profit a man if he gain all his
   time to pretend to pray, if he harbors unlove in his heart to prevent
   real prayer? How the devil laughs at us because we do not see this
   truth!

   We have God's word for it that eloquence, knowledge, faith, liberality,
   and even martyrdom profit a man nothing--get hold of it--nothing,
   unless his heart is filled with love (I Cor. xiii.). "Therefore give us
   love."

   (4) Refusal to do our part may hinder God answering our prayers. Love
   calls forth compassion and service at the sight of sin and suffering,
   both here and overseas. Just as St. Paul's heart was
   "stirred"--"provoked"--within him as he beheld the city full of idols
   (Acts xvii. 16). We cannot be sincere when we pray "Thy kingdom come"
   unless we are doing what we can to hasten the coming of that
   kingdom--by our gifts, our prayers and our service.

   We cannot be quite sincere in praying for the conversion of the ungodly
   unless we are willing to speak a word, or write a letter, or make some
   attempt to bring him under the influence of the Gospel. Before one of
   Moody's great missions he was present at a meeting for prayer asking
   for God's blessing. Several wealthy men were there. One began to pray
   that God would send sufficient funds to defray the expenses. Moody at
   once stopped him. "We need not trouble God about that," he said
   quietly, "we are able to answer that prayer!"

   (5) Praying only in secret may be a hindrance. Children of a family
   should not always meet their father separately. It is remarkable how
   often our Lord refers to united prayer--"agreed" prayer. "When ye pray,
   say, Our Father"; "If two of you shall agree on earth as touching
   anything they shall ask, it shall be done for them. . . . For where two
   or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
   them" (Matt. xviii. 19, 20).

   We feel sure that the weakness in the spiritual life of many churches
   is to be traced to an inefficient prayer-meeting, or the absence of
   meetings for prayer. Daily matins and evensong, even when reverent and
   without the unseemly haste which is so often associated with them,
   cannot take the place of less formal gatherings for prayer, in which
   everyone may take part. Can we not make the weekly prayer-meeting a
   live thing and a living force?

   (6) Praise is as important as prayer. We must enter into His gates with
   thanksgiving, and into His courts with praise, and give thanks unto Him
   and bless His name (Ps. c. 4). At one time in his life Praying Hyde was
   led to ask for four souls a day to be brought into the fold by his
   ministry. If on any day the number fell short of this, there would be
   such a weight on his heart that it was positively painful, and he could
   neither eat nor sleep. Then. in prayer he would ask the Lord to show
   him what was the obstacle in himself. He invariably found that it was
   the want of praise in his life. He would confess his sinfulness and
   pray for a spirit of praise. He said that as he praised God seeking
   souls would come to him. We do not imply that we, too, should limit God
   to definite numbers or ways of working; but we do cry: "Rejoice! Praise
   God with heart and mind and soul."

   It is not by accident that we are so often bidden to "rejoice in the
   Lord." God does not want miserable children; and none of His children
   has cause for misery. St. Paul, the most persecuted of men, was a man
   of song. Hymns of praise came from his lips in prison and out of
   prison: day and night he praised His Savior. The very order of his
   exhortations is significant. "Rejoice evermore; pray without ceasing;
   in everything give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
   to you" (I Thess. v. 16-18).

   The will of God. Get that thought into your mind. It is not an optional
   thing.

   REJOICE: PRAY: GIVE THANKS

   That is the order, according to the will of God--for you, and for me.
   Nothing so pleases God as our praises--and nothing so blesses the man
   who prays as the praises he offers! "Delight thyself also in the Lord;
   and he shall give thee the petitions of thine heart" (Ps. xxxvii. 4,
   R.V., marg.).

   A missionary who had received very bad news from home, was utterly cast
   down. Prayer availed nothing to relieve the darkness of his soul. He
   went to see another missionary, no doubt seeking comfort. There on the
   wall was a motto-card: "Try Thanksgiving!" He did; and in a moment
   every shadow was gone, never to return.

   Do we praise enough to get our prayers answered? If we truly trust Him,
   we shall always praise Him. For


   God nothing does nor suffers to be done

   But thou would'st do thyself

   Could'st thou but see

   The end of all events as well as He.

   One who once overheard Luther praying said, "Gracious God! What spirit
   and what faith is there in his expressions! He petitions God with as
   much reverence as if he were in the Divine presence, and yet with as
   firm a hope and confidence as he would address a father or a friend."
   That child of God seemed quite unconscious that "hindrances to prayer"
   existed!

   After all that has been said, we see that everything can be summed up
   under one head. All hindrance to prayer arises from ignorance of the
   teaching of God's Holy Word on the life of holiness He has planned for
   all His children, or from an unwillingness to consecrate ourselves
   fully to Him.

   When we can truthfully say to our Father, "All that I am and have is
   thine," then He can say to us, "All that is mine is thine."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER 12: WHO MAY PRAY?

   IT is only two centuries ago that six undergraduates were expelled from
   the University of Oxford solely because they met together in each
   other's rooms for extempore prayer! Whereupon George Whitefield wrote
   to the Vice-Chancellor, "It is to be hoped that, as some have been
   expelled for extempore praying, we shall hear of some few others of a
   contrary stamp being expelled for extempore swearing." Today, thank
   God, no man in our land is hindered by his fellow-men from praying. Any
   man may pray--but has every man a right to pray? Does God listen to
   anyone ?

   Who may pray? Is it the privilege--the right--of all men? Not everyone
   can claim the right to approach the King of our realm. But there are
   certain persons and bodies of people who have the privilege of
   immediate access to our sovereign. The Prime Minister has that
   privilege. The ancient Corporation of the City of London can at anytime
   lay its petition at the feet of the King. The ambassador of a foreign
   power may do the same. He has only to present himself at the gate of
   the palace of the King, and no power can stand between him and the
   monarch. He can go at once into the royal presence and present his
   request. But none of these has such ease of access and such loving
   welcome as the Kings own son.

   But there is the King of kings--the God and Father of us all. Who may
   go to Him? Who may exercise this privilege--yes, this power--with God?
   We are told--and there is much truth in the remark--that in the most
   skeptical man or generation prayer is always underneath the surface,
   waiting. Has it the right to come forth at any time? In some religions
   it has to wait. Of all the millions in India living in the bondage of
   Hinduism, none may pray except the Brahmins! A millionaire merchant of
   any other caste must perforce get a Brahmin--often a mere boy at
   school!--to say his prayers for him.

   The Mohammedan cannot pray unless he has learned a few phrases in
   Arabic, for his "god" only hears prayers offered in what they believe
   to be the holy language. Praise be to God, no such restrictions of
   caste or language stand between us and our God. Can any man, therefore,
   pray?

   Yes, you reply, anyone. But the Bible does not say so. Only a child of
   God can truly pray to God. Only a son can enter His presence. It is
   gloriously true that anyone can cry to Him for help--for pardon and
   mercy. But that is scarcely prayer. Prayer is much more than that.
   Prayer is going into "the secret place of the Most High," and abiding
   under the shadow of the Almighty (Ps. xci. 1). Prayer is a making known
   to God our wants and desires, and holding out the hand of faith to take
   His gifts. Prayer is the result of the Holy Spirit dwelling within us.
   It is communion with God. Now, there can scarcely be communion between
   a king and a rebel. What communion hath light with darkness? (II Cor.
   vi. 14.) In ourselves we have no right to pray. We have access to God
   only through the Lord Jesus Christ (Eph. ii. 18, iii. 12).

   Prayer is much more than the cry of a drowning man--of a man sinking in
   the whirlpool of sin: "Lord, save me! I am lost! I am undone! Redeem
   me! Save me!" Anyone can do this, and that is a petition which is never
   unanswered, and one, if sincere, to which the answer is never delayed.
   For "man cannot be God's outlaw if he would." But that is not prayer in
   the Bible sense. Even the lions, roaring after their prey, seek their
   meat from God; but that is not prayer.

   We know that our Lord said, "Everyone that asketh receiveth" (Matt.
   vii. 8). He did say so, but to whom? He was speaking to His disciples
   (Matt. v. 1, 2). Yes, prayer is communion with God: the "home-life" of
   the soul, as one describes it. And I much question whether there can be
   any communion with Him unless the Holy Spirit dwells in the heart, and
   we have "received" the Son, and so have the right to be called
   "children of God" (John i. 12).

   Prayer is the privilege of a child. Children of God alone can claim
   from the heavenly Father the things which He hath prepared for them
   that love Him. Our Lord told us that in prayer we should call God "our
   Father." Surely only children can use that word? St. Paul says that it
   is "because ye are sons God sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our
   hearts, crying, Abba, Father'" (Gal. iv. 6). Is this what was in God's
   mind when, in dealing with Job's "comforters," He said, "My servant Job
   shall pray for you; for him will I accept"? (Job xlii. 8.) It looked as
   if they would not have been "accepted" in the matter of prayer. But as
   soon as one becomes a "son of God" he must enter the school of prayer.
   "Behold, he prayeth," said our Lord of a man as soon as he was
   converted. Yet that man had "said" prayers all his life (Acts ix. 11).
   Converted men not only may pray, but must pray--each man for himself,
   and, of course, for others. But, unless and until we can truthfully
   call God "Father," we have no claim to be treated as children--as
   "sons," "heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ"--no claim at all. Do
   you say this is hard? Nay, surely it is natural. Has a "child" no
   privileges?

   But do not misunderstand me. This does not shut any man out of the
   kingdom of heaven. Anyone, anywhere, can cry, "God be merciful to me, a
   sinner!" Any man who is outside the fold of Christ, outside the family
   of God, however bad he may be, or however good he thinks he is, can
   this very moment become a child of God, even as he reads these words.
   One look to Christ in faith is sufficient; "Look and live." God did not
   even say "see"--He says just look! Turn your face to God.

   How did those Galatian Christians become "sons of God"? By faith in
   Christ. "For ye are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus"
   (Gal. iii. 26). Christ will make any man a son of God by adoption and
   grace the moment he turns to Him in true repentance and faith. But we
   have no rightful claim even upon God's providence unless we are His
   children. We cannot say with any confidence or certainty, "I shall not
   want," unless we can say, with confidence and certainty, "The Lord is
   my Shepherd."

   A child, however, has a right to his father's care, and love, and
   protection, and provision. Now, a child can only enter a family by
   being born into it. We become children of God by being "born again,"
   "born from above" (John iii. 3, 5). That is, by believing on the Lord
   Jesus Christ (John iii. 16).

   Having said all this as a warning, and perhaps as an explanation why
   some people find prayer an utter failure, we hasten to add that God
   often hears and answers prayer even from those who have no legal right
   to pray--from those who are not His "children," and may even deny that
   He exists! The Gospels tell us of not a few unbelievers who came to
   Christ for healing; and He never sent one away without the coveted
   blessing--never. They came as "beggars," not as "children." And even if
   "the children must first be fed," these others received the
   crumbs--yea, and more than crumbs--that were freely given.

   So today God often hears the cry of unbelievers for temporal mercies.
   One case well known to the writer may be given as an illustration. My
   friend told me that he had been an atheist many years. Whilst an
   infidel, he had been singing for forty years in a church choir because
   he was fond of music. His aged father became seriously ill two or three
   years ago, and lay in great pain. The doctors were helpless to relieve
   the sufferer. In his distress for his father, the infidel choirman fell
   on his knees and cried, "O God, if there is a God, show Thy power by
   taking away my father's pain!" God heard the man's piteous cry, and
   removed the pain immediately. The "atheist" praised God, and hurried
   off to his vicar to find out the way of salvation! Today he is
   out-and-out for Christ, giving his whole time to work for his
   newly-found Savior. Yes, God is greater than His promises, and is more
   willing to hear than we are to pray.

   Perhaps the most striking of all "prayers" from the lips of unbelievers
   is that recorded of Caroline Fry, the author of Christ Our Example.
   Although possessed of beauty, wealth, position and friends, she found
   that none of them satisfied, and at length, in her utter misery, she
   sought God. Yet her first utterance to Him was an expression of open
   rebellion to and hatred of Him! Listen to it--it is not the prayer of a
   "child":--

   "O God, if Thou art a God: I do not love Thee; I do not want Thee; I do
   not believe there is any happiness in Thee: but I am miserable as I am.
   Give me what I do not seek; give me what I do not want. If Thou canst,
   make me happy. I am miserable as I am. I am tired of this world; if
   there is anything better, give it me."

   What a "prayer"! Yet God heard and answered. He forgave the wanderer
   and made her radiantly happy and gloriously fruitful in His service.


   In even savage bosoms

   There are longings, strivings, yearnings

   For the good they comprehend not.

   And their feeble hands and helpless.

   Groping blindly in the darkness,

   Touch God's right hand in the darkness,

   And are lifted up and strengthened.

   Shall we, then, alter our question a little, and ask, who has a right
   to pray?" Only children of God in whom the Holy Spirit dwells. But,
   even so, we must remember that no man can come unashamed and with
   confidence to his Father in heaven unless he is living as a son of God
   should live. We cannot expect a father to lavish his favors upon erring
   children. Only a faithful and sanctified son can pray with the Spirit
   and pray with the understanding also (I Cor. xiv. 15).

   But if we are sons of God, nothing but sin can hinder our prayers. We,
   His children, have the right of access to God at any time, in any
   place. And He understands any form of prayer. We may have a wonderful
   gift of speech pouring itself out in a torrent of thanksgiving,
   petition, and praise like St. Paul; or we may have the quiet, deep,
   lover-like communion of a St. John. The brilliant scholar like John
   Wesley and the humble cobbler like William Carey are alike welcome at
   the throne of grace. Influence at the court of heaven depends not upon
   birth, or brilliancy, or achievement, but upon humble and utter
   independence upon the Son of the King.

   Moody attributed his marvelous success to the prayers of an obscure and
   almost unknown invalid woman! And truly the invalid saints of England
   could bring about a speedy revival by their prayers. Oh, that all the
   shut-ins" would speak out!

   Do we not make a mistake in supposing that some people have a "gift" of
   prayer? A brilliant Cambridge undergraduate asked me if the life of
   prayer was not a gift, and one which very few possessed? He suggested
   that, just as not everyone was musical, so not everyone is expected to
   be prayerful! George Mller was exceptional not because he had a gift
   of prayer, but because he prayed. Those who cannot "speak well," as God
   declared Aaron could, may labor in secret by intercession with those
   that speak the word. We must have great faith if we are to have great
   power with God in prayer, although God is very gracious, and oftentimes
   goes beyond our faith.

   Henry Martyn was a man of prayer, yet his faith was not equal to his
   prayers. He once declared that he "would as soon expect to see a man
   rise from the dead as to see a Brahmin converted to Christ." Would St.
   James say, "Let not that man think he shall receive anything of the
   Lord"? (James i. 7.) Now, Henry Martyn died without seeing one Brahmin
   accepting Christ as his Savior. He used to retire, day by day, to a
   deserted pagoda for prayer. Yet he had not faith for the conversion of
   a Brahmin. A few months back there knelt in that very pagoda Brahmins
   and Mohammedans from all parts of India, Burma and Ceylon, now
   fellow-Christians. Others had prayed with greater faith than Henry
   Martyn.

   Who may pray? We may; but do we? Does our Lord look at us with even
   more pathos and tenderness than when He first uttered the words, and
   say, "Hitherto ye have asked nothing in My name? Ask, and ye shall
   receive, that your joy may be full" (John xvi. 24). If the dear Master
   was dependent on prayer to make His work a power, how much more are we?
   He sometimes prayed with "strong crying and tears" (Heb. v. 7). Do we?
   Have we ever shed a prayerful tear? Well might we cry, "Quicken us, and
   we will call upon Thy name" (Ps. lxxx. 18).

   St. Paul's exhortation to Timothy may well be made to us all: "Stir up
   the gift of God which is in thee" (II Tim. i. 6). For the Holy Spirit
   is prayer's great Helper. We are incapable of ourselves to translate
   our real needs into prayer. The Holy Spirit does this for us. We cannot
   ask as we ought. The Holy Spirit does this for us. It is possible for
   unaided man to ask what is for our ill. The Holy Spirit can check this.
   No weak or trembling hand dare put in motion any mighty force. Can
   I--dare I--move the Hand that moves the universe? No! Unless the Holy
   Spirit has control of me.

   Yes, we need Divine help for prayer--and we have it! How the whole
   Trinity delights in prayer! God the Father listens: the Holy Spirit
   dictates: the eternal Son presents the petition--and Himself
   intercedes; and so the answer comes down.

   Believe me, prayer is our highest privilege, our gravest
   responsibility, and the greatest power God has put into our hands.
   Prayer, real prayer, is the noblest, the sublimest, the most stupendous
   act that any creature of God can perform.

   It is, as Coleridge declared, the very highest energy of which human
   nature is capable. To pray with all your heart and strength--that is
   the last, the greatest achievement of the Christian's warfare on earth.

   "LORD, TEACH US TO PRAY!"
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]21:17

   Exodus

   [2]3:5   [3]14:15   [4]15:11   [5]32:32   [6]33:18   [7]34:29

   Deuteronomy

   [8]28:58

   Judges

   [9]6:40   [10]6:40

   1 Samuel

   [11]12:23

   2 Kings

   [12]4:6

   Nehemiah

   [13]1:4

   Job

   [14]23:3   [15]42:8   [16]42:10

   Psalms

   [17]2:8   [18]23:2   [19]25:1   [20]25:14   [21]29:9   [22]36:7
   [23]37:4   [24]37:4   [25]50:23   [26]51:10   [27]62:5   [28]63:3
   [29]66:18   [30]68:18   [31]80:18   [32]91:1   [33]100:4   [34]103:1
   [35]104:1   [36]106:15   [37]106:15   [38]111:3

   Isaiah

   [39]1:15   [40]6:1   [41]6:3   [42]30:30   [43]40:5   [44]43:7
   [45]59:2   [46]59:16   [47]60:1-2   [48]60:21   [49]64:7   [50]64:7
   [51]64:7   [52]65:24   [53]66:8

   Ezekiel

   [54]14:3

   Daniel

   [55]10:12-13   [56]10:13

   Joel

   [57]2:28   [58]2:28

   Malachi

   [59]3:10   [60]3:10   [61]3:10

   Matthew

   [62]5:1-2   [63]5:8   [64]5:23   [65]5:44-45   [66]6:8   [67]6:15
   [68]6:22   [69]6:24-25   [70]6:26   [71]7:8   [72]7:11   [73]8:10
   [74]13:19   [75]14:23   [76]14:28-29   [77]14:31   [78]15:28
   [79]16:17   [80]16:23   [81]18:15   [82]18:19-20   [83]18:20
   [84]20:22   [85]21:21-22   [86]23:14   [87]23:37   [88]24:5
   [89]26:44   [90]28:18-20

   Mark

   [91]1:35   [92]3:20   [93]6:6   [94]6:31   [95]11:24   [96]11:25

   Luke

   [97]1:46-47   [98]2:14   [99]5:15-16   [100]6:12   [101]6:35
   [102]11:8   [103]11:13   [104]11:13   [105]12:49   [106]18:1
   [107]18:7   [108]20:47   [109]22:43   [110]22:44   [111]22:44

   John

   [112]1:12   [113]3:3   [114]3:5   [115]3:16   [116]3:16   [117]3:17
   [118]7:17   [119]11:41   [120]11:41-42   [121]11:42   [122]13:35
   [123]14:11   [124]14:13   [125]14:13-14   [126]14:13-14
   [127]14:13-14   [128]14:13-14   [129]14:13-14   [130]14:14
   [131]14:14   [132]14:26   [133]14:26   [134]15:7   [135]15:7
   [136]15:7-8   [137]15:14   [138]15:14-15   [139]15:16   [140]15:16
   [141]16:9   [142]16:15   [143]16:23-24   [144]16:23-24   [145]16:24
   [146]16:24   [147]16:24   [148]16:26   [149]16:26-27   [150]17:1
   [151]17:3   [152]17:3   [153]17:18   [154]17:22   [155]17:24
   [156]20:21

   Acts

   [157]1:4-8   [158]4:13   [159]6:4   [160]9:11   [161]9:15   [162]12:5
   [163]17:16   [164]22:10   [165]22:18   [166]27:25   [167]27:25

   Romans

   [168]3:4   [169]4:3   [170]4:20-21   [171]5:9   [172]6:19   [173]8:14
   [174]8:26   [175]8:26   [176]8:26   [177]8:26   [178]8:26
   [179]8:26-27   [180]8:26-27   [181]9:3   [182]10:12   [183]11:33
   [184]11:36   [185]12:1   [186]12:11   [187]15:5   [188]15:30

   1 Corinthians

   [189]2:16   [190]3:21   [191]4:7   [192]6:11   [193]13   [194]13
   [195]13:4   [196]13:4   [197]13:5   [198]14:15

   2 Corinthians

   [199]4:6   [200]6:14   [201]12:8   [202]12:8-9   [203]12:9

   Galatians

   [204]3:6   [205]3:26   [206]4:6   [207]4:19

   Ephesians

   [208]1:3   [209]1:3   [210]1:7   [211]2:12   [212]3:18   [213]3:19
   [214]3:20   [215]5:27   [216]6:12   [217]6:12   [218]6:18
   [219]6:18-20

   Philippians

   [220]1:21   [221]2:5   [222]4:5-6   [223]4:6   [224]4:19   [225]4:19

   Colossians

   [226]1:10   [227]1:11   [228]1:14   [229]2:1-2   [230]3:12-17
   [231]4:12

   1 Thessalonians

   [232]4:11-12   [233]5:16-18   [234]5:17

   2 Thessalonians

   [235]1:10   [236]3:5   [237]3:10

   1 Timothy

   [238]2:4   [239]6:16

   2 Timothy

   [240]1:6   [241]2:22

   Titus

   [242]3:4

   Hebrews

   [243]4:16   [244]5:7   [245]5:7   [246]5:7   [247]7:25   [248]10:19
   [249]11:6

   James

   [250]1:5   [251]1:6-8   [252]1:7   [253]1:17   [254]2:23   [255]4:3
   [256]4:3   [257]4:3

   1 Peter

   [258]3:1-10   [259]3:7   [260]4:14

   2 Peter

   [261]3:9

   1 John

   [262]1:3   [263]3:8   [264]3:21   [265]3:21   [266]3:21-22
   [267]3:22   [268]5:14   [269]5:14   [270]5:14-15

   Jude

   [271]1:3   [272]1:20
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=17#xii-p8.1
   2. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=5#viii-p20.3
   3. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=15#vii-p18.1
   4. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=11#viii-p28.1
   5. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=32#x-p42.1
   6. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=18#viii-p31.1
   7. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=29#viii-p31.2
   8. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=58#viii-p28.2
   9. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=40#vii-p4.1
  10. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=40#vii-p6.1
  11. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=23#x-p6.2
  12. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xi-p21.2
  13. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=1&scrV=4#x-p49.2
  14. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=23&scrV=3#viii-p10.2
  15. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=8#xv-p8.2
  16. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=10#xiv-p25.2
  17. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi-p6.1
  18. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=2#x-p6.1
  19. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=1#viii-p4.1
  20. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=14#ix-p49.1
  21. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=9#viii-p25.4
  22. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=7#vii-p36.3
  23. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=4#xiv-p16.1
  24. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=4#xiv-p39.1
  25. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=23#viii-p26.1
  26. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=10#iv-p34.1
  27. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=5#viii-p13.1
  28. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=3#vii-p36.4
  29. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=18#xiv-p8.1
  30. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=18#viii-p29.2
  31. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=18#xv-p22.3
  32. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=1#xv-p5.1
  33. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=100&scrV=4#xiv-p35.1
  34. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=1#viii-p25.2
  35. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=1#viii-p25.3
  36. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=15#viii-p8.1
  37. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=15#xiv-p12.2
  38. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=111&scrV=3#viii-p28.3
  39. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xi-p1.1
  40. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=1#viii-p11.2
  41. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=3#viii-p20.1
  42. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=30#viii-p28.5
  43. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=5#viii-p22.1
  44. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=7#viii-p29.3
  45. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=2#xiv-p9.1
  46. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=16#iv-p3.1
  47. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=1#viii-p29.7
  48. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=21#viii-p32.1
  49. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=7#iv-p11.1
  50. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=7#v-p22.1
  51. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=7#x-p55.1
  52. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=24#xi-p10.1
  53. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=8#x-p45.1
  54. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=3#xiv-p15.1
  55. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=12#x-p35.1
  56. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=13#xi-p10.2
  57. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=28#vi-p15.1
  58. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=28#iv-p11.2
  59. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v-p18.2
  60. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii-p11.1
  61. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii-p32.1
  62. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=1#xv-p7.2
  63. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#viii-p39.1
  64. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=23#xiv-p25.1
  65. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#xiv-p20.1
  66. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=8#vii-p29.1
  67. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=15#xiv-p23.1
  68. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=22#vii-p34.1
  69. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#vii-p34.2
  70. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=26#xi-p20.1
  71. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=8#xv-p7.1
  72. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#ix-p55.2
  73. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vi-p35.1
  74. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=19#x-p34.2
  75. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=23#x-p29.1
  76. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vii-p9.1
  77. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=31#vii-p9.2
  78. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=28#x-p37.1
  79. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#xi-p29.1
  80. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#xi-p29.1
  81. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=15#xiv-p26.1
  82. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=19#xiv-p33.1
  83. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=20#vi-p25.1
  84. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=22#xi-p8.3
  85. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=21#iv-p30.1
  86. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=14#x-p27.1
  87. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=37#xi-p18.1
  88. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=5#ix-p6.2
  89. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=44#x-p37.2
  90. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#v-p18.1
  91. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=35#x-p28.2
  92. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=20#x-p31.1
  93. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iv-p10.1
  94. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=31#x-p31.2
  95. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=24#vii-p21.1
  96. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=25#xiv-p29.1
  97. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=46#viii-p25.1
  98. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#viii-p20.2
  99. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=15#x-p30.1
 100. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=12#x-p28.1
 101. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=35#vii-p36.1
 102. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=8#x-p36.1
 103. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#vi-p15.2
 104. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#ix-p55.1
 105. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=49#vi-p17.1
 106. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#x-p15.2
 107. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=7#x-p36.2
 108. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=47#x-p27.2
 109. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=43#x-p49.1
 110. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#x-p39.2
 111. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#x-p52.1
 112. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xv-p7.3
 113. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xv-p11.1
 114. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#xv-p11.1
 115. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii-p28.1
 116. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xv-p11.2
 117. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xii-p15.1
 118. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=17#ix-p50.1
 119. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=41#viii-p27.1
 120. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=41#vii-p16.1
 121. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=42#vii-p21.5
 122. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=35#vii-p21.4
 123. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=11#vi-p9.1
 124. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=13#ix-p10.1
 125. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v-p5.1
 126. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=13#ix-p41.1
 127. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=13#ix-p4.1
 128. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=13#ix-p6.1
 129. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=13#xi-p22.1
 130. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vi-p44.1
 131. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vii-p39.1
 132. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#ix-p37.1
 133. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#xiii-p2.1
 134. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=7#ix-p39.1
 135. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=7#ix-p42.1
 136. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=7#v-p7.1
 137. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=14#v-p8.1
 138. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=14#vii-p19.1
 139. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=16#v-p8.2
 140. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=16#ix-p6.1
 141. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=9#xiv-p10.1
 142. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=15#viii-p30.2
 143. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=23#v-p10.1
 144. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=23#ix-p6.1
 145. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#v-p14.1
 146. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#ix-p5.1
 147. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#xv-p22.1
 148. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=26#ix-p6.1
 149. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=26#v-p13.1
 150. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#viii-p21.2
 151. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#viii-p10.1
 152. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#viii-p21.2
 153. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=18#vii-p21.2
 154. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=22#viii-p29.6
 155. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#viii-p21.1
 156. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=21#vii-p21.3
 157. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi-p28.1
 158. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=13#viii-p33.1
 159. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v-p32.1
 160. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=11#xv-p8.3
 161. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#ix-p38.1
 162. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=5#x-p39.1
 163. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=16#xiv-p31.1
 164. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=10#ix-p59.1
 165. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=18#viii-p11.1
 166. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=25#v-p18.3
 167. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=25#vii-p28.5
 168. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xi-p16.1
 169. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii-p28.2
 170. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#xiv-p10.3
 171. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=9#ix-p11.1
 172. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii-p34.4
 173. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#ix-p37.2
 174. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iv-p3.2
 175. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#x-p48.1
 176. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#x-p48.2
 177. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#xi-p8.2
 178. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#xi-p25.1
 179. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#v-p31.1
 180. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#ix-p53.1
 181. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#x-p43.1
 182. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=12#v-p28.2
 183. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#xiii-p1.1
 184. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#viii-p29.1
 185. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vii-p34.3
 186. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=11#x-p17.1
 187. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=5#v-p44.1
 188. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=30#x-p50.1
 189. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#ix-p48.2
 190. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=21#xi-p3.1
 191. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xiv-p12.1
 192. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#xii-p16.1
 193. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv-p33.1
 194. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#xiv-p30.1
 195. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vii-p36.2
 196. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#xiv-p12.3
 197. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=5#xii-p18.1
 198. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=15#xv-p17.1
 199. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#viii-p31.3
 200. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#xv-p5.2
 201. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#x-p37.3
 202. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#xi-p8.1
 203. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#xi-p31.1
 204. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii-p28.3
 205. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=26#xv-p10.1
 206. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xv-p8.1
 207. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#x-p45.2
 208. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi-p32.1
 209. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#x-p47.2
 210. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=7#ix-p11.2
 211. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xv-p5.3
 212. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xv-p5.3
 213. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vii-p34.5
 214. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v-p12.1
 215. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=27#viii-p29.4
 216. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#x-p45.3
 217. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#x-p47.1
 218. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=18#x-p47.3
 219. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=18#x-p54.1
 220. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vi-p36.1
 221. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=5#ix-p48.1
 222. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=5#x-p20.1
 223. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=6#x-p58.1
 224. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v-p28.1
 225. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=19#x-p56.1
 226. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v-p34.1
 227. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=11#viii-p28.4
 228. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=14#ix-p11.3
 229. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=1#x-p50.2
 230. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=12#ix-p60.1
 231. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=12#x-p51.1
 232. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=11#x-p17.2
 233. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=16#xiv-p36.1
 234. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#x-p15.1
 235. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=10#viii-p29.5
 236. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii-p38.1
 237. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=10#x-p17.3
 238. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xi-p12.1
 239. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#viii-p19.1
 240. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xv-p23.1
 241. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi-p42.1
 242. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vii-p37.1
 243. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#x-p4.1
 244. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xv-p22.2
 245. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#x-p44.1
 246. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xi-p24.1
 247. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#xi-p25.2
 248. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=19#ix-p13.1
 249. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=6#xi-p21.1
 250. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#ix-p52.1
 251. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xiv-p10.2
 252. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=7#xv-p21.1
 253. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#ix-p16.1
 254. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=23#vii-p28.4
 255. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=3#ix-p9.1
 256. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=3#ix-p33.1
 257. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=3#xiv-p18.1
 258. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xiv-p27.1
 259. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#x-p34.1
 260. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=14#viii-p30.1
 261. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#vii-p35.1
 262. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#viii-p33.2
 263. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#x-p46.1
 264. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv-p34.2
 265. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=21#xii-p20.1
 266. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=21#xiv-p17.1
 267. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=22#ix-p44.1
 268. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=14#ix-p43.1
 269. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=14#ix-p26.1
 270. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vii-p26.1
 271. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=3#xiv-p13.1
 272. file:///ccel/u/unknown/kneeling/cache/kneeling.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii-p16.2
