     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Scale (or Ladder) of Perfection
      Creator(s): Hilton, Walter (d. 1396)
   CCEL Subjects: All; Mysticism; Proofed
      LC Call no: BV4831
     LC Subjects:

                  Practical theology

                  Practical religion. The Christian life

                  Works of meditation and devotion
     __________________________________________________________________

                      THE SCALE (or LADDER) of PERFECTION

Written by WALTER HILTON

  With an Essay on The Spiritual Life of Mediaeval England by the Rev. J. B.
  DALGAIRNS, Priest of the Oratory

   Moses plus profecit in monte adorando quam

   multitude magna bellantium

   Scanned and edited by Harry Plantinga, 1995

   This etext is in the public domain
     __________________________________________________________________

Publishers' Note

   OF all the old English ascetical works which were extant before the
   Reformation none have maintained their reputation longer than Walter
   Hilton's "Scale of Perfection." Hilton was a canon of Thurgarton in
   Nottinghamshire, and died in 1395. His "Scale of Perfection" is found
   in no less than five MSS. in the British Museum alone. Wynkyn de Worde
   printed it at least three times--in the years 1494, 1519 and 1525. Many
   other editions were printed at the same period.

   After the Reformation it was a favourite book of Father Augustine
   Baker's, the well-known author of "Sancta Sophia," and his comments on
   it are among his MSS. at Downside. In 1659 Father Baker's biographer
   and editor, Dom Serenus Cressy, O.S.B., published an edition of the
   "Scale," the title-page of which claims that "by the changing of some
   antiquated words [it is] rendered more intelligible." Another edition
   appeared in 1672, and yet another in 1679.

   Within our own times two editions have been published--one by the late
   Father Ephrem Guy, O.S.B., in 1869, the other, a reprint of Cressy's,
   in 1870, with an introduction by Father Dalgairns on the "Spiritual
   Life of Mediaeval England." Cressy's text has again been used in the
   present edition, and Father Dalgairns's Essay is also reprinted in this
   volume.
     __________________________________________________________________

CONTENTS

   An Essay on the Spiritual Life of Mediaeval England

   THE FIRST BOOK

   PART I

   I. That the inward state of the Soul should be like the outward

   II. Of the Active Life, and the Exercises and the Works thereof

   III. Of the Contemplative Life, and the Exercises and Works thereof

   IV. Of three Sorts that be of Contemplation, and of the First of them

   V. Of the Second Sort of Contemplation

   VI. Of the Lower Degree of the Second Sort of Contemplation

   VII. Of the Higher Degree of the Second Sort of Contemplation

   VIII. Of the Third Sort of Contemplation

   IX. Of the Difference that is betwixt the Second and Third Sort of
   Contemplation

   X. How that Appearings or Shewings to the Corporal Senses or Feelings
   may be both good and evil

   XI. How thou shalt know whether the Showing or Apparition to the bodily
   Senses and Feelings be good or evil

   XII. How and in what things a Contemplative Man should be busied

   XIII. How virtue beginneth in Reason and Will and is perfected in Love
   and Liking, or Affection

   XIV. Of the Means that bring a Soul to Contemplation

   XV. (i) What a Man should use and refuse by the virtue of Humility

   (ii) How Hypocrites and Heretics, for want of Humility, exalt
   themselves in their Hearts above others

   XVI. Of a firm Faith necessary thereto, and what things we ought to
   believe thereby

   XVII. Of a firm and resolute Intent and Purpose necessary thereto

   XVIII. A brief Rehearsal of what hath been said, and of an Offering
   made of them altogether to Jesus

   PART II

   I. (i) Of Prayer, and the several Sorts thereof

   (ii) How they should do that are troubled with vain Thoughts in their
   Prayers

   II. (i) Of Meditation

   (ii) Of divers Temptations of the Enemy, and the Remedies against them

   III. That a Man should know the measure of his Gift, that he may desire
   and take a better when God giveth it

   PART III

   I. Of the Knowledge of a Man's Soul, and the Powers thereof necessary
   to Contemplation

   II. Of the Worthiness and Excellency of the Soul and how it was lost

   III. (i) That a Man should be industrious to recover again his ancient
   Dignity, and reform within him the Image of the Trinity, and how it may
   be done

   (ii) That this Dignity and Image is restored by Jesus, and how He is to
   be desired, sought and found

   IV. (i) Of the Ground and Image of sin in us, which is first to be
   found out and laboured against, and how it is to be done

   (ii) What the said Image of sin is, properly, and what cometh out of it

   V. (i) Of the Seven Deadly sins, and first of Pride, what it is, and
   when it is a deadly sin and when but venial

   (ii) How Pride in Heretics and in Hypocrites is deadly sin

   (iii) A short Exhortation to Humility and Charity, with a Conclusion
   how a Man may know how much Pride he hath in him

   VI. (i) Of Envy and Wrath and their Branches, and how, instead of sin,
   the Person is often hated

   (ii) That it is a Mastery and noble Skill to love Men's Persons, and
   yet wisely to hate their sins, and how

   (iii) How a Man shall know how much Wrath and Envy is hid in the ground
   of his Heart, and how he may know whether he loves his Enemies, and the
   Examples we have thereof in our Saviour

   VII. Of Covetousness, and how a Man may know how much of it is hid in
   his Heart

   VIII. (i) Of Gluttony, and how a Man shall know when he sinneth not in
   Eating and Drinking, and when he sinneth venially, and when deadly

   (ii) That a Man should be busy to put away and hinder all Motions of
   Sin, but more busy about those of Spiritual sins than those of Bodily

   (iii) What Remedy a Man should use against the Faults in Eating and
   Drinking

   IX. Of the Five Windows of this dark Image, and what cometh in by them,
   and how they are to be ordered

   X. Of another Hole or Window that is to be stopped as well as the
   Windows of the Senses, viz., the Imagination

   XI. A Brief Rehearsal of what hath been said in the former Chapters,
   with a Portraiture of this dark Image of sin

   XII. A comparing of this Image with the Image of Jesus, and how it is
   to be dealt with

   XIII. How a Man shall be shapen to the Image of Jesus, and Jesus shapen
   in him

   XIV. The Conclusion of this Book, and of the Cause why it was made, and
   how she for whom it was made was to make use of it

   THE SECOND BOOK

   PART I

   I. (i) That a Man is the Image of God after the Soul and not after the
   Body; and how he is restored and reformed thereto that was misshapen by
   sin

   (ii) That Jews and Pagans and also false Christians are not reformed
   effectually through the virtue of the Passion through their own Faults

   II. Of two Manners of Reforming of this Image, one in fulness, another
   in part

   III. That Reforming in part is in two manners, one in Faith, another in
   Feeling

   IV. That through the Sacrament of Baptism (which is grounded in the
   Passion of Christ) this Image is reformed from Original sin

   V. That through the Sacrament of Penance (that consisteth in
   Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction) this Image is reformed from
   Actual sin

   VI. That we are to believe stedfastly the reforming of this Image, if
   our Conscience witness to us a full forsaking of sin, and a true
   turning of our Will to good living

   VII. That all the Souls that live humbly in the Faith of Holy Church,
   and have their Faith enlivened with Love and Charity, be reformed by
   this Sacrament, though it be so that they cannot feel the special gift
   of Devotion or of spiritual feeling

   VIII. That Souls reformed need ever to fight and strive against the
   Motions of sin while they live here. And how a Soul may know when she
   assenteth to these Motions, and when not

   IX. That this Image is both fair and foul whilst it is in this Life
   here, though it be reformed; and of the Differences of the secret
   Feelings of those that be reformed and those that be not

   X. Of three sorts of Men, whereof some be not reformed, and some be
   reformed only in Faith, and some both in Faith and Feeling

   XI. How Men that abide and live in sin, misshape themselves into the
   likeness of divers Beasts, and they be called the Lovers of the World

   XII. (i) How Lovers of this World in divers ways disenable themselves
   from becoming reformed in their Souls

   (ii) A little Counsel how Lovers of this World should do, if they will
   be reformed in their Souls before their departure hence

   PART II

   Of Reforming in Faith and Feeling also

   I. That this Reforming cannot be suddenly gotten, but in length of
   Time, by Grace, and much Spiritual and Corporal Industry

   II. (i) The Causes why so few Souls in comparison of the Multitude of
   others come to this Reforming that is both in Faith and Feeling

   (ii) How that without great Corporal and Spiritual Industry, and
   without much Grace and Humility, Souls cannot come to reforming in
   Feeling nor keep themselves therein after they come thereto

   III. An Entry or good Beginning of a Spiritual Journey, showing how a
   Soul should behave herself in intending and working that will come to
   this Reforming, by example of a Pilgrim going to Jerusalem

   IV. Of certain Temptations and Lettings which Souls feel from their
   Spiritual Enemies, in their Spiritual knowing and going towards
   Jerusalem, and the Remedies against them

   V. Of an evil Day and a good Night, and what they mean, and how the
   Love of the World is likened to an evil Day, and the love of God to a
   good Night

   VI. How that the Desire of Jesus felt in this lightsome Darkness
   slayeth all Motions of sin, and enableth the Soul to perceive spiritual
   Lightnings from the heavenly Jerusalem, that is, Jesus

   VII. How a Man shall know false Illuminations, that are feigned by the
   Enemy, from the true Light of knowing that cometh out of Jesus, and by
   what tokens

   VIII. How great profit it is to the Soul to be brought through Grace
   into lightsome Darkness, and how a Man shall dispose himself if he will
   come thereto

   IX. That the Working of our Lord Jesus in the Reforming of a Soul, is
   divided into four times, which are: Calling, Justifying, Magnifying and
   Glorifying

   X. How it falleth out sometimes that Souls that are but beginning or
   profiting in Grace seem to have more Love, as to outward tokens
   thereof, than some have that be perfect, and yet it is not really so in
   their Interior

   XI. After what manner a Man shall come to know his own Soul, and how a
   Man should set his Love in Jesus, God and Man in one Person

   PART III

   I. In what Sense this Manner of Speaking of Reforming of a Soul in
   Feeling is to be understood, and in what Manner it is reformed, and how
   it is found in St Paul's Writings

   II. How God openeth the inward Eye of the Soul to see Him, not all at
   once, but by divers times, and of three Manners of reforming of a Soul
   explained by a familiar Example

   III. How Jesus is Heaven to the Soul, and why He is called Fire

   IV. Of two manner of Loves, created and uncreated, and how we are bound
   to love Jesus much for our Creation; but more for our Redemption, and
   most of all for our Salvation, through the gifts of His Love

   V. How that some Souls love Jesus by bodily Fervours, and by their own
   human Affections that are moved by Grace and by Reason. And how some
   love Him more quietly by spiritual Affections only moved inwardly
   through spiritual Grace of the Holy Ghost

   VI. That the Gift of Love, amongst all other Gifts of Jesus, is most
   worthy and most profitable. And how Jesus doth all that is well done in
   His lovers, only for Love. And how Love maketh the exercise of all
   Virtues and all good Deeds light and easy

   VII. How Love through gracious Beholding of Jesus slayeth all stirrings
   of Pride; and maketh the Soul to lose the savour and delight in all
   earthly Honours

   VIII. How Love slayeth all stirrings of Wrath and Envy easily; and
   reformeth in the Soul the Virtues of Peace and Patience, and of perfect
   Charity to his Neighbour, as He did specially in the Apostles

   IX. Love slayeth Covetousness, Lechery and Gluttony, and the fleshly
   delight and savour in all the five Bodily Senses, softly and easily,
   through a gracious beholding of Jesus

   X. What Virtues and Graces a Soul receiveth through opening of the
   inner eye into the gracious beholding of Jesus, and how it cannot be
   gotten only by man's labour, but through special grace and his own
   labour also

   XI. How such special Grace for the Beholding of our Lord Jesus is
   withdrawn sometimes from a Soul; and how a Soul is to Behave herself in
   the Absence and in the Presence of Jesus, and how a Soul shall always
   desire (as much as is in her) the gracious Presence of Jesus

   XII. A Commendation of Prayer offered up to Jesus by a Contemplative
   Soul, and how stableness in Prayer is a secure work to stand in; and
   how every Feeling of Grace in a chosen Soul may be called Jesus. But
   the more clean the Soul is, the more worthy the Grace is

   XIII. How a Soul through the opening of the spiritual Eye receiveth a
   gracious Love enabling to understand the Holy Scriptures; and how
   Jesus, that is hid in the Holy Scriptures, showeth Himself to His
   Lovers

   XIV. Of the secret Voice of Jesus sounding in a Soul, and how it may be
   known. And how all the gracious Illuminations made in a Soul be called
   the Speakings of Jesus

   XV. (i) How through gracious Opening of the Spiritual Eye a Soul is
   made Wise, humbly and truly to see the Diversities of Degrees in Holy
   Church, as Militant, and for to see the nature of Angels; and first of
   the Reprobate

   (ii) How by the same light of Grace the Nature of the blessed Angels is
   seen. And how Jesus is God and Man above all Creatures, according to
   that which the Soul may see of Him here
     __________________________________________________________________

AN ESSAY on the Spiritual Life of Mediaeval England

   IT is only very gradually that we are obtaining a real knowledge of the
   Middle Ages. Hitherto it has been one of those subjects which no one
   could approach without getting into a passion. Just as no one can talk
   soberly of Mary, Queen of Scots, so it would appear as if few could
   keep their tempers in speaking or writing of the mediaeval time. The
   fact is that it is only by little that we can understand a period so
   very different from our own. A chaotic time is always a time of great
   contrasts, when profound ignorance exists side by side with
   considerable learning in individual instances, when heresies are wild
   and monstrous, while faith is touchingly simple and devoted. The real
   difficulty is to estimate the condition of the masses. It requires a
   patient spirit of research into minute details and dry statistics,
   united with a reverential admiration, a sifting criticism as well as a
   devout imagination, to avoid overweighing isolated instances and
   attaching undue importance to outstanding and striking features. I am
   not going to enter upon this dangerous ground. My only anxiety is to
   protest against what I cannot but consider a great error, both
   historically and ecclesiastically, the assumption that the Middle Ages
   are the model time of Christianity. It matters little what a man thinks
   about mediaeval architecture, vestments and embroidery, but it does
   matter a good deal what principles a man holds as to what may be called
   the philosophy of Church History. If he conceives the grand story of
   God's Church as though it were a pyramid, the apex of which is formed
   by the Middle Ages, while modern Christendom is on the downward side,
   then his whole view of Christianity is wrong. The Church never grows
   old, and it has advantages in the nineteenth century which it had not
   in the thirteenth. What, however, strikes a student of history most
   forcibly is that the more minutely we know the ages which are past, the
   more we learn the oneness of the spirit amidst all outward differences
   of form. We are every day obtaining more knowledge about the Middle
   Ages. Much has come to light since, thirty years ago, I wrote some
   "Lives of English Mediaeval Saints" at Littlemore, and, little as I
   have been able to follow the progress of history since then, I have
   seen enough to acknowledge that recent publications have brought with
   them the conviction that there was far more interior and mystical life
   amongst our ancestors than appeared at first sight.

   Very much has been done for us by such learned bodies as the Early
   English Text Society, and by such men as Pfeiffer in Germany and Lecoy
   de la Marche in France. Now we not only possess sermons like those of
   St Bernard addressed to monks in the cloister, but we have the
   identical vernacular sermon which roused to passionate grief the
   mediaeval sinner, and drew tears of sweet devotion from the eyes of the
   citizens of Cologne, Paris and London, or the peasants of country
   parishes in the Black Forest or the Weald of Kent. We have the English
   prayers which were said before the Rosary was invented, and the
   devotions which touched the hearts of men and women living in the midst
   of that world which seems so strange and so far off to us. I must
   confess that without any depreciation of our grand old Cathedrals, "The
   Wooing of our Lord" and "The Ancren Riwle" have more charms for me than
   a thousand painted windows. I know the thoughts which flowed from
   hearts which have long since ceased to beat, and I can understand, as I
   never did before, the grim old warriors and their wives who look so
   unearthly side by side upon their tombs. One touch of grace makes me
   feel akin to them.

   The perusal of this literature has, however, far more than a
   sentimental interest. It has now become simply ludicrous to look upon
   the devotional ideas of the Middle Ages as made up of indulgences and
   gifts to monasteries. These, of course, had their right place, as they
   have now; but, if ever it was doubtful, no one now can doubt that the
   mediaeval sinner knew quite as well as the gentleman of the nineteenth
   century that if he offended God and did not resolve never to offend Him
   again, he would infallibly be lost, though he left all his lands to the
   neighbouring convent. Priests might sing Requiems, and nuns might
   recite their Office, but nought could avail the impenitent before the
   judgement seat of Christ. If any man doubt it, let him read a sermon
   preached by Berthold of Regensburg, somewhere near Toggenburg or
   Sargans, not far from where the railway now skirts the lovely lake of
   Wallen. The barefooted Franciscan introduces, in his dramatic way, a
   man who had kept possession of ill-gotten gains rising up in the midst
   of the congregation, and saying: "Ho! Brother Berthold, I have done
   good to the brotherhood, and I make my confession every year; I have
   often entertained you at my house; I am in the confraternity, and have
   besought your prayers, that when I am dead you may watch over my body
   with song and lections." "Thou hast done well," is the Brother's
   answer, "and as soon as thou art dead we will sing for thee, and read
   long vigils, and chant beautiful Masses for thy soul, and loud
   Requiems, and bring thee in procession from thy parish church into our
   minster, and lay thee before the altar. But, I tell thee, if thou hast
   not restored what thou hast robbed, then, if all the tears and the
   raindrops which were ever shed or rained since the world began were
   turned into monks and brothers, grey monks and black, Preachers and
   Minorites--yea, into patriarchs and prophets, martyrs and confessors,
   widows and virgins, and if they were to read and to sing and weep tears
   of blood before God for thee to the day of judgement, they would do
   thee no more good than if they did all this for the foul fiend." Such
   was mediaeval doctrine in the year 1256. Moreover, it results from many
   hitherto unknown documents, that there was much more of what we should
   now call spirituality everywhere in the Middle Ages than even Catholics
   were disposed to think. It is even plain that nations were not reduced
   to one uniform standard. There was, for instance, a type of devotion
   which was peculiarly English, and the object of the present essay is to
   point this out. Of course, I can only treat the subject cursorily, for
   want of space, and I will confine myself to one portion of mediaeval
   life intimately connected with the book which is here presented to the
   reader.

   Very little is known of Walter Hilton, the author of the "Scale or
   Ladder of Perfection." It is very likely that more might be known if
   any one took the trouble to search the manuscripts of the British
   Museum. Something perhaps also might be done towards amending the text
   of this book if the edition of 1659, of which this is a reprint, were
   compared with the old black letter of Wynkyn de Worde. The present
   edition, [1] however, has solely a spiritual, not a critical object,
   and, therefore, I confine myself to the little which lies on the
   surface of history about this mystical writer, without inquiring
   further. Fortunately, Father Guy has lately, in his excellent edition
   of "The Scale of Perfection," thrown light on the life of Walter
   Hilton, by proving that he did not belong to the Carthusian Order, but
   was a Canon of Thurgarton, in Nottinghamshire. Tanner had already
   published an extract from a manuscript, which gave 1395 as the year of
   his death. No one, however, had as yet perceived that this fact
   disproves the ordinary account of his having been a member of Henry
   VI's Carthusian monastery at Sheen, since that house was not founded
   till several years later. It might still be argued that he belonged to
   some other house of the Order. As, however, there is no authority for
   his having been a Carthusian except the erroneous account of his having
   belonged to Sheen, and as the passage quoted by Tanner distinctly
   affirms him to have died at Thurgarton, Father Guy seems to me to have
   sufficiently proved his point. It is not hard to see how the mistake
   arose. Walter Hilton had evidently a great devotion to the Carthusian
   Order, and there is still extant in manuscript a panegyric of it,
   addressed to Adam Horsley, an officer of the King's Exchequer, who by
   his advice became a disciple of St Bruno. [2] On the other hand, we
   shall presently see abundant proof that the devotion of the Carthusians
   to Walter Hilton was no less great. There was something in the "Scale
   of Perfection" which attracted the monks whom the Christian instincts
   of Henry VI planted in the neighbourhood of his palace of Richmond, as
   well as their brethren of the Charterhouse, who kept up a witness for
   God in the heart of London.

   There is, however, an especial reason why the book should have found
   its way to Sheen. We know from Dugdale that a benefactor of the
   monastery had assigned out of the manors of Lewisham and Greenwich
   twenty marks a year for the maintenance of an anchoret, whose cell was
   in its precincts. Thus there dwelt in the midst of the Carthusians one
   of those recluses to whose instruction the book is dedicated, and a
   description of whom will form a considerable part of this essay.

   Now it is not a little strange that a large portion of English
   vernacular literature has direct reference to this form of the solitary
   life. We possess, besides Hilton's "Scale of Perfection," two other
   most remarkable books, addressed to or written by anchoresses. They
   will serve as specimens of the spiritual life of our ancestors at
   several very striking periods.

   It is very remarkable that the most startling form of the life of the
   desert saints should have continued in England up to the very moment of
   the Reformation. The Anchorets or Anchoresses (for there were
   solitaries of both sexes) were more lonely than hermits in the sense
   that they were far more of recluses. The hermit lived, it is true, in
   an out of the way place, in a forest, or in one of those many
   uncultivated spots of which an English common or down are the sole
   relics, but which were easily to be found in a country not yet entirely
   cultivated; while the anchorets were commonly attached to a church, and
   were thus not far from their fellowmen. They were, however, immured
   within the four walls of their habitation, while the hermit was a free
   denizen of the woods. As we know from St Godric, he might have his
   garden and his cow. The anchorets, on the contrary, were strictly
   confined to their cells. They were the descendants of solitaries like
   St Thais and those other recluses of whom we read in the annals of the
   Nile desert, who were strictly shut up in their hut and only held
   conversation with others through a window, which also served as a
   passage for their food. This sort of life, then, was by no means
   peculiar to the Oriental contemplative who fled from the old worn-out
   world of a decrepit civilization. The same taste for solitude in its
   most extreme form was a part of the young and vigorous life of those
   Teutonic nations whom Christianity converted after the Roman and
   Hellenic culture had disappeared. While the blood of the old Vikings
   was still fresh in their veins, men and women left the brilliant and
   varied world of the Middle Ages, which was still full of life and
   movement, to shut themselves in a cell, with no prospect but the black
   yews and crosses of the church-yard. This was a solitude far deeper
   than that of the great monasteries, each of which was a little world.
   It is evident that these recluses were by no means rare. There is many
   a foundation on record for the perpetual entertainment of a recluse.
   [3] Several Pontificals contain a regular office for these enclosures.
   Very often the anchoret was a chaplain attached to a church, who said
   Mass in his cell. The anchoress was more commonly near a church, into
   which she could look through a window, and thus take part in its holy
   ceremonies. Incidental mention is often made of such recluses in the
   troubled history of the times. Two anchorets were burned in the church
   at Mantes, when William the Conqueror set fire to the town. Richard II,
   before setting out on his dangerous encounter with Wat Tyler, went to
   confession to the anchoret in Westminster Abbey. It is probable that
   these holy men were often spiritual directors, while, as we shall
   presently see, many souls in sorrow and trouble, came to the window of
   the maiden anchoress for advice and consolation. It is true that from
   their very position the recluses were exposed to great temptations.
   Sometimes hypocrites were to be found among them, as is known from the
   life of St Stephen of Obazine, where we hear of a pretended anchoret
   who decamped with sums of money entrusted to him. The life is more
   intelligible in the case of a priest who had the adorable Sacrifice to
   offer up, confessions to hear, and Office to recite; but what would be
   the occupation of the hearts and brains of many an English maiden
   during the long days and nights which she thus spent in the narrow
   circle of the four walls which thus encaged her? What spells did she
   use to cool the restless fever in her veins? This is revealed to us by
   those treatises which we are now to consider.

   The first is the "Ancren Riwle," a book for anchoresses, first
   published by the Camden Society. The authorship of this remarkable book
   is very uncertain, or rather it is unknown. There is not a vestige of
   evidence to connect it with St Richard of Chichester, to whom it has
   been ascribed. On the faith of a manuscript, it has been assigned to
   Simon of Ghent Bishop of Salisbury, and supposed to have been written
   by him for some sisters living at Tarant in Dorsetshire. It has also
   been contended that Richard Poore, Bishop of the same See, was its
   author. The only thing that is certain is that it was written by a
   Dominican, for the list of prayers which the writer enumerates as
   having been in use among the lay brothers of his Order, are nearly
   identical with those ordered in the Rule of St Dominic. [4] As the
   Black Friars did not come to England till 1221, the book could not have
   been originally written for the sisters at Tarant, who before that date
   are known to have been Cistercian and not recluses; nor can one of the
   above-named prelates be its author, for they never belonged to the
   Order. Whoever was its author, it is evident that it must have been
   written before French had penetrated to any great extent into the
   English tongue. A few such expressions as Deulefet (Dieu le fait) and
   "sot" (foolish), show the presence of the Norman; and "annui" proves
   how early an importation from France was weariness of spirit in
   England. But the newness of words of French origin proves how little
   two centuries of Norman rule had succeeded in Romanizing the old
   language of the Saxon. Though the recluses to whom the book is
   addressed evidently could read French, yet the whole language and tone
   of thought is essentially English. The anchoresses, then, were English
   girls, in the thirteenth century. Their very names are unknown, though
   at that time, probably in the reign of our Henry III, their
   renunciation of the world was much spoken of among our ancestors. "Much
   word is of you, how gentle women ye be, for godliness and for nobleness
   yearned after by many, sisters of one father and one mother, in the
   blossom of your youth having forsaken all the world's blisses, and
   become anchoresses." A rich neighbour sent them all necessaries "from
   his hall." They had maidens to wait upon them, and to provide all that
   they wanted from without. They themselves, however, never stepped
   beyond the threshold of their hermitage. One window looked into the
   church, and from thence they assisted at the holy Sacrifice of the
   Mass. At another window, answering to the grill of an enclosed convent,
   they gave audience to visitors; but from the moment of their seclusion
   they never left their house, till they were carried out for burial.

   What could be the meaning of this apparition in the bustling times of
   the thirteenth century. Though society was gradually settling down, yet
   it was a restless age. Men did not travel for pleasure, nor were there
   yearly migrations to the seaside; yet there was still a good deal of
   wandering. The great migrations of nations were over long before, and
   the majority of the agricultural population was still practically tied
   to the soil; yet crusades and pilgrimages often drew men to the far
   East and across the Alps. The scholar wandered from university to
   university for knowledge; the merchant was not tied to his desk, but
   travelled from fair to fair with all his precious wares; the minstrel
   disseminated news, and sung his ballads. There was a world then, with
   pomps and vanities, as there is now; a gay, parti-coloured, motley
   world, at which the Church frowned and preached. The eternal war
   between God and the world was going on. It is quite true there was less
   of the chronic excitement which is now wearing the strength of souls
   with its wasting fever. Pleasures were intermittent, and life more
   even. [5] Balls were few, and generally took place in the daytime;
   public tournaments were few and far between. Yet society was still
   heaving with conflicting elements. Archbishops were often in exile,
   Emperors were under the ban of the Church; the Pope himself oftener in
   Viterbo than in Rome. English barons were harassing their king with
   Oxford Provisions; Simon de Montfort was devising a real English
   Parliament where the middle classes were represented. All the while
   these maidens of the period were praying to God day and night.

   This is the secret of their life. Wherever men believe in prayer, you
   are sure to have the monastic life in some shape or other. If they have
   none, they will soon cease to believe in prayer, as is fast becoming
   the case in all Protestant countries. Wherever the Christian idea is
   strong, men who are by their position necessarily involved in the
   strife of the world will be glad to know that men and women who are
   separated from its turmoils and its sins are offering prayers to God
   for them.

   It is plain that such was the occupation, and such the idea of the
   anchoress. It is also true that they did a great deal more than pray.
   The very dangers against which the author of her rule warns her are a
   proof that all had many visitors. He warns her against becoming a
   "babbling" or "gossiping anchoress," a variety of the species evidently
   drawn from the life; a recluse whose cell was the depository of all the
   news of the neighbourhood at a time when newspapers did not exist. Her
   habitation is not to be the storehouse where the neighbours placed
   objects of value, that they might be safe from the robber's hand. All
   this proves that the good anchoress had means of exercising charity
   towards her fellow creatures. Many a sorrowing soul came to the window,
   and received balm for her wounded spirit from behind the black curtain
   and the white cross which hung there. Through her servants she might
   even practise hospitality to those who wanted it, and they might act as
   schoolmistresses to little girls who otherwise would frequent schools
   where boys were taught. All this is quite true, yet it is plain that
   the chief business of the anchoress was prayer.

   It is very difficult for men living in the modern world to understand a
   life of prayer; yet they must accept it as a real fact. Thousands of
   Christians have lived such a life without becoming either praying
   machines like the Buddhists or fakirs like the Brahmins. The principle
   of Christian asceticism is as far apart from Manicheism as possible. It
   is simply the principle of expiatory suffering and prayer involved in
   the very idea of the sacrifice of Christ. The gulf which separates the
   anchoress from the fanatic is the love of Jesus. Of course this is
   nothing new to Catholics. Yet I think that even Catholics are not aware
   to what extent this is true of mediaeval devotion, and above all of
   England. Looking at the England of to-day it is very difficult to
   realize the fact that, whilst such a feeling towards our Lord is the
   very foundation of all Christian devotion, there is undoubtedly a kind
   of tender, pathetic love which is to be found in old English writers,
   and which is peculiarly their own. If I were asked to select the grace
   which is prominent in their writings, I should say that it was piety in
   the sense in which the word is applied to the gift of the Holy Ghost.
   The literature which is now before us is an excellent specimen of this
   spirit, because of the great interior freedom which was allowed to
   anchorets. They were less liturgical, and had fewer regulations than
   the religious Orders. "In this wise," says the Rule, "answer to him
   that asketh you of your Order, and whether it is white or black; say
   that ye are both, through the grace of God, of St James's order, about
   which he wrote, Immaculatum se custodire ab hoc saeculo, that is, as I
   said before, From the world to keep himself clean and unstained.'
   Herein is religion, and not in the white hood nor in the black, nor in
   the white nor in the grey cowl. Thus it is in a convent; but wherever
   woman liveth or man liveth by himself alone, eremite or anchoret, on
   outward things whereof no scandal cometh, he need lay little stress."
   [6] The anchoress had no peculiar habit, and her office was, as has
   been said, not that of the choir, but that of the lay brothers. She is
   encouraged to say English prayers. [7] At midday she made a meditation
   on the crucifix. Holy meditations are especially recommended to her.
   [8] Though, according to the practice of the Church at the time, she
   made only fifteen Communions a year, yet there is a marked devotion to
   the Blessed Sacrament throughout the treatise. Its perpetual presence
   in the church is held out as a refuge against temptation, and it is
   plain that from the window which looked into the church, the anchoress
   often knelt in prayer, with her eyes fixed upon the altar where Jesus
   lay in the Sacrament of His love. Let me give a few specimens of these
   meditations of the thirteenth century. These then were the veritable
   thoughts which went through the hearts of English anchoresses as they
   knelt before the crucifix five hundred years ago:

   "Jesus; true God! God's Son! Jesus, true God, true Man! Man,
   maiden-born! Jesus, my holy love, my own sweetness! Jesus, mine heart,
   my joy, my soul's health! Jesus, sweet! Jesus, my love, my light, my
   healing oil, my honey-drop! Thou all that I hope in! Jesus, my weal, my
   winsomeness, blithe bliss of my breast! Jesus, teach me that Thou art
   so soft, and so sweet, yet, too, so lovely and so lovesome that the
   Angels ever behold Thee, and yet are never full of looking on Thee!
   Jesus, all fair, before whom the sun is but a shadow, for she loseth
   her light and becometh ashamed of her darkness before Thy bright face.
   Thou that givest her light, and whose is all that brightness, enlighten
   my dark heart. Give brightness to Thy bower, even my soul that is
   sooty. Make her worthy to be Thy sweet abode. Kindle me with the blaze
   of Thy enlightening love. Let me be Thy bride, and learn me to love
   Thee, the loving Lord! Wo that I am so strange with Thee; but as Thou
   hast bodily separated me from the world, separate me eke in heart; turn
   me altogether to Thee, with true love and belief." [9]

   In another place, after a beautiful and minute description of the
   crucifixion, and how the "hellbairns" betrayed and crucified Him, she
   breaks out: "Ah! Jesus, my life's love, what heart is there that will
   not break when he thinketh hereof; how Thou, that art the Saviour of
   mankind, and the remedy for all bales, didst thole such shame for the
   honour of mankind. Men speak oft of wonders and of strange things
   divers and manifold that have befallen, but this was the greatest
   wonder that ever befell upon earth. Yea, wonder above wonders that that
   renowned Kaiser, crowned in Heaven, maker of all that is made, to
   honour His foes would hang between two thieves. Ah, how can I live for
   ruth that see my darling on the rood, and His limbs so drawn that I may
   tell each bone in His body! Ah, how do they now drive the iron nails
   through Thy fair hands into the hard rood and through Thy noble feet!
   Ah, now from those hands and feet so lovely streams the blood so
   ruefully! Ah, now they offer to my love, who says He thirsts, two evil
   drinks in His blood-letting, vinegar, sourest of all drinks, mingled
   with gall, that is the bitterest of all things! Ah, now, sweet Jesus,
   yet besides all Thy woe, to eke it out with shame and mockery, they
   laugh Thee to scorn when Thou hangest on the rood! Ah that lovely body
   that hangs so ruefully, so bloody, and so cold! Ah, how shall I live,
   for now dies my love for me on the dear rood, hangs down His head, and
   sends forth His soul? But it seems to them that He is not yet fully
   tormented, nor will they let the pitiful body rest in peace. They bring
   forth Longinus with the broad sharp spear. He pierces His side, cleaves
   the heart, and there come flowing out of that wide wound the Blood that
   bought us, the water that washes the world of guilt and sin. Ah, sweet
   Jesus, Thou openest for me Thy heart, that I may know Thee truly, for
   there I may openly see how much Thou lovedst me. With wrong should I
   refuse Thee my heart, since Thou hast bought heart for heart. Jesus,
   sweet Jesus, thus Thou foughtest for me against my soul's foes. Thou
   didst settle the contest for me with Thy body, and hast made of me, a
   wretch, Thy beloved and Thy spouse. Brought Thou hast me from the world
   to Thy bower. I may there so sweetly kiss Thee, and embrace Thee, and
   of Thy love have ghostly liking. What may I suffer for Thee for all
   that Thou didst thole (endure) for me? But it is well for me that Thou
   be easy to satisfy. A wretched body and a weak I bear upon earth, and
   that, such as it is, I have given Thee and will give Thee to Thy
   service. Let my body hang with Thy body nailed on the rood, and
   enclosed within four walls, and hang I Will with Thee, and never more
   leave my cross till that I die."

   These extracts suffice to give us an insight into the inner life of the
   anchoresses of the thirteenth century. They were supported in their
   long imprisonment by the love of our Lord. Their thoughts were fed by
   the image of Jesus. This is expressed in characteristic words: "After
   the death of an earnest knight man hangeth high in church his shield to
   his memory. All so is this shield, that is, the crucifix, set in church
   in such place that it may soonest be seen, for to think thereby on the
   knightship of Jesus Christ which He did on the rood." Here is evidently
   a passionate, chivalrous love of our Lord. The Rule is very full of
   child-like piety, and at the same time of shrewd common sense. Its
   whole tone is as different as possible from that of the hermit of
   modern fancy. There are no images of Alexandrian orgies, no hobgoblins
   worse than the anchoress's cat, which is especially exempt from the ban
   which proscribes pet animals. [10] She is nothing but a simple girl,
   who has given up the free life of English country maidens for the love
   of Christ.

   Very different is the next anchoress who comes under our consideration.
   One of the most remarkable books of the Middle Ages is the hitherto
   almost unknown work called "Sixteen Revelations of Divine Love made to
   a devout servant of our Lord, called Mother Juliana, an Anchoress of
   Norwich." [11] It contains visions and passages of such beauty as to
   rival the revelations of the Blessed Angela of Foligno. We shall find
   it well worth studying.

   But little is known of Mother Juliana. Her very name has been hitherto
   unnoticed. It appears, however, most probable that she is the Juliana
   Lampit to whom a knight, Shakespeare's "good Sir Thomas Erpingham,"
   [12] who commanded the English archers at Agincourt, left a legacy in
   his will in 1424. Her cell was at the east end of the church-yard of St
   Julian's Church at Norwich. [13] She was thirty years old and a half in
   May, 1373, and, as she appears to have died in 1443, she must have
   lived to be a hundred. She thus lived through some of the most stirring
   times of English history. She saw Poitiers and Agincourt, and the death
   of Joan of Arc.

   Nothing can show more forcibly how profoundly the minds of men in the
   fourteenth century were stirred down to their lowest depths than the
   appearance in an obscure anchoress of those fundamental questions
   concerning good and evil, which, however laid to rest in times of
   peaceful faith, are sure to start up afresh whenever the minds of men
   are strongly moved. We know that the time was marked by an outburst of
   mystical life in Germany, and that Eckhart, Tauler and the Blessed
   Henry Suso are proofs of the existence of a deeply speculative as well
   as religious spirit; but we were not prepared to find it in England.
   This is the more remarkable because there is no trace of any connexion
   between the German and English movement. In one short passage alone,
   Juliana, in the crude English expression, "unmade kind is God," [14]
   might seem to give utterance to the doctrine so prominent in Eckhart
   that creatures, considered as eternally present to God's mind, are
   identical with God. It was such expressions as these which drew upon
   the Dominican the censure of the Church, which, after his submission,
   he modified, and which reappear in writers of his school, such as the
   Blessed Henry Suso, but with explanations which render them harmless.
   Their occurrence in Mother Juliana is very remarkable. We might be
   tempted to suppose that they were an importation into Norwich through
   the immigration of Flemish weavers. We must, however, remember that
   this school of mysticism, represented by Ruysbrock, appeared later in
   Flanders than in the Rhineland. These views, then, are only another
   proof, among many, of the simultaneous appearance of ideas in places
   unconnected with each other. Like volcanoes, distant from each other,
   bursting out into flame at one and the same moment, they reveal the
   existence of some fiery depths at work in the very heart of
   Christendom. In Juliana's mind, however, this view of creation is only
   subordinate to that which absorbs and agonizes her whole being--the
   mystery of the existence of sin. Like the faces of fiends which grin in
   stone down upon us from the roof of a Gothic cathedral, the thought
   haunted her cell and mocked her at her prayers. In her mind it does not
   take the shape of the modern difficulty of the existence of suffering,
   eternal or temporal. It is true that even in this shape the difficulty
   was not entirely unknown to the Middle Ages. In Dante's great poem, for
   instance, the question of the eternal destiny of the heathen is treated
   with a freedom which we should not have expected. Even in the preceding
   century Brother Berthold is obliged to answer both popular and learned
   objections to the doctrine of everlasting punishment. [15] This,
   however, is never doubted by Mother Juliana. With her the difficulty is
   the possibility of the existence of such a horror as sin in creatures,
   which, even in the natural order, are so connected with God that in Him
   they "move and have their being." Above all, in the supernatural order,
   how could there be sin in souls predestinated to heaven? "How may this
   be? For I know by the common teaching of holy Church, and by mine own
   feeling, that the blame of our sins continually hangeth upon us from
   the first man unto the time when we come up into Heaven. And between
   these two contraries my reason was greatly troubled by my blindness,
   and could have no rest, for dread that His blissful presence should
   pass from my sight, and I to be left in unknowing how He beheld us in
   our sin. My longing endured, Him continually beholding; and yet I could
   have no patience in great fear and perplexity." Her mind is torn
   because she must hate sin, "as holy Church teacheth," yet that hateful
   thing exists in the predestinate. [16] In vain she takes refuge in the
   views of the schoolmen that sin has "no manner of substance, ne no part
   of being, ne it might not be known but by the pain thereof." [17] It
   was but poor comfort that sin, being a defect and therefore a negation,
   can be no object of cognition. The fiend was too powerful to be laid by
   metaphysical distinctions. Conscience and "the doom of the Church"
   alike cried out that it was a horrid fact, an "ugly sight," and that
   many creatures "shall he damned to Hell without aid, as holy Church
   teacheth me to believe." [18] The agony of soul still continued: "I
   cried inwardly with all my might, seeking unto God for help, moaning
   thus: Ah! Lord Jesus, King of bliss, how shall I be eased?'" [19]

   This is very different from the "Ancren Riwle." There we saw none but
   the ordinary temptations of the soul, "the world and the flesh." Here
   is a soul racked by the agony of perplexity, torn by the throes of
   doubt. It is not the fruit of modern scepticism, "the spirit which
   always contradicts." She takes for granted all the grand mysteries of
   Heaven and earth. It is this very certainty which causes intolerable
   pain. This soul has a tremendous grasp of the reality of God, which she
   expresses with terse energy. "The Trinitie is God," she exclaims, "God
   is the Trinitie, the Trinitie is our maker, the Trinitie is our keeper,
   the Trinitie is our everlasting lover, the Trinitie is our endless joy
   and our blisse, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and in our Lord Jesus Christ;
   and this was showed in the first sight (vision) and in all. For when
   Jesus appeareth, the Blessed Trinity is understood as unto my sight."
   [20] Yet with all this, there was that "ugly sight" of sin, obscuring
   the very face of God, shaking "the holy Church in sorrow and anguish
   and tribulation, as men shaketh a cloth in the wind," [21] coming like
   a dark cloud between her and the crucifix. Truly here is an anchoress
   worth studying, if only because it gives us a new and unexpected
   insight into the mediaeval time.

   The fact is hers was a dismal age. The more we study history, the more
   preposterous it seems to lump together into one the whole of those ages
   commonly called the Ages of Faith. There is as much difference between
   the twelfth and fourteenth centuries as between the fourteenth and the
   nineteenth. The power of the Church throughout the Middle Ages has
   certainly been much exaggerated. There were continual fluctuations of
   victory and defeat. Even in the thirteenth century she was by no means
   omnipotent; certainly at the beginning of the fourteenth her influence
   was sensibly growing less. I wish, however, just now especially to
   point out that, simultaneously with the fierce attack of Europe on the
   Papacy, of which the treatment of Boniface VIII by Philip the Fair was
   the beginning, there came an undoubted outburst of sin, a marked
   progress in vice. It is absurd to look for the cause of this enmity in
   the Papacy itself. Boniface laid claim to nothing whatsoever which was
   not successfully claimed by Innocent III. The causes were to be found
   in society itself, in profound social changes which were bringing on
   political revolutions. The unchristian principles which from the first
   were contained in chivalry, its courts of love, and its impure
   literature, were now getting entirely the upper hand over its high and
   virtuous ideal. The germ of all this wickedness had been at an early
   period brought over to England by the Queen of Henry II, the Eleanor of
   the South of France. Since John England had been ruled by men who, with
   all their faults, were good and religious--Henry, Dante's "king of
   simple life," [22] and the noble Edward, his son; but the brilliancy of
   Cressy and Poitiers cannot blind us to the licentiousness of the court
   of Edward III, even though we disbelieve the common story of his
   affection for the Countess of Salisbury. Minute details on the subject
   of dress and manners, from contemporaries of Mother Juliana, come to us
   from too many sources to leave a doubt on the degeneracy of the times.
   The dress and demeanour of the ladies of the upper classes scandalized
   the people, and were a distinct change for the worse. "In these days,"
   says Knighton, "arose a murmur and clamour among the people, that
   whenever there was a tournament, there came a great concourse of ladies
   of the court, costly and beautiful, but not of the best of the kingdom,
   in divers and wonderful rich apparel, in divided tunics, one part of
   one colour and one of another, with short caps and bands in the manner
   of cords wound round the head, and zones well bound round with gold or
   silver, and in pouches across their bodies knives called daggers, and
   thus they proceeded on chosen coursers or well-governed horses to the
   place of tournament; and so expended and devastated their goods, and
   vexed their bodies with scurrilous wantonness, that the murmurs of the
   people sounded everywhere; and thus they neither feared God nor blushed
   at the chaste voice of the people." [23] Evidently these ladies of the
   period were worse than their grandmothers. Let any one call to mind the
   Parson's sermon in the "Canterbury Tales," and he will see that this
   immodesty continued in the reign of Richard II. This change of manners
   was, however, by no means confined to England. Loud complaints arose
   from every land in Europe. Dante's sad and beautiful description of the
   simplicity of the old Florentine life which he had known in his early
   years, and his indignant lines against the low dresses introduced among
   the Florentine ladies of the fourteenth century, [24] are too precise
   to allow us to suppose them to be the product of a morbid mind. The
   sober prose of the chronicle bears out the language of the poet.
   "People at this time," says the Roman author of Rienzi's life, "began
   to change much in their habits, both in dress and conduct." Documents
   from Pavia, Piacenza and Milan bear witness to the same change for the
   worse, especially in the modesty of the young. [25] As for France, the
   universal voice accuses it of being the centre of corruption and vice.
   Already, at the end of the preceding century, a preacher of the south
   of France attacks customs which only appeared later elsewhere. [26]
   Villani traces Florentine degeneracy to the visit of the French in
   1384. [27] The same degeneracy appears in Germany. Landino, a
   commentator on Dante, mentions a circumstance of German life which
   resembles St Chrysostom's invectives against the public baths of the
   Eastern Empire. The whole subject is thus summed up by a competent
   writer [28] : "Since the end of the thirteenth century the comfort and
   material prosperity of all classes in Italy, the Netherlands, France
   and Germany were much greater owing to the spread of commerce and
   intercourse. On all sides are seen a tendency to luxury and a rapid
   change of fashion which already, under Philip IV, called forth a formal
   sumptuary ordinance for the nobility, clergy and citizens." It was just
   one of those periods in which the heart of Christians like Mother
   Juliana are profoundly stirred by the sight of the increasing
   wickedness of mankind.

   Nor need we wonder that the knowledge of the wickedness of the world
   should have reached the cell of the recluse. It so happens that the
   anchoress lived in the centre of these political revolutions, which
   were the result of this very degeneracy of chivalry. Norwich, with its
   60,000 inhabitants, was the second city in the kingdom, and represented
   more interests than even London. No one can fail to have been struck
   with the prominence of financial details in the annals of the reign of
   Edward III. The great conqueror is forced to leave his great crown and
   his little crown and his Queen's crown in pledge, and his nobles as
   hostages for his debts, before he can set sail from the continent and
   return to his own kingdom. A great part of his revenues came from taxes
   on wool, and as Norwich was the great seat of woollen manufactures, it
   acquired an immense preponderance in an age when almost daily
   alternations between protectionist and free-trade principles prove the
   attention paid to its peculiar branch of commerce. The city was
   therefore always profoundly stirred by England's revolutions, and wild
   storms surged up to the very doors of the cell of the Anchoress of
   Carrow. Every party in the realm was represented there. About seventy
   years before Juliana's birth there had been fighting in the streets
   between the partisans of the Abbey and the citizens. The old-world
   privileges of the Church, given in times when the monks were almost the
   only agriculturists, became galling to the rich wool-merchants of
   Norwich, and a bloody fight had been the result. The agitation had,
   however, worked deeper down; and a lower stratum of society was in
   process of upheaval. In the great insurrection of 1381 the French
   Revolution had been well-nigh anticipated. Two elements of strife were
   at work, and each affected Norwich. First there was the rebellion of
   labour against property. The awful visitation of the Black Death had
   carried off a vast proportion of the ill-fed, comfortless villains. The
   result was a great rise in wages, which Parliament attempted to keep
   down by legislation. This produced a long strike among the labourers,
   who fled from the uncultivated fields and flocked into the towns. From
   one single manor, that of Cossey, no fewer than eighteen villains in
   one year fled to Norwich; out of these eight received their freedom on
   the plea of their having had a domicile for a year and a day. This
   occurred earlier in the century, but by Juliana's time hundreds must
   thus have been turned into free manufacturers instead of serfs. In that
   one city there were congregated all the conflicting elements of
   society--the rich Abbey, the wealthy merchant, the Flemish manufacturer
   and the freed serf. This of itself, however, might have been
   insufficient to raise the storm if it had not been for a cause to which
   I have adverted. The increasing and ruinous luxury of the nobles
   produced a grinding oppression of the poor. This had always been
   contained in the bosom of feudalism. In that system those who were not
   possessors of land, the villains and the serfs, had but little to trust
   to but the conscience of their lord and the customs which regulated
   their services. As long as the lord had comparatively simple wants, the
   serf was less oppressed. But when a licentious court showed an example
   of prodigality, the infection spread through the whole of the feudal
   hierarchy. The knight still swore to defend the poor and the oppressed,
   but when he wanted money for his multiplied needs, the temptation to
   wring it out of the vassal was too strong to be resisted. Here again we
   have a cloud of witnesses from all sides. The evil had begun earlier in
   France. "The order of knighthood," says James of Vitry in a sermon, "is
   now-a-days in many cases corrupt; they use their strength like furious
   madmen. Many harry their vassals by corv?es, as they are called, and
   give them no bread to eat." [29] "Let the serf be too happy that I have
   left him his calf and spared his life," said a nobleman, who had
   carried off a poor man's cow. Matters had become ten times worse at the
   period of which we are writing. The world had less conscience, and
   there are fewer stories on record of the signal punishment of the
   oppressor. "Jacques Bonhomme will not pull out his purse unless you
   beat him, but Jacques Bonhomme will pull out his purse because he will
   be beaten," was the common talk. [30] Jacques Bonhomme took a fearful
   revenge. The horrible rebellion of the Jacquerie was the result. In
   England it took a longer time to stir up these elements of horror.
   There was a better feeling amongst us, and the Commons in the Good
   Parliament presented a petition for a law to forbid the lords of the
   demesnes to exercise sovereign authority by taxing the villain. [31]
   The king answered that he would act as seemed good to him. The answer
   cost England a civil war. Six years later London was in the hands of
   Wat Tyler at the head of the Kentish serfs, and the blood of the
   Archbishop of Canterbury stained the streets of the city. Men
   perpetrated horrible crimes, but they were maddened by an unjust tax,
   levied by officials who insulted the honour of those who were nearest
   and dearest to them. Here again Norwich was in the midst of the fight.
   A dyer of Norwich was at the head of the peasants, and its Bishop, of
   the noble house of Spencer, in full armour, with a few lancers, rode
   and hewed down the insurgents, and arrested their leader. While all
   these horrors were enacted at the city gates, Juliana was leading her
   life of miraculous prayer. Amidst decaying chivalry and chaotic revolt
   the saints of God were suffering. It is remarkable that on the same
   blood-stained flats of Norfolk, over which formerly, in quieter times,
   St Walstan, of the royal house of Cedric, had driven the plough as a
   poor labourer, now in this most troubled century, an English peasant
   maiden, Jane the Meatless, was adoring and loving the Blessed
   Sacrament, which for many years was almost her only food.

   Into this witch's cauldron was thrown another ingredient. Up to this
   time Europe can hardly be said to have given birth to an indigenous
   heresy. Such errors as those of Berengarius and Gilbert de la Por?e
   were chiefly confined to the schools, and only affected the laity in a
   comparatively small degree. Heresies of the Albigensian class were the
   descendants of Gnostics and Manichees. [32] Public opinion was against
   them, and the very jongleurs in their songs satirized the Vaudois. We
   find, however, in the fourteenth century the beginning of a distinct
   revolt of the cultivated class against Christianity. They are already
   numerous enough to fill the sixth circle of Dante's Hell. In the case
   of Fredrick II it was still possible to refer his scepticism to what
   has been well called Ghibelline culture. But now out of the dismal
   tombs arise at once spirits who belonged to both the great parties of
   the time. Farinata was a Ghibelline, Cavalcante was a Guelph. Hitherto
   England had been singularly free from intellectual revolts against the
   Church. The Dominican author of the "Ancren Riwle" thanks God that
   England is free from heresy. In Mother Juliana's time, however, the
   land was stained with native error. It is to the disgrace of Wycliffe
   that while he taught doctrines which, notwithstanding his disclaimers,
   struck at the root of all property, he played into the hands of the
   party of the rapacious nobles, headed by the Duke of Lancaster. The
   citizens of London rose in disgust against the priest who insulted
   their bishop and was protected by the man who was the defender of
   abuses, which the Black Prince rose from his bed of death to oppose in
   his place in Parliament. We have not, however, anything to do with
   Wycliffe's social views. I must advert to the speculative part of his
   system in order to contrast it with that of the recluse of Norwich, for
   there is sometimes a coincidence of language which might deceive the
   unwary. Little do they know of Wycliffe who look upon him as a sort of
   modern Evangelical because he translated the bible and abused the
   mendicant Orders. That he was a morning-star of the Reformation we have
   no difficulty in allowing, a fitting Lucifer for such a day. Some
   writers have connected him with Ockham, because Merton College had the
   honour of producing both. In point of fact, the two doctors were at the
   very opposite extremes of the poles of scholastic thought. Wycliffe
   identifies nominalism with heresy and held realism in its most intrepid
   form. "We meet in him," says a Protestant writer, "with elements which
   in their logical evolution would have led to Pantheism." What they did
   lead to, according to the same authority, was "a denial of free-will"
   in God and man. So thoroughly and absolutely did he identify in God the
   idea and the fact, the order of thought and the order of being, that he
   denies to God the conception of any possible things beyond what is or
   will be actual. Thus creation, present or future, is the measure of
   God's omnipotence. The old metaphysical bull-dog of the North country,
   the "quidam Borealis" of Walsingham, hung on with all his teeth to his
   premisses, in spite of the immorality of the conclusion. God, according
   to him, was neither more nor less free in the creation of the world
   than in the generation of the Son. I need not say that this is direct
   Pantheism, since it makes the universe a necessary part of God.
   Wycliffe saw and was not scared by the fearful danger of throwing the
   causality of evil upon God. He tries to escape from it, indeed, by the
   scholastic view that sin is but a negation, and therefore cannot be the
   object of the Divine ideas. But he did not fear to say that all things
   happen by absolute necessity. [33] "Accordingly all sin appears to him
   a necessary thing; all is required in order to the beauty of the
   universe." This might have appeared at first sight as unintelligible
   nonsense, but it has borne a most bitter fruit. Unfortunately a good
   deal of what some are inclined to dismiss as metaphysical subtlety
   leads to endless misery, and turns to very intelligible blasphemy. The
   slightest acquaintance with the schoolmen will enable us to see that
   Wycliffe's views are an audacious perversion of scholastic principles.
   His denial of possible things in God is a shameless use of St Thomas's
   "Actus Purus," and his theory of evil a still more shameless abuse of
   the view that sin is a defect not a substance.

   We are now in a condition to show how groundless is the notion that
   Mother Juliana's expressions in the least imply a tendency to the
   errors of Wycliffe. Both fact and doctrine render such a notion
   preposterous. It so happens that we have Walsingham's testimony that
   "Faith and religion remained inviolate in the diocese of Norwich." The
   martial prelate whom we met just now threatened to burn any Lollard
   whom he caught, and would, without doubt, have kept his word. The
   recluse was under ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and was too marked a
   person to escape if her works had had a really Wycliffite tendency.
   Furthermore, her tender devotion to our Lady, her reverence for the
   saints, her very mode of life rendered it impossible. Wycliffe denied
   the necessity of confession, calls the canonization of saints
   blasphemous, and enclosure within stone walls a result of "the cursed
   spirit of falsehood." The only passages which would lend a colour to
   such an imputation on the recluse are those which we have already
   quoted, and others [34] which imply strong views about predestination,
   the impossibility of the ultimate fall of the elect, and the loving
   care of God for the souls of the elect if they fall into sin. All these
   coincidences only show how deeply the minds of men were stirred, since
   we find views on these subjects in the very cell of the recluse. It
   would be simple ignorance to suppose that such thoughts were confined
   to Wycliffe, and could only be derived from him. Bradwardine had
   already made them familiar. How far even the popular mind was tossed
   about by questions of free-will and grace is plain from the fact that
   in Chaucer the Nun's Priest mentions Bradwardine's book; and the
   existence of these disputes is thus referred to as well-known to an
   assembly such as that which composed the Canterbury Pilgrims, to mine
   host of the Tabard, to the miller and the reeve.

   What has already been proved contrary to fact can still be shown to be
   impossible by a comparison of doctrine. The few coincidences between
   Mother Juliana and Wycliffe are among the many proofs that the same
   speculative view often means different things in different systems.
   Both St Augustine, Calvin and Mahomet believe in Predestination, yet an
   Augustinian is something utterly different from a Scotch Cameronian or
   a Mahometan. The same words mean different things in the mouths of
   different people. The idea which runs through the whole of Mother
   Juliana is the very contradictory of Wycliffe's Pantheistic
   Necesitanarianism, The moment that a man believes in any real sense in
   a loving God he ceases to be a Pantheist. It is not enough to believe
   in a beneficent spirit, for universal benevolence may be a blind
   impulse, but since love is a free gift of self, a spirit who can love
   is free, and a being who is free is at once personal. [35] The very
   basis, however, and the essence of Mother Juliana's views are her
   belief in the lovingness of God. Few since the beginning of
   Christianity have spoken of the love of God like this English recluse.
   After the agony of the black night of sin, her only consolation is to
   plunge into the great abyss of God's love. "Thus Jesus Christ, that
   does good again evil, is our very Mother. We have our being of Him,
   where the ground of Motherhood beginneth, with all the sweet keeping of
   love that endlessly followeth. As verily as God is our Father, as
   verily is God our Mother; and that showeth He in all; and namely in
   these sweet words there He saith, I it am,' that is to say, I it am,
   the might and the goodness of the Fatherhead; I it am, the wisdom and
   the kindness of the Motherhead; I it am, the light and the grace that
   is all blessed love; I it am, the Trinity; I it am, the Unity; I it am,
   the high sovereign goodness of all manner things; I it am that maketh
   thee to long; I it am, the endless fulfilling of all true desires.' Our
   high Father, Almighty God, which is being, He knoweth us and loved us
   from before any time. Of which knowing in His full deep marvellous
   charity, by the far-seeing endless counsel of all the blessed Trinity,
   He would that the Second Person should become our Mother, our Brother,
   and our Saviour. Whereof it followeth that as verily as God is our
   Father, verily God is our Mother." In a perfect rapture of love, she
   goes on, "Our kind Mother, our gracious Mother, for He would all whole
   become our Mother in all things; He took the ground of His work full
   low and full mildly in the maiden's womb. In this low place He arrayed
   Him, and dight Him all ready in our poor flesh, Himself to do the
   service and the office of Motherhead in all things. We wit that all our
   mothers bear us to pain and to dying, what is that but our very Mother
   Jesus? He alone beareth us to joy and to endless living, blessed mote
   He be. Thus He sustained us with Him, in pain and travail, unto the
   full time that He would suffer the sharpest thorns and grievous pains
   that ever were or shall be, and died at the last. And when He had done
   and so borne us to bliss, yet might not all this suffice to His
   marvellous love. And that He showed in these high ever-passing words of
   love, If I might suffer more, I would suffer more.' He might no more
   die, but He would not stint working. Wherefore Him behoveth to feed us,
   for the dear-worthy love of motherhood hath made Him debtor to us. The
   mother may give her child to suck her milk; but our precious Mother
   Jesus, He may feed us with Himself and doth full continuously and
   tenderly with the Blessed Sacrament. This is precious food of very
   life, and with all the sweet sacrament He sustaineth us full mercifully
   and graciously. And so He meant in these blessed words, when He said, I
   it am that Holy Church preacheth thee and teacheth thee.' That is to
   say, all the health and life of the sacraments, all the virtue and the
   grace of my word, all the goodness that is ordained in Holy Church to
   thee, I it am.' The mother may lay her child tenderly to her breast;
   but our tender Mother Jesus He may homely lead us into His blessed by
   His sweet open side, and show us there in party of the Godhead. And
   that showeth He in the ninth Revelation, giving the same understanding
   in His sweet word when He saith, Lo how I love thee.'" [36] This is the
   key-note of her whole book, the solution of all her doubts. She
   attempts no reasoning, and has no logical answer to her difficulties.
   She simply plunges into the depths of God's love. "There I was learned
   that I should only enjoy in our blessed Saviour Jesus, and trust in Him
   for all things. And thus our good Lord answered to all questions and
   doubts that I might make, saying full comfortably: ' I may make all
   things well, and I can make all things well, and I shall make all
   things well, and I will make all things well, and thou shalt see
   thyself that all manner of things shall be well." This, after all, is
   the sole refuge of poor humanity. Yet it is not a mere sentiment. It is
   based on a deep view of God's great attributes. God is not merely a
   benevolent being. She distinguishes His pity from His love. Down in the
   depths of His eternity there has been a longing, which she calls "a
   ghostly thirst," a "love-longing." [37] "For as truly as there is a
   property (attribute) in God of ruth and pity, as verily there is a
   property in God of thirst and longing. And this property of longing and
   thirst cometh of the endless goodness of God; right as the property of
   pity cometh of His endless goodness; and though He have longing and
   pity, they are sundry properties (different attributes) as to my
   sight."

   Put this side by side with Wycliffe's deep growl at abuses rather than
   sin, his heaven of brass, and his iron destiny; it looks like and is a
   different religion. Not only the feeling which actuates, but the
   intellectual basis which animates it is the direct contradiction of his
   whole system. She belongs to the genuine school of English mystics
   which we have pointed out. Her love for Jesus is of the same kind as
   that found in the "Ancren Riwle." The supernatural events of her life
   remind us of what has been often thought to be peculiar to Continental
   devotion. Here is a poor English recluse, who has visions not unworthy
   of being read by the side of those of her great contemporary, St
   Catherine of Siena. This is a phase of English mediaeval life which we
   little suspected. Juliana is a recluse very different from the
   creatures of the imagination of writers on comparative morals. So far
   from being cut off from sympathy with her kind, her mind is tenderly
   and delicately alive to every change in the spiritual atmosphere of
   England. Every storm was felt with an electric shock through her inmost
   being. The earthquake council made the cell of the poor recluse rock to
   and fro as violently as the stones of old St Paul's. The four walls of
   her narrow home seem to be rent and torn asunder, and not only England,
   but Christendom appears before her view. [38] It was not the crucifix
   which came before her in her visions, but the very form of the
   crucified Jesus, "with the plenteous bleeding of the head, the great
   drops of blood falling down from under the garland of thorns." And this
   was seen at Norwich, the English Manchester of the fourteenth century,
   when Cressy and Poitiers were still fresh in men's minds, and the Black
   Prince was lying sick at Berkhampstead. At that time England had not
   separated itself from the great stream of Christian life.

   A further proof the intimate connection between the spiritual and
   social life of England is furnished us by the history of the remarkable
   treatise to which this Essay serves as an introduction. The precise
   time when it was actually written is unknown; all that is certain is
   that the "Scale of Perfection" must have been written before 1395, when
   its author died. As Juliana's book was written in 1370, it is plain
   that there cannot have been any great difference in date between the
   composition of the two works. It tells much for the spiritual life of
   England that in the fourteenth century such a treatise as the "Scale of
   Perfection" should have been written. It is, however, to the subsequent
   history of the book that I wish to point rather than to its origin; it
   so happens that the period assigned for the commencement of Walter
   Hilton's influence coincides with that of the close of Mother Juliana's
   life. [39] Unlike Mother Juliana's book, which remained comparatively
   unknown, Walter Hilton's treatise evidently had a wide circulation. The
   number of existing manuscripts scattered through various cathedral and
   other libraries bear witness to its popularity. It was translated into
   Latin by a Carmelite early in the fifteenth century. It was high in
   repute with the Carthusians, and this in itself is a guarantee of its
   being extensively read. No order was so respected in England and other
   Teutonic countries as the Carthusian. Those who speak most mournfully
   of the bad state of Christendom just before the Reformation, always
   make an honourable exception of the sons of St Bruno. They were
   spiritual directors of Gerard Groot in the Low Countries, and of Colet,
   More and Fisher in England. One of their especial employments was the
   translation and propagation of good spiritual books, as we know from
   Surius, through whom Tauler and Henry Suso were made known to the
   Church in a Latin dress. Walter Hilton was the favourite author of
   Margaret, Countess of Richmond, the spiritual child of Fisher. The art
   of printing was as yet in its infancy when the "Scale of Perfection"
   was at once printed in black letter by Wynkyn de Worde, and other
   editions rapidly appeared. This, then, is the remarkable fate of this
   book. A treatise on the spiritual life, originally written by an
   obscure author in a small house of Augustinian Canons in
   Nottinghamshire and addressed to the most solitary of all the varieties
   of monastic life, is chosen to be the guide of good Christians in the
   courts of kings and in the world. Throughout the dismal wars of the
   Roses, and the more dismal reign of Henry VIII, many a heart was
   strengthened and consoled by Walter Hilton. The very copy still exists
   which must have been in the hands of the martyred Carthusians, the glow
   from whose pallid faces lit up the cell of Sir Thomas More as he gazed
   down at them as they were dragged on the hurdle to execution. The
   selfsame book was to be found in the palace of the mother of Henry VII.
   How she loved it, the rude lines in Wynkyn de Worde's edition will
   testify:

   This heavenly book more precious than gold,

   Was lately directed with great humility,

   For godly pleasure therein to behold

   Unto the right, noble Margaret, as ye see,

   The King's Mother of excellent bounty,

   Harry the Seventh, that Jesus him preserve,

   This mighty Princess hath commanded me

   T' imprint this book her grace for to deserve.

   Now, all this is very worthy of remark. Here is a book written for a
   recluse, yet printed and recommended as a book of devotion, not for the
   cloister, but for good Christians in the world. This is quite a new
   feature, and points at once to fact that that the interior life was
   spreading in England. What is the significance of this fact? Enough has
   been already said to show that the religious life of the Middle Ages
   was not the formal ritualism which many have supposed. German scholars
   have done a vast deal to destroy this illusion by the publication of
   old religious books in the vernacular tongue. We have only got to look
   at Mone's collection of mediaeval hymns, and to observe the frequent
   notices of translations, not only into German, but into French and
   Italian, to be convinced that the songs of the Church were accessible
   to the poor, and even in common use amongst them in their own language.
   Jacopone de Todi's beautiful hymns are a proof of the popularity of
   spiritual songs other than the liturgical hymns of the Breviary. There
   are extant also hymns sung and prayers said in various
   languages--French, Provenal, German and English--to be used at the
   Elevation, the Holy Communion, and on various feasts. [40] Didactic
   books of devotion in the vernacular tongue, such as Tauler's
   "Nachfolge," "L'Internelle Consolation," and in English the "Ayenbite
   of Inwit" or Remorse of Conscience prove that spiritual reading was
   practiced. It is plain then that our mediaeval ancestors were by no
   means so chained to the letter, so unspiritual as some have supposed.
   Nevertheless it is true that the "Scale of Perfection" is a step
   forward, indicating a greater spread of the spiritual life among
   Christians in the world.

   The fact is that there was arising, at the close of the feudal period,
   a new class, which had to be legislated for. We often use the terms
   mediaeval and modern without much reflection on the real difference
   between society as it was constituted then and now. The feudal society
   was a great hierarchy of duties. Of course, wherever Christianity
   exists property must involve duties; in the mediaeval time property and
   duty were absolutely synonymous. Property was held on condition of
   certain services, and was forfeited when these were withheld. In theory
   the feudal sovereign was the owner of the soil, and the nobles held
   their lands of him on a definite tenure. Combined with this was the
   view that each noble was despotic on his own land, and administered
   justice to the serfs who lived upon it. Horridly oppressive and
   tyrannical as the system became in fact, it was founded on the notion
   of reciprocal obligations. The noble defended and fought for the serf,
   who in his turn laboured for the lord. The consequence of this state of
   things was that there did not exist a single man who had nothing to do.
   Independently of the absence of available wealth and of means of being
   comfortable, the very fact of possessing something implied that a man
   must work. Every little lord who possessed as much as a tower was fully
   occupied in the administration of justice, in the government of his
   vassals, and in actual war or the keeping himself ready for it.
   Robbery, injustice and crime were very possible; idleness could not
   exist. The result of this was that there was no such thing as a class
   of persons in society who had a great deal of time on their hands and
   were not compelled to do anything. In times when money was scarce life
   was a struggle. Ladies took a personal share in the work of the
   kitchen, and overlooked their servants from the gallery in the hall.
   Even hunting was an occupation as well as an amusement; men hunted
   stags for the sake of the venison, instead of foxes for the love of
   sport. The fish of the stream and the birds which were struck down by
   the hawk were an object to the lord. Gardens and parks were few, and
   forests many. The marks of the plough can still be traced close up to
   the ruined castle wall. Life was a more earnest, personal affair in the
   Middle Ages than now.

   Gradually this state of things passed away. Warwick the King-maker has
   been rightly called the last of the Barons. In Henry VI we may consider
   that we have the last of mediaeval kings. The Middle Ages find their
   euthanasia in this pallid, saintly monarch, just as a former state of
   things was closed by St Edward the Confessor. Edward IV, the favourite
   of the citizens of London, brave, but unchivalrous, faithless,
   irreligious and unchaste, was a king of a far other type. The wars of
   the Roses utterly destroyed the old feudal baron. Men were hardly
   conscious of the change, and the Duke of Norfolk might still boast
   "that he was as good as a king when he was on his own estate at
   Norwich." The dream cost him his head. It was only gradually that men
   became aware of the vast, silent change which had been consummated. The
   feudal world had passed away, and modern society had taken its place.
   As far as concerns us, the result is the total disruption of all
   necessary connection between property and occupation, the creation of a
   very large class of men and women who can live, if they please, without
   doing anything at all. I do not mean to say that any man breathing is
   born without duties; but I mean that there is a very large class of
   beings who can eat, drink and perform all the functions of life whether
   they do their duties or not.

   It is evident that this state of things requires something peculiar to
   meet it. What is to be done with all this superfluity of unemployed
   life? What is a man thus set free from obligation to do with his time?
   In the Middle Ages life itself imposed an unvarying rule of living. Is
   man now to live without a rule? A thousand moral and religious
   questions start up and cry out for an answer. Things have become
   possible now which were not possible before. Men and women can spend
   their lives in an unvarying round of amusements and excitements, even
   without supposing them to seek vicious pleasures. Theatres, operas,
   balls, novels--things unknown to their ancestors--may make up their
   life. Is this right? Is it safe? A most momentous question this, which
   requires an answer. Here is a new thing upon earth, or at least a state
   of things which has not existed since the Teutonic nations were
   converted--the upper classes of society able to live in a constant
   round of amusement, and thinking themselves satisfactorily sure of
   salvation, because of the hypothetical absence of great sin. Are
   unlimited balls and unlimited sacraments compatible? Or is a worldly
   life a perilous one for those who live it? Or rather ought not
   Christians to spend more time in prayer, in devotion, in voluntary
   almsgiving and works of charity, in proportion as they are set free
   from many duties? Is not life more dangerous and salvation more
   insecure because of this terrible invasion of the world, with audacious
   requirements and unblushing exigencies? Considering the cool impudence
   with which the world insists on his own innocence, nay, has even the
   impertinence to look upon its general mode of life as a duty to
   society, it does seem as if this new attitude of the world called for
   new rules and a greater strictness to counteract its dangers.

   Now, the "Scale of Perfection" is valuable because it is an English
   book containing an answer to this question. If not written for, it was
   at least adopted by an English princess, a king's mother, living at
   court in the reign of Henry VII. In fact, it contains the old English
   Catholic view before Protestantism existed. The answer to the above
   question is unequivocal, and is contained in the following words: [41]
   "When men and women who are free from worldly businesses if they will,
   and may have their needful sustenance without much solicitude about it,
   especially religious men and women--and other men also in secular
   estate, that have good abilities and understanding, and may, if they
   will dispose themselves, come to much grace; these men are more to
   blame than those who are so busied with worldly things which are so
   needful to be done. Verily it is perilous for a soul not to seek to
   make any further progress." The only safe thing is to "set his heart
   fully to come to more grace and give himself heartily to prayer,
   meditating and other good wishes."

   Such was the old Catholic life, before we were corrupted by the society
   of Protestants. The moral of the book is that a supernatural life is
   common to all Christians, and that there is no such infinite
   distinction between Christians in the world and religious. Both, in
   different degrees and modes, are not safe unless they aim at "profiting
   in grace." Of course, much in Walter Hilton's book is inapplicable to
   us, yet all who are not repelled by the unusual English will find it a
   very beautiful spiritual treatise. It is not a regimental book, and
   contains few rules. No one will find in it "a rule of life." It is
   simply occupied in laying down principles. A book written in the
   fourteenth century cannot be expected to establish minute practical
   rules for the nineteenth. It will, however, be very valuable as a
   specimen of the old traditional Catholic spiritual life in England. The
   basis of all spiritual life in all ages must after all be the same; and
   this book, written so long ago in the forgotten house of Canons at
   Thurgarton, may help us now in fighting our battle of life in this very
   different time. In this respect it will be a lesson to us. Rather
   mystical than ascetical, it contains an antidote to the prevailing
   tendency to restless activity, even in devotion. Above all, it is
   remarkable for containing the old English tradition of a most tender,
   personal love for our blessed Lord.

   Now that we are threatened by a great influx of Protestant morals,
   through the increasing intercourse of Catholics with the world, it will
   be well if this book reminds us of our past history. The great apostasy
   of the Reformation could never have been successful if a terrible
   outbreak of worldliness had not sapped the first principles of
   Christian life among the nobility and gentry of England. Nothing will
   save us now in dangerous times but the supernatural principles of our
   Faith carried out in our lives.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] It should be remembered that the book was written in the fourteenth
   century, and the reader must expect inaccuracies which would not be
   tolerated now. For instance, I would mention the author's views about
   the sins of heathens, and inadequate notions of the Sacrament of
   Penance.

   [2] This treatise exists in manuscript in the library of Merton
   College. Mr Bliss, one of the librarians of the Bodleian, has kindly
   examined it, and assures me that it nowhere implies that Hilton himself
   belonged to the Order.

   [3] Many of these particulars are taken from the very interesting
   account of the Anchorets in Dr Rock's "Church of our Fathers."

   [4] Compare "Ancren Riwle," p. 24, with Brockie, tom. IV, 121. It is
   also plain, from p. 38 of the Riwle, that the author did not believe
   the Immaculate Conception.

   [5] Chaire Franaise au Moyen Age, 414.

   [6] Ancren Riwle, p. 13.

   [7] P. 291.

   [8] P. 241.

   [9] This interpretation is rather different from that of the learned
   translator of the "Riwle."

   [10] P. 417.

   [11] Blomfield, in his History of Norfolk, p. 546, mentions a MS.,
   apparently existing in his day, and belonging to a clergyman of the
   name of Peck, author of "The Antiquities of Stamford." The book was
   first published by Cressy in 1670, and reprinted in 1843.

   [12] Sir Thomas Erpingham has the credit of having been a partisan of
   Wycliffe. That for twenty-eight years before his death he was a good
   Catholic is certain. From the year 1400 he was an intimate friend of
   the Bishop of Norwich, the great enemy of the Lollards. He is said to
   have built a gate at the west end of the Cathedral as an atonement for
   his errors. In the same will there is a legacy for Masses for his soul,
   and special bequests to each Monk.--Blomfield, 372, 526.

   [13] It is true that Juliana Lampit is there said to be the recluse of
   Carrow (v. Blomfield, p 515). The church of St Julian, however,
   belonged to the nunnery of Carrow, and therefore the recluse might very
   well have been called by that name.--Pp. 545, 546, 862, where 1528 is
   evidently a misprint for l428.

   [14] P. 157.

   [15] Pfeiffer, p. 386.

   [16] P. 110.

   [17] P. 62.

   [18] P. 71.

   [19] P. 111.

   [20] P. 9.

   [21] P. 63.

   [22] Purg. vii.

   [23] Quoted in Longman's Edward, i, 295.

   [24] Compare Purg. 23 and Par. 15, 16.

   [25] Cant, Histoire des Italiens, tom. 7, c. 123.

   [26] Chaire Franaise au Moyen Age. P. 409.

   [27] Cant, Ibid.

   [28] Schwab, Johannes Gerson, p. 38.

   [29] Chaire Franaise, 357.

   [30] Longman's Life of Edward III, ii, 24.

   [31] Ibid., 259.

   [32] It is true that Malespina mentions Epicureans (Muratori, 8, 933),
   even in the Countess Matilda's time, but there seem to have been
   heretics of an older type to whom Malespina gives a name more familiar
   to himself.

   [33] Neander, vol. ix, p. 241, Bohn's edition. He appends the following
   note, "Among the forty-five articles attributed to Wycliffe, the
   proposition, Omnia de necessitate absolute eveniunt,' might justly be
   condemned as one actually belonging to him." Neander is my authority
   throughout, for I am not acquainted with Wycliffe's writings.

   [34] For instance, p. 131.

   [35] "We premise this, that when we attribute Personality to God, we
   intend to asseverate of Him nothing else than that He is a Being
   (Wesen) separated from all other existence (Sein), self-subsisting,
   self-conscious, and free."--Kleutgen, Theologie, i, 229. In other
   words, though freedom does not constitute Personality, yet every free
   intellectual being must be personal. Thus, because the Sacred Humanity
   was free, it must ipso facto have possessed a personality, i.e., since
   it had none of its own, that of the Divine Word.

   [36] P. 149.

   [37] P. 67.

   [38] How accessible were anchoresses to the influence of the outer
   world is proved by the curious fact that the last anchoress of Carrow
   was actually perverted by Bilney, and turned Protestant in
   1530.--Blomfield, p. 145.

   [39] Blomfield, 546. All that is known is that she was alive in 1443,
   but was a hundred years old. She had two servants to wait upon her.

   [40] V. Mone, i, 286, 293, 254, and Ancren Riwle.

   [41] P. 151.
     __________________________________________________________________

                       THE SCALE OR LADDER OF PERFECTION
     __________________________________________________________________

BOOK I
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART I
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER I: That the inward State of the Soul should be like the outward

   GHOSTLY Sister in Christ Jesus, I pray thee that in the calling to
   which our Lord hath called thee for His service, thou rest contented,
   and abide constantly therein, travailing busily with all the powers of
   thy soul to fulfil in truth of good life (by the grace of Jesus Christ)
   the state which thou hast taken in exterior likeness and seeming; and
   as thou hast forsaken the world, as it were a dead man, and turned to
   our Lord bodily in sight of men, so thou be in thy heart as it were
   dead to all earthly loves and fears, and turned wholly to our Lord
   Jesus Christ; for be thou well assured that a bodily turning to God
   without the heart following is but a figure and likeness of virtues,
   and not the truth in itself. Wherefore wretched men and women are they
   who, neglecting the care of their interior, show only exteriorly a form
   and likeness of holiness, in habit or clothing, in speech and outward
   carriage and works, casting their eyes upon other men's deeds, and
   judging their defects, esteeming themselves to be something, when
   indeed they are just nothing, and so deceive themselves. Do not thou
   so; but together with thy body turn principally thy heart to God, and
   frame thy interior to His likeness, by humility and charity and other
   spiritual virtues, and then art thou truly turned to Him. I say not
   that thou mayest early on the first day be turned to Him in thy soul in
   perfection of virtues as thou mayest with thy body be enclosed in a
   house; but my meaning is, that thou shouldst know that the end of thy
   bodily enclosure is that thou mightest thereby the better come to a
   spiritual enclosure; and even as thy body is enclosed from bodily
   converse with men, even so thine heart might be enclosed from the
   inordinate loves and fears of all earthly things. And that thou mayest
   the better come thereto, I shall in this little treatise yield thee the
   best instructions and helps that I know or can.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER II: Of the Active Life, and the Exercises and the Works thereof

   THOU must understand that there are in the holy Church two manner of
   lives (as saith St Gregory) in which a Christian is to be saved. The
   one is called Active, the other Contemplative; without living one of
   these two lives no man may be saved. The Active consisteth in love and
   charity exercised exteriorly by good corporal works, in fulfilling of
   God's commandments and of the seven works of mercy, corporal and
   spiritual, towards our Christian brethren. This life pertains to all
   worldly men that have riches and plenty of worldly goods to dispose of,
   and to all those (be they learned or unlearned, lay men or spiritual
   persons) that are in office or state to govern, or have care of others;
   and generally all worldly men are bound to the practice of this kind of
   life according to their best knowledge and ability, and as reason and
   discretion shall require. If he much good have, then much good for to
   do; if he little have, less may he do; and if he naught have, then must
   he have a good will. Such works as these (be they corporal or
   spiritual) are works of the Active life. Also a great part of it
   consists in great bodily deeds which a man exerciseth upon himself, as
   great fasting, much watching, and other sharp penance, to chastise the
   flesh with discretion for sins formerly committed. As also to mortify
   thereby the lusts and likings of the flesh, and to make it pliable and
   obedient to the will of the spirit. These works though they be but
   Active, yet they help very much, and dispose a man in the beginning to
   attain afterwards to contemplation, if they be used with discretion.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER III: Of the Contemplative Life, and the Exercises and Works thereof

   CONTEMPLATIVE life consisteth in perfect love and charity, felt
   inwardly by spiritual virtues; and in a true and certain sight and
   knowledge of God and spiritual matters. This life belongs to them
   especially who for the love of God forsake all worldly riches, honours,
   worships and outward businesses, and wholly give themselves soul and
   body (according to all the knowledge and ability that is in them) to
   the service of God, by exercises of the soul.

   Now then, since it is so (dear sister) that the quality of thy state
   requireth of thee to be contemplative (for that is the intent of thy
   enclosing, that thou mightest more freely and entirely apply thyself to
   spiritual exercises), it behoveth thee to be right busy both night and
   day in labour of body and spirit, to attain as nigh as thou canst to
   that life by such means as thou mayest find to be best for the said
   end. But before I tell thee of the means, I shall tell thee a little
   more of this contemplative life, that thou mayest somewhat see what it
   is, and so set it as a mark in the sight of thy soul, whereto thou
   shalt tend, and direct all thy exercises and doings.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IV: Of three Sorts that be of Contemplation and of the First of them

   CONTEMPLATIVE life hath three parts. The first consisteth in knowing
   God, and of spiritual things gotten by reason and discourse, by
   teaching of men, and by study in holy Scripture, without spiritual
   gust, or affection, or inward relish felt by them; for they have it not
   by the special gift of the Holy Ghost, as persons truly spiritual have
   their knowledge, which, therefore, is very tasteful to them in their
   interior.

   This part have especially in them learned men and great scholars, who,
   through long study and travail in holy Writ, attain to this knowledge
   more or less by the abilities of their natural wit, which God giveth to
   every one, more or less, that hath use of reason.

   This knowledge is good, and may be called a kind or part of
   Contemplation, inasmuch as it is a sight of verity and a knowledge of
   spiritual things. Nevertheless it is but a figure and shadow of true
   Contemplation, since it hath no spiritual gust or taste in God, nor
   inward sweetness, which none feels but he that is in great love of
   charity; for it is the proper Well or Spring of our Lord, to which no
   alien is admitted. But the aforesaid manner of knowing is common both
   to good and bad, seeing it may be had without charity, and therefore it
   is not very contemplation. Of this kind of knowledge St Paul speaketh
   thus: If I knew all mysteries and all knowledge, and have not charity,
   I am nothing. [42]

   Nevertheless, if they that have it keep themselves in humility and
   charity, and according to their might fly worldly and fleshly sins, it
   is to them a good way, and a great disposing to true Contemplation if
   they desire and pray devoutly after the grace of the Holy Ghost. Other
   men have this knowledge, and turn it to pride and vain-glory, or unto
   covetousness and desire of worldly dignities, worships and riches, not
   humbly using it to the glory of God, nor charitably to the soul's good
   of their brethren. Some of them fall either into heresies and errors,
   or into other open sins, by which they discredit themselves and the
   holy Church. Of this knowledge St Paul speaks in these words: knowledge
   puffeth up, but charity edifies. [43] This I knowledge alone lifteth up
   the heart to pride; but mix it with charity, and then it turns to
   edification.

   This knowledge alone is but water, unsavoury and cold. And, therefore,
   if they that have it would humbly offer it up to our Lord, and pray for
   His grace, He would by His blessing turn their water into wine, as He
   did at the prayer of His Mother at the marriage feast; that is to say,
   He would turn their unsavoury knowledge into true wisdom, and their
   cold naked reason into spiritual light and burning love, by the gift of
   the Holy Ghost.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [42] 1 Cor. 13.

   [43] 1 Cor. 8.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER V: Of the Second Sort of Contemplation

   THE second part of Contemplation lieth principally in affection,
   without spiritual light in the understanding or sight of spiritual
   things; and this is commonly of simple and unlearned men who give
   themselves wholly to devotion, and is had and felt in this manner: When
   man or woman being in meditation of God, through the grace of the Holy
   Ghost, feeleth fervour of love and spiritual sweetness, by occasion of
   thinking of Christ's passion, or of some of the works done by Him in
   His humanity; or he feeleth cause of great trust in the goodness and
   mercy of God for the forgiveness of his sins, or admires the liberality
   of His gifts of grace, or else feeleth in his affection a certain
   reverential fear towards God, and His secret judgements and justice,
   which yet he seeth not; or being in prayer, he findeth all the powers
   of his soul to be gathered together, and the thought and love of his
   heart to be drawn up from all transitory things, aspiring and tending
   upwards towards God by a fervent desire, and spiritual delight, and
   yet, nevertheless, during that time he hath no plain sight in the
   understanding of spiritual things, nor in particular of any of the
   mysteries or senses of the holy Scriptures; but only that for that time
   nothing seemeth so pleasing and delightful to him as to pray, or think
   as he then doth for the savoury delight and comfort that he findeth
   therein, and yet cannot he tell what it is, but he feeleth it well, for
   it is a gift of God, for out of it spring many sweet tears, burning
   desires, and still mournings, or contrition for sin, which scour and
   cleanse the heart from all filth of sin, and causeth it to melt into a
   wonderful sweetness in Jesus Christ, and to become obedient and ready
   to fulfil all God's will, insomuch that it seems to him he makes no
   reckoning what becomes of himself, so that God's will were fulfilled in
   him, and by him, with many other such good inspirations and desires
   which cannot be reckoned. Such feelings as these cannot be had without
   great grace, and whoso hath any of them or other such like, he is at
   that time in charity and the grace of God; which charity let him know
   to his comfort, will not be lost or lessened in him (though the fervour
   thereof may abate) but by a deadly sin. And this may be called the
   second part of Contemplation, nevertheless, this part hath two degrees.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VI: Of the Lower Degree of the Second Sort of Contemplation

   THE lower degree of this feeling, men which are active may have by
   grace, when they are visited by our Lord, as mightily and as fervently
   as they that give themselves wholly to Contemplation and have this
   gift. But this feeling in his fervour cometh not alway when a man
   would, nor lasteth it full long. It cometh and goeth as He will that
   giveth it; and therefore whoso hath it, let him be humble, and thank
   God and keep it secret, unless it be to his confessor, and let him hold
   it as long as he may with discretion; and when it is withdrawn, let him
   not be daunted or troubled, but abide constant in the light of faith,
   an humble hope, with patient expecting till it come again. This is a
   little tasting of the sweetness of the love of God, whereof David saith
   thus in the Psalms: Gustate et videte quoniam suavis est Dominus--Taste
   and see how sweet our Lord is. [44]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [44] Ps. 33.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VII: Of the Higher Degree of the Second Sort of Contemplation

   THE higher degree of this part may not be had nor held but of them
   which be in great rest and quiet both of body and mind, who by the
   grace of Jesus, and long travail corporal and spiritual, are arrived to
   a rest and quietness of heart and clearness of conscience. So that
   nothing is so pleasing to them as to sit still in quiet of body and to
   pray always to God, and to think on our Lord, and sometimes on the
   blessed name of Jesus, which is comfortable and delightful to them, by
   the remembering whereof they feel themselves moved and fed in their
   affection towards God. And not only the said name, but also all other
   kind of prayers (as the Pater Noster, the Ave, the Hymns and Psalms,
   and other devout prayers and sayings of holy Church) are turned, as it
   were, into a spiritual mirth and sweet songs, by which they are
   comforted and strengthened against all sins, and much relieved in their
   bodily pains or diseases. Of this degree speaketh St Paul thus: Be not
   drunk with wine, but be filled with the Holy Ghost, speaking to
   yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, making melody an
   your hearts to our Lord. [45] Whoso hath this grace, let him keep
   himself in humility and be ever desiring to come to more knowledge and
   feeling of God, which is to be had in the third sort of Contemplation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [45] Ephes. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VIII: Of the Third Sort of Contemplation

   THE third sort, which is as perfect Contemplation as can be had in this
   life, consisteth both in knowing and affecting; that is, in knowing and
   perfect loving of God, which is when a man's soul is first reformed by
   perfection of virtues to the image of Jesus, and afterwards, when it
   pleaseth God to visit him, he is taken in from all earthly and fleshly
   affections, from vain thoughts and imaginings of all bodily creatures,
   and, as it were, much ravished and taken up from his bodily senses, and
   then by the grace of the Holy Ghost is enlightened, to see by his
   understanding Truth itself (which is God) and spiritual things, with a
   soft, sweet, burning love in God, so perfectly that he becometh
   ravished with His love, and so the soul for the time is become one with
   God, and conformed to the image of the Trinity.

   The beginning of this Contemplation may be felt in this life, but the
   full perfection of it is reserved unto the bliss in heaven. Of this
   union and conforming to our Lord speaks St Paul thus: Qui adhaeret Deo
   unus spiritus est cum eo; [46] that is to say, he who by ravishing of
   love is become united to God, God and that soul are not now two, but
   both one. And surely in this oneing consisteth the marriage which
   passeth betwixt God and the soul, that shall never be dissolved or
   broken.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [46] 1 Cor. 6:17.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IX: Of the Difference that is betwixt the Second and Third Sort of
    Contemplation

   THE foresaid second sort of Contemplation may be termed a burning love
   in Devotion, and is the lower; this third a burning love in
   Contemplation, and is the higher. That is sweeter to the bodily
   feeling, this to the spiritual feeling inwardly, and is more worthy,
   more spiritual, more wonderful. For, indeed, it is a foretaste (so
   little as it is) and an earnest or handsell [47] of the sight or
   Contemplation of heavenly joy, not clearly, but half in darkness, which
   shall be perfected and made a clear light and sight in the bliss of
   heaven; as St Paul saith: Now we see as through a glass darkly, but
   then we shall see face to face. [48] This is the enlightening of the
   understanding in delights of loving, whereof David saith in the
   Psalter: Et nox illuminatio mea in deliciis meis--My night is my light
   in my delight. [49] The other is milk for children, but this solid meat
   for perfect men, that have their senses exercised (as St Paul saith)
   for the discerning of good from evil.

   To the perfection of this high Contemplation may no man come till he be
   first reformed in soul to the likeness of Jesus in the perfection of
   virtues: nor can any man living in mortal body have it continually and
   habitually in the height of it, but by times when he is visited. And as
   I conceive by the writing of holy men, it is a full short time, for
   soon after he returneth to a sobriety of bodily feeling; and of all
   this work charity is the cause. Thus, as I understand St Paul speaks of
   himself: For whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God, or whether
   we be sober, it is for your cause; it is the love of Christ that
   constraineth us; [50] that is, whether we overpass our bodily senses in
   Contemplation, or we are more sober to you in our bodily feeling, the
   love of Christ straineth us. Of this part of Contemplation and of
   reforming to God speaketh St Paul openly, thus: But we all with open
   face, beholding as in a glass the glory of our Lord, are changed into
   the same image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord.
   [51] Which is as much as if in the person of himself and all perfect
   men he had said thus: We, first being reformed in virtues, and having
   the face of our soul uncovered by opening of our spiritual eye, behold
   as in a mirror the heavenly joy, being withal fulshaped and oned to the
   image of our Lord, from clearness of faith into clearness of
   understanding, or else from clearness of desire into that of blessed
   love; and all this is wrought in a man's soul by the spirit of our
   Lord, as saith St Paul.

   This part of Contemplation God giveth where He will, to learned and
   unlearned, to men and to women, to them that are in government, and to
   solitary also. But it is special, and not common. And although a man
   who all his lifetime is active happen to have the gift of it through
   special grace or favour, yet the fulness of it may no man have, but he
   that is solitary and in life contemplative.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [47] Hansel, a first gift.

   [48] 1 Cor. 13.

   [49] Ps. 138.

   [50] 2 Cor. 5:13-14.

   [51] 2 Cor. 3:18.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER X: How that Appearings or Shewings to the Corporal Senses or
    Feelings may be both good and evil

   BY this that I have said may you somewhat understand that visions, or
   revelations, or any manner of spirit in bodily appearing, or in
   imagining, sleeping or waking, or also any other feeling in the bodily
   sense, made as it were spiritually, either by sounding in the ear, or
   savouring in the mouth, or smelling at the nose, or else any sensible
   heat, as it were fire glowing and warming the breast, or any other part
   of the body, or any other thing that may be felt by bodily sense,
   though it be never so comfortable and liking, yet be they not very
   Contemplation, but simple and secondary (though they be good) in
   respect of spiritual virtues, and of this spiritual knowing and loving
   of God accompanying true Contemplation. But all such manner of feeling
   may be good, wrought by a good angel, and they may be deceivable,
   wrought by a wicked angel, when he transfigureth himself into an angel
   of light. Wherefore sith [52] they may be both good and evil, it
   appeareth they are not the best. For, mark ye well, that the devil may,
   when he hath leave, counterfeit in bodily feeling the likeness of the
   same things the which a good angel may work; for just as a good angel
   cometh with light, so can the devil. And as he can do this in matters
   of seeing, so can he do it in matters of the other senses. Whoso hath
   felt both, he can well tell which were good and which were evil. But he
   that never felt either, or else but one of them, may easily be
   deceived.

   These two be alike in the manner of feeling outwardly, but they are
   full different within, and therefore they are not to be desired
   greatly, nor to be entertained lightly, unless a soul can by the spirit
   of discretion know the good from the evil, that he be not beguiled, as
   St John saith: Trust not every spirit, but essay first whether it be of
   God or no. [53] Wherefore by one trial that I shall tell thee,
   methinketh thou shalt know the good from the evil.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [52] Since.

   [53] 1 St John 4:1.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XI: How thou shalt know whether the Showing or Apparition to the
    bodily Senses and Feelings be good or evil

   IF it be so that thou see any manner of light or brightness with thy
   bodily eye or in imagination, other than every man seeth; or if thou
   hear any pleasant, wonderful sounding with thy ear, or in thy mouth any
   sweet sudden savour, other than what thou knowest to be natural, or any
   heat in thy breast like fire, or any manner of delight in any part of
   thy body, or if a spirit appear bodily to thee, as it were an angel to
   comfort thee or teach thee; or if any such feeling, which thou knowest
   well that it cometh not of thyself, nor from any bodily creature,
   beware in that time, or soon after, and wisely consider the stirrings
   of thy heart; for if by occasion of the pleasure and liking thou takest
   in the said feeling or vision, thou feelest thy heart drawn from the
   minding and beholding of Jesus Christ, and from spiritual exercises, as
   from prayer, and thinking of thyself and thy defects, or from the
   inward desire of virtues, and of spiritual knowing and feeling of God,
   for to set the sight of thy heart and thy affection, thy delight and
   thy rest, principally on the said feelings or visions, supposing that
   to be a part of heavenly joy or angels' bliss, and thereupon comest to
   think that thou shouldst neither pray nor think of anything else, but
   wholly attend thereto, for to keep it and delight thyself therein: then
   is this feeling very suspicious to come from the enemy; and therefore,
   though it be never so liking and wonderful, refuse it and assent not
   thereto, for this is a sleight of the enemy. When he seeth a soul that
   would entirely give itself to spiritual exercises, he is wonderfully
   wroth; for he hateth nothing more than to see a soul in this body of
   sin to feel verily the savour of spiritual knowledge and the love of
   God, which he himself, without the body of sin, lost wilfully. And
   therefore, if he cannot hinder him by open sinning, he will let and
   beguile him by such vanity of bodily savours or sweetness in the
   senses, to bring a soul into spiritual pride and into a false security
   of himself, weening that he had thereby a feeling of heavenly joy, and
   that he is half in paradise, by reason of the delight he feeleth about
   him, when indeed he is near to hell gates; and so by pride and
   presumption he might fall into errors or heresies, or phantasies, or
   other bodily or spiritual mischiefs.

   But if it be so that this manner of feeling let not thy heart from
   spiritual exercises, but maketh thee more devout, and more fervent to
   pray, more wise to think ghostly thoughts, and though it be so that it
   astonish thee in the beginning, nevertheless afterward it turneth and
   quickeneth thy heart to more desire of virtues, and increaseth thy love
   more to God and to thy neighbour, also it maketh thee more humble in
   thy own eyes--by these tokens mayest thou know that it is of God,
   wrought by the presence and working of a good angel, and cometh from
   the goodness of God, either for the comfort of simple devout souls, for
   to increase their trust and desire towards God, to seek thereby the
   knowing and loving of God more perfectly by means of such comforts. Or
   else if they be perfect that feel such delight, it seemeth to them to
   be an earnest and as it were a shadow of the glorifying of the body,
   which it shall have in the bliss of heaven; but I wot [54] not whether
   there be any such man living on earth. This privilege had Mary Magdalen
   (as it seemeth to me) in the time when she was alone in the cave thirty
   years, and every day was borne up with angels, and was fed both body
   and soul by their presence, as we read in her story.

   Of this way of discerning the working of spirits speaketh St John in
   his Epistle, thus: Omnis spiritus qui solvit Jesum, hic non est ex
   Deo--Every spirit that loosed or unknitteth Jesus, he is not of God.
   [55] These words, I confess, may be understood in many manners,
   nevertheless, one way I may understand them to this purpose, as I have
   said. This knitting and fastening of Jesus to a man's soul is wrought
   by a good will and a great desire to Him, only to have Him and see Him
   in His bliss spiritually. The greater this desire is, the faster is
   Jesus knit to the soul; and the less this desire is, the looser is He
   knit; whatsoever spirit, therefore, or feeling it is which lesseneth
   this desire and would draw it down from the stedfast minding of Jesus
   Christ and from the kindly breathing or aspiring up to Him, this spirit
   will unknit Jesus from the soul, and therefore is not of God, but is
   the working of the enemy. But if a spirit, or a feeling, or a
   revelation make this desire more, knitting the knots of love and
   devotion faster to Jesus, opening the eye of the soul into spiritual
   knowing more clearly, and maketh it more humble in itself, this spirit
   is of God.

   And hereby you may learn that you are not to suffer your heart
   willingly to rest nor to delight wholly in any such bodily feelings of
   such manner of comforts or sweetness, though they were good; but rather
   hold them in your sight naught, or little in comparison of spiritual
   desire and stedfast thinking on Jesus; nor shall you fasten the thought
   of your heart over much on them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [54] Know.

   [55] 1 St John 4:3.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XII: How and in what things a Contemplative Man should be busied

   BUT thou shalt ever seek with great diligence in prayer that thou
   mayest come to a spiritual feeling or sight of God. And that is, that
   thou mayest know the wisdom of God, the endless might of Him, His great
   goodness in Himself and in His creatures; for this is Contemplation,
   and that other mentioned is none, thus saith St Paul: Being rooted and
   grounded in charity, we may be able to comprehend with all the saints
   what is the breadth and length and height and depth. [56] That ye may
   know, he saith not, by sound of the ear nor sweet savour in the mouth,
   nor by any such bodily thing, but that ye may know and feel with all
   saints what is the length of the endless being of God, the breadth of
   the wonderful charity and the goodness of God, the height of His
   almighty Majesty and the bottomless depths of His wisdom. In knowing
   and spiritual feeling of these should be the exercise of a
   Contemplative man. For in these may be understood the full knowing of
   all ghostly things. This exercise is that one thing which St Paul
   coveted after, saying thus: This one thing I covet, which is that,
   forgetting those that are behind, and reaching forth to those things
   that are before, I press to the mark of the supernal vocation. [57]
   Which is as much as if he had said, One thing is best for me to covet,
   and that is, that I might forget all things that be behind or backward,
   and I shall stretch out my heart ever forward for to feel and to grip
   the sovereign reward of endless bliss. Behind are all bodily things,
   forward or before are all spiritual things. And so St Paul would forget
   all bodily things, and even his own body also, that so he might see
   spiritual things.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [56] Ephes. 3:18.

   [57] Phil. 3:13.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XIII: How Virtue beginneth in Reason and Will and is perfected in
    Love and Liking, or Affection

   THUS have I told thee a little of Contemplation what it is, to the
   intent that thou mightest know it and set it as a mark before the sight
   of thy soul, and to desire all thy lifetime to come to any part of it
   by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is the conforming of a soul
   to God, which cannot be had unless it first be reformed by some
   perfection of virtues turned into affection; which is when a man loveth
   virtues because they be good in themselves. Many a man hath the virtues
   of humility, patience and charity to his neighbour, and such other only
   in his reason and will, and hath no spiritual delight nor love in them,
   for ofttimes he feeleth grudging heaviness and bitterness for to do
   them, and yet nevertheless he doth them, but tis only by stirring of
   reason for dread of God. This man hath these virtues in reason and
   will, but not the love of them in affection. But when by the grace of
   Jesus and by ghostly and bodily exercise reason is turned into light
   and will into love, then hath he virtues in affection; for he hath so
   well gnawn on the bitter bark or shell of the nut that at length he
   hath broken it and now feeds on the kernel; that is to say, the virtues
   which were first heavy for to practise are now turned into a very
   delight and savour, so that he takes as much pleasure in humility,
   patience, cleanness, sobriety and charity as in any other delights.
   Verily till these virtues be turned thus into affection he may well
   have the second part of Contemplation, but the third, in sooth, shall
   he not have.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XIV: Of the Means that bring a Soul to Contemplation

   Now seeing virtues dispose us to Contemplation, it behoveth us to use
   the means that may bring us to virtues. And they be three means which
   men most commonly use that give themselves to Contemplation: As reading
   of holy Scripture and good books, secondly, spiritual meditation;
   thirdly, diligent prayer with devotion. By meditation shalt thou come
   to see thy wretchedness, thy sins and thy wickedness; as pride,
   covetousness, gluttony, sloth and lechery, wicked stirrings of envy,
   anger, hatred, melancholy, wrath, bitterness and imprudent heaviness.
   Thou shalt also see thy heart to be full of vain flames and fears of
   the flesh and of the world. All these stirrings will always boil out of
   thy heart, as water runneth out of the spring of a stinking well, and
   do hinder the sight of thy soul, that thou mayest never see nor feel
   clearly the love of Jesus Christ, for know thou well that until the
   heart be much cleansed from such sins, through firm verity [58] and
   diligent meditating on Christ's humanity, thou canst not have any
   perfect knowledge of God, Himself witnessing the same in His Gospel
   thus: Blessed are the clean in heart, for they shall see God. [59] In
   meditation, likewise, shalt thou see those virtues which be needful for
   thee to have, as humility, mildness, patience, righteousness, spiritual
   strength, temperance, cleanness, peace and soberness, faith, hope and
   charity. These virtues thou shalt see in meditation, how good, how
   fair, how profitable they be; and by prayer thou shalt thereupon desire
   and get them. Without which third means of prayer thou canst not be
   contemplative, for Job saith thus: In abundantia ingredieris
   sepulchrum--In plenty shalt thou enter thy grave; that is in plenty of
   bodily works and spiritual virtues shalt thou enter thy grave, that is
   thy rect [60] in Contemplation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [58] Stable truth.

   [59] St Matt. 5.

   [60] Right rule.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XV

      SECTION I: What a Man should use and refuse by the Virtue of Humility

   Now if thou desirest to prosecute spiritual works and exercises wisely,
   and to labour seriously in them, it behoveth thee to begin right low;
   three things needest thou first to have, upon which as on a firm ground
   thou shalt set all thy work, namely, humility, a firm faith, and
   resolute will and purpose to seek after God.

   First, it behoveth thee to have humility on this manner: thou shalt in
   thy will and in thy feeling judge thyself unfitting to dwell among men
   and unworthy to serve God in conversation with His servants and as
   unprofitable to thy Christian brethren, wanting both skill and power to
   fulfil any good works of active life in help of thy neighbour, as other
   men and women do. And, therefore, as a wretch and an outcast and refuse
   of all men art shut up in a house alone, that thou shouldst not grieve
   nor offend man or woman by thy bad example, seeing thou canst not
   profit them by any well-doing. Beyond this it behoveth thee to look
   further, that since thou art so unable to serve our Lord by outward
   bodily works, how much more it behoveth thee to deem thyself unable and
   unworthy to serve him spiritually by inward exercises; for our Lord is
   a spirit, as the prophet saith: Our Lord is a Spirit before our face,
   and the most kindly service to Him is spiritual, as He saith Himself:
   True worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth. [61]
   Thou then that art so gross, so lewd, so fleshly, so blind in spiritual
   things and in the understanding of thy own soul (which it behoveth thee
   first to know before thou canst come to the knowing of God), how
   shouldst thou feel or think thyself to be able or worthy to enjoy the
   estate or likeness of a contemplative life, which consisteth
   principally, as I have said, in spiritual knowing. This I speak to
   thee, not that thou shouldst repent thee of thy clothing, enclosing and
   state of life, but that thou shouldst feel this humility really in thy
   heart (if thou canst), for this is the very truth and no lie. And,
   thereupon, thou shalt night and day desire and endeavour to come in
   truth as near as thou canst to that state which thou hast taken upon
   thee, firmly believing it to be the best kind of state for thee (by the
   mercy of God) to exercise thyself in. And though it be so that thou
   canst not in this life attain to the perfection of that state, yet, at
   least, seek to make an entry into it, and trust assuredly to have the
   perfection thereof by the mercy of God in heaven. And truly this is my
   own case, who feel myself so wretched, frail and fleshly, and so far
   from the true feeling of that which I speak of, that in a manner I do
   nothing but cry, God mercy, and desire after it (as well as I can) with
   a hope that our Lord will bring me thereto in heaven. Do thou likewise;
   and better also, if God give thee grace.

   The feeling of this lowness and humility will put out of thy heart all
   imprudent looking into other men's actions, and drive thee wholly to
   behold thyself, as if there were no other man living but God and
   thyself. And thou shalt deem and hold thyself more vile and more
   wretched than any one creature that liveth; insomuch that thou shalt
   hardly be able to brook and endure thyself, for the greatness and
   number of thy sins, and the filth which thou shalt feel in thyself.

   Thus behoveth it thee sometimes to feel and judge of thyself, if thou
   mean to become truly humble. For I tell thee truly, if thou wilt be
   very humble, thou must think a venial sin in thyself more grievous and
   painful to thee and greater in thy sight sometimes than great deadly
   sins in other men. And this is most true in thy case who aimest at
   Contemplation, seeing whatsoever hindereth and letteth thy soul most
   from the feeling and knowing of God, oughteth to be most grievous and
   painful to thee. But a venial sin of thy own letteth thee more from the
   feeling and perfect love of Jesus Christ than any other man's sins can
   do, be they never so great.

   It follows, therefore, that thou shouldst rise more in thy heart
   against thyself to hate and condemn in thyself all manner of sin which
   letteth thee from the sight of God, more than against the faults of
   other men; for if thy heart be clean from thy own sins, verily the sins
   of other men will not hurt thee. If, therefore, thou wilt find rest
   here and in heaven, do thou (according to the counsel of one of the
   holy Fathers) every day ask of thyself: What am I? and judge no man.

   But thou wilt object, how may this be, seeing it is a deed of charity
   to tell men of their faults, and a deed of mercy to admonish them that
   they may mend?

   To this I answer that in my mind, that to thee or any other that hath
   taken on them the state of a contemplative life, it belongeth not to
   leave the watching over thyself to behold and blame other men, unless
   there should be great need, so that a man were in danger to perish
   without it.

   But those men that are active and have authority and charge of others,
   are bound by their office and by way of charity to look into, inquire
   and rightly to judge and correct other men's faults; not out of a
   desire and delight to punish them, but only for need, with the fear of
   God and in His name, and for the love of the salvation of their souls.
   Other men also who are active and have no care or charge of other men
   are bound to admonish other men of their faults out of charity only,
   and that when the sin is deadly and cannot well be corrected by
   another, and there is hope of amendment by being admonished else it is
   better to let it alone.

   That this is good doctrine may be gathered by the practices of St John,
   who was a Contemplative, and St Peter, who was an Active man. For when
   our Lord at His last Supper with His disciples, at the motion of St
   Peter to St John, told St John how Judas should betray Him, St John
   told it not to St Peter, though he asked him, but turned him, and laid
   his head upon Christ's breast, and became ravished through love into
   the contemplation of the Divinity and divine secrets; and that so
   pleasingly and beneficially to himself that he forgot both Judas and St
   Peter, teaching thereby other Contemplatives how in the like occasion
   they should behave themselves.

   By this that hath been said thou mayest learn neither to judge other
   men nor conceive willingly against them any evil suspicions, but love
   them, nor see any faults in them, but worship in thy heart such as lead
   Active lives in the world, and suffer many tribulations and
   temptations; which thou sitting in thy house feelest naught of; and
   they endure very much labour and care, and take much pains for their
   own and other men's sustenance, and many of them had rather (if they
   might) serve God (as thou dost) in bodily rest and quietness.
   Nevertheless, they in the midst of their worldly business, avoid many
   sins, which thou, if thou wert in their state, shouldst fall into, and
   they do many good deeds, which thou canst not do. There is no doubt but
   many do thus, but which they be, thou knowest not; and therefore it's
   good for thee to worship [62] them all, and set them all in thy heart
   above thyself as thy betters, and cast thyself down at their feet, as
   being the vilest and lowest in thy own sight. For there is neither
   dread nor danger in making thyself never so low beneath others, though
   in the sight of God, at the same time, thou hast more grace than
   others; but danger there is in being too high, and lifting up thyself
   in thy thoughts willingly above any other man, though he were the most
   wretched and the most sinful caitiff that is in the earth; for our Lord
   saith: He that humbleth himself shall be exalted, and he that exalteth
   himself shall be brought low. [63]

   This part of humility doth it behove thee to have in thy beginning; and
   by it, and for the grace, shalt thou come to the perfection of it, and
   so of all other virtues. For whoso hath one virtue, hath all other
   virtues; as much as thou hast of humility, so much hast thou of
   charity, of patience, and of other virtues; though they be not shown or
   appear outwardly. Be, therefore, busy to get humility, and hold it
   fast, for it is the first and the last of all other virtues.

   The first, as being the foundation, as saith St Augustine: If thou
   think to build a high house of virtues, lay first a deep foundation of
   humility. Also, it is the last; for it is the maintainer and conserver
   of all other virtues. St Gregory saith: He that gathereth (or striveth
   to keep) virtues without humility, is like him that maketh or carrieth
   the powder of spices in the wind. Do thou never so good deeds, fast,
   watch, or anything else, if thou hast not humility, it is naught which
   thou dost.

   Nevertheless, if thou feelest not this humility in thy heart with
   affection, as thou wishest, do as thou mayest, humble thyself in will,
   by reasoning and arguing with thyself, judging that by right thou
   shouldst be so humble, and think of thyself as I have said, albeit thou
   do not so feel it within thee, and in that respect hold and esteem
   thyself the verier wretch, that thou canst not feel thyself to be that
   which in truth thou art. And if thou do so, though thy flesh rise
   against it, and will not assent to thy will, be not too much daunted,
   nor troubled, but bear with and suffer such false feelings of thy
   flesh, as a pain, and then despise and reprove that feeling, and break
   down that rising of thy heart, as if thou wouldst be well contented to
   be spurned and trodden under other men's feet. So by the grace of Jesus
   Christ, through stedfast thinking on the humility of His precious
   Manhood, shalt thou much abate the stirrings of pride; and the virtue
   of humility, that was first only in thy naked will, shall be turned
   into feeling of affection. Without which virtue, either in true will,
   or in feeling of affection, whoso disposeth himself to serve God in a
   contemplative life, like to a blind man, he will stumble, and never
   attain thereto. The higher he climbeth by bodily penance, and other
   virtues, and hath not this humility, the lower he falleth. For as St
   Gregory saith: He that cannot perfectly despise himself, he hath never
   yet found the humble wisdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

      SECTION II: How Hypocrites and Heretics, for want of Humility, exalt
      themselves in their Hearts above others

   HYPOCRITES and heretics feel not this humility neither in good-will nor
   in affection, but full cold and dry are their hearts and reins from the
   soft feeling of this virtue, and by so much the further are they from
   it, as they esteem they have it. They gnaw on the dry bark without, but
   the sweet kernel and the inward taste of it they never come to. They
   make a show of outward humility in habit and holy speech, in a low
   carriages and (as they would make show) in many corporal and spiritual
   virtues. But in the will and affection of their heart, where humility
   should be, it is but feigned. For they judge, and despise, and set at
   naught other men that will not do as they do and teach; they esteem
   them either fools for want of knowledge, or to be blinded by fleshly
   living. And, therefore, lift they themselves up on high in their own
   sight above all others, weening that they live better than others, and
   that they only have the truth and verity of right living and of
   spiritual feeling, and of the singular grace of God both in knowledge
   and affection above all others. And out of this sight of themselves
   riseth a delight in their hearts, in which they worship and praise
   themselves, as if there were none but they. They praise and thank God
   with their lips, but in their hearts, like thieves, they steal His
   worship and praise, and place it in themselves, and so have neither
   humility in will nor affection.

   A wretched caitiff or sinner which falleth all day, and is sorry that
   he doth so, though he hath not humility in affection, yet hath he it in
   good will; but an Heretic or an Hypocrite hath neither; for they have
   the condition of the Pharisee, who came, as our Lord saith in the
   Gospel, with the Publican into the Temple to pray. And when he came, he
   prayed not, nor asked aught of God, for he thought he had no need; but
   he began to thank God, and said thus: Lord, I thank Thee that Thou
   givest me more grace than others, that I am not like other men,
   robbers, luxurious, or other such sinners. He looked beside him, and
   saw the Publican, whom he knew for a wretch, knocking on his breast,
   only crying for mercy; then he thanked God he was not such a one as he,
   for Lord, said he, I fast twice a week, and I pay my tithes duly. When
   he had done, our Lord said: He went home without grace as he came, and
   got just nought.

   But thou wilt say, wherein did this Pharisee amiss, since he thanked
   God and spoke the truth? I answer he did amiss, inasmuch as he judged
   and reproved the Publican in his heart, who was justified of God. And
   he also did amiss, for he thanked God only with his mouth, but secretly
   in his heart he willingly delighted in himself through pride and
   glorying in the gifts of God, stealing to himself the honour of them,
   and the praise and love due to God. This is the condition verily of
   Heretics and Hypocrites, they will not willingly pray, and if they
   pray, do not humble themselves, acknowledging their wretchedness, but
   feigningly thank and love God, and speak of Him with their mouth, but
   their delight is vain and false, and not in God, and yet they do not
   think so, for they cannot love God. And as the wise man saith: Praise
   is not comely in the mouth of a sinner. [64] Wherefore it is profitable
   for me, and for thee, and for such other wretches, to leave the
   condition of this Pharisee, and feigned loving of God, and follow the
   Publican in lowliness, asking of mercy and forgiveness of sins, and
   grace of spiritual virtues, that we may afterward, with a clean heart,
   truly thank Him and love Him, and yield wholly all honour without
   feigning; for our Lord asketh thus by His Prophet: [65] Upon whom shall
   My Spirit rest? He answereth Himself, and saith: Upon none but upon the
   humble, poor and contrite in heart, and him that trembleth at My words.
   If, therefore, thou wilt have the Spirit of God ruling in thy heart,
   have humility and dread Him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [61] St John 4.

   [62] Respect.

   [63] St Luke 14.

   [64] Ecclus. xv.

   [65] Is. 66.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XVI: Of a firm Faith necessary thereto, and what things we ought to
    believe thereby

   THE second thing which it behoveth thee to have is a firm faith in all
   the articles of thy belief, and in the Sacraments of the holy Church,
   believing them stedfastly with all thy will in thy heart. If thou feel
   any stirring in thy heart against any of them, by suggestion of the
   enemy to put thee in doubt of them, be thou stedfast, and dread not
   therefore, but forsake thine own wit, without disputing or ransacking
   of them, and set thy faith in general on the faith of the holy Church,
   and make no reckoning of the stirrings of thy heart which seem to be
   contrary thereto; for those stirrings are not thy faith, but the faith
   of the holy Church is thy faith, though thou never see it nor feel it.
   And bear those suggestions patiently as a scourge of our Lord, by which
   He will cleanse thy heart and make thy faith stedfast. Also it behoveth
   thee to embrace and honour in thy heart all the laws and ordinances
   made by the prelates and rulers of the Church, either in declaring of
   the Faith, or concerning the Sacraments, or in general concerning all
   Christian men, meekly and truly assenting to them though thou
   understandest not the cause of making such ordinances; and though thou
   shouldst think that some of them were unreasonable, [66] yet shalt not
   thou judge them or find fault with them, but reverence and honour them
   although they little concern thy particular. Neither entertain thou any
   opinion or fancy or singular conceit under colour of more holiness (as
   some unwise people do) either out of thy own imagination, or by the
   teaching of any other man, which thwarteth the least ordinance or
   general teaching of the Church.

   Moreover, together with such faith, thou shalt firmly hope that thou
   art ordained by our Lord to be saved as one of His chosen by His mercy,
   and stir not from this hope whatsoever thou hearest or seest, or what
   temptation befalls thee. Though thou think thyself so great a wretch
   that thou art worthy to sink into hell, for that thou doest no good nor
   servest God as thou shouldst, yet hold thee in this truth and in this
   hope, and ask mercy, and all shall be well with thee. And though all
   the devils in hell appeared in bodily shapes, saying to thee, sleeping
   or waking, that thou shouldst not be saved; or all men living on earth
   or all the angels in heaven (if possible) should say the same, yet
   believe them not, nor be stirred much from thy hope of salvation. This
   I speak to thee, because some are so weak and simple that when they
   have given up themselves wholly to serve God to their power, and feel
   any stirrings of this kind within them by the suggestion of the enemy,
   or any of his false prophets (which men call soothsayers) that they
   shall not be saved, or that their state or manner of living is not
   pleasing to God, they be astonished and moved with such words, and so
   through ignorance fall sometimes into great heaviness, and as it were
   into despair of salvation.

   Wherefore it is (as it seems to me) necessary for every one (that by
   the grace of God is in a full and resolute will to forsake sin, and as
   clearly as his conscience telleth him, suffereth no deadly sin to rest
   in him, but he goes soon to confession for it, and humbly betakes
   himself to the sacraments of the Church) to have a good trust and hope
   of salvation. Much more then should they trust and hope, who give
   themselves wholly to God, and eschew venial sins the best they know and
   can.

   But on the other hand, as perilous it is for him who lieth wittingly in
   deadly sin, to have trust in salvation, and in hope of this trust will
   not forsake his sin, nor humble himself truly to God and the holy
   Church.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [66] Unskilful.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XV: Of a firm and resolute Intent and Purpose necessary hereto

   THE third thing needful for thee to have in thy beginning was an entire
   and firm intention; that is to say an entire will and a desire only to
   please God, for this is charity, without which all is nought which thou
   doest, and thou shalt set thine intent always to search and travail how
   thou mayest please Him, resting no time willingly from some good
   exercises, either bodily or ghostly. Neither shalt thou set a time in
   thy heart that thus long thou wilt serve Him, and then suffer thy heart
   willingly to fall down to vain thoughts and idle exercises, imagining
   it needful to do so for preserving of thy health, leaving the keeping
   of thy heart and good exercises, and seeking rest and comfort for a
   time outwardly from thy bodily senses or inwardly from vain thoughts,
   as it were for recreation of thy spirit, that thereby it may be more
   quick and lively for spiritual employments. But I trow thou wilt not
   find it so. I say not that thou wilt be able fully and continually to
   perform this thy intent and purpose, for ofttimes thy bodily
   necessities, such as eating, drinking, sleeping and speaking and the
   frailty of thy flesh shall let and hinder thee, be thou never so
   careful. But my meaning and desire is that thy will and intent be
   always wholly to be exercised bodily and spiritually, and to be no time
   idle, but always lifting up thy heart by desire to God and to heaven,
   whether thou be eating or drinking or doing any corporal work as much
   as thou canst, intermit it not willingly. For if thou have this intent
   it will make thee quick and ready to thy exercises; and if thou fall
   through frailty or negligence upon any idle occupation or vain speech,
   it will smite thy heart as sharply as a prick, and make thee account
   irksome, and be weary of all such vanities, and turn again speedily to
   inward thinking of Jesus Christ or to some good exercise.

   As to thy body, it is good to use discretion in eating, drinking and
   sleeping, and in all manner of bodily penance, and in long vocal
   prayer, and in all bodily and sensible feelings and fervours, or
   earnestness of devotions, and tears and the like, and in discoursing
   with the imagination in times of aridities and want of the feeling of
   grace. In all these works it is good to use discretion, for the mean is
   the best. But in destroying of sin by keeping thy heart, and in the
   continual desire of virtues and the joys of heaven, and to have the
   spiritual knowledge and love of Jesus Christ, hold there no mean, for
   the greater it is the better it is, for thou must hate sin and all
   fleshly loves and fears in thy heart without ceasing, and love virtue
   and purity and desire them without stinting if thou canst. I say not
   that all this is needful to salvation, but I trow it is speedful and
   much helping. And if thou keep this full intent, thou shalt profit more
   in one year in virtues than thou shalt without it in seven.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XVIII: A brief Rehearsal of what hath been said, and of an Offering
    made of them altogether to Jesus

   Now I have told thee of the end thou shouldst set in thy desire, and
   draw towards it as nigh as thou canst, as also what is needful for thee
   to have in thy beginning, namely, humility, firm faith and an entire
   and strong will and purpose, upon which ground thou shalt build thy
   spiritual house by prayer and meditation and other spiritual virtues.

   Furthermore, pray thou or meditate thou, or any other good deed or
   exercises which thou dost, be it either good by grace or defective
   through thy own frailty, or whatsoever it be that thou seest, feelest
   or hearest, smellest or tastest, either outwardly or by thy bodily
   senses or inwardly by thy imagination, or knowest or perceivest by thy
   natural reason, bring it all within the truth and the rules of holy
   Church, and cast all into the mortar of humility and break it small
   with the pestle of the fear of God, and throw the powder of all this
   into the fire of desire, and so offer it up to God. And I tell thee for
   truth that well pleasing shall this offering be in the sight of our
   Lord Jesus, and sweet shall the smoke of that fire smell before His
   face.

   The sum is this: draw all that thou seest and intendest within the
   truth of holy Church, and break thyself by humility, and offer up the
   desire of thy heart only to thy Lord Jesus, to have Him and nought else
   but Him. If thou do thus, I hope, by the grace of Christ, that thou
   shalt never be overcome by thine enemy. This St Paul teacheth us when
   he saith: Whether ye eat or drank, or whatsoever else ye do, do all in
   the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, [67] forsaking yourselves and
   offering all up to Him; and the means which thou shalt use to this
   purpose are prayer and meditation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [67] 1 Cor. 10.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART II
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER I

      SECTION I: Of Prayers and the several Sorts thereof

   PRAYER is profitable and speedful to be used for the getting of purity
   of heart by destroying of sin and bringing in virtues; not that thou
   shouldst thereby make our Lord know what thou desirest, for He knoweth
   well enough what thou needest, but to dispose thee and make thee ready
   and able thereby, as a clean vessel, to receive the grace which our
   Lord would freely give thee, which grace cannot be felt till thou be
   exercised [68] and purified by the fire of desire in devout prayer. For
   though it be so that prayer is not the cause for which our Lord giveth
   grace, nevertheless it is a way or means by which grace freely given
   cometh into a soul.

   But now thou wilt desire perhaps to know how thou shouldst pray and
   upon what thing thou shouldst set the point of thy thoughts in prayer,
   and also what prayer was best for thee to use. As to the first, I
   answer that when thou art wakened out of thy sleep, and art ready to
   pray, thou shalt feel thyself fleshly and heavy, tending ever downwards
   to vain thoughts, either of dreams or fancies, or of unnecessary things
   of the world or of the flesh, then behoveth it thee to quicken thy
   heart by prayer, and stir it up as much as thou canst to some devotion.
   In thy prayer set not thy heart on any bodily thing, but all thy care
   shall be to draw in thy thoughts from beholding any bodily thing, that
   thy desire may be as it were naked and bare from all earthly things,
   ever aspiring upward to Jesus Christ, whom yet thou canst never see
   bodily as He is in His Godhead, nor frame any image or likeness of Him
   in thy imagination; but thou mayest, through devout and continual
   beholding of the humility of His precious humanity, feel the goodness
   and the grace of His Godhead.

   When thy desire and mind is gotten up, and as it were set free from all
   fleshly thoughts and affections, and is much lifted up by spiritual
   power unto spiritual favour and delight in Him and of His spiritual
   presence; hold thou therein much of thy time of prayer, so that thou
   have no great mind of earthly things, or if they come into thy mind
   that they do but trouble or affect thee little. If thou canst pray
   thus, thou prayest well, for prayer is nothing else but an ascending or
   getting up of the desire of the heart into God by withdrawing of it
   from all earthly thoughts. Therefore it is likened to a fire which, of
   its own nature, leaveth the lowness of the earth and always mounteth up
   into the air, even so desire in prayer, when it is touched and kindled
   of the spiritual fire, which is God, is ever aspiring up to Him that it
   came from.

   They that speak of this fire of love know not well what it is; save
   this I can tell that it is neither any bodily thing nor felt by any
   sense of the body. A soul may feel it in prayer or in devotion, which
   soul is in the body, but it feeleth it not by any bodily sense; for
   though it is true that it works in and upon the soul, that the body
   itself is turned thereby into a heat and be as it were chafed through
   the labour and travail of the spirit, nevertheless the fire of love is
   not bodily, for it is only in the spiritual desire of the soul. And
   this is no riddle to any man or woman that have had the experience of
   devotion; but because some are so simple as to imagine that because it
   is called a fire that therefore it should be hot as bodily fire is,
   therefore have I set down thus much.

   Now as to thy other question to know what prayer is best to be used, I
   shall give thee my opinion. Thou shalt understand that there be three
   kinds of vocal prayer.

   The first is that which was made immediately by God Himself, as the
   Pater noster; the second those that are made more generally by the
   ordinance of holy Church, as Matins, Evensong and Hours; the third sort
   such as are made by pious men addressed to our Lord and to our Lady and
   to His saints.

   As to these kinds of prayers that are called vocal, I judge that for
   thee that art religious and art bound by custom and thy rule to say thy
   Breviary it is most expedient to say it, and that as devoutly as thou
   canst, for in saying of them thou sayest also the Pater noster and
   other prayers likewise. And to stir thee up more to devotion there be
   ordained psalms and hymns, and such other which were made by the Holy
   Ghost, like as the Pater noster was. Therefore thou shalt not say them
   hastily nor carelessly, as if thou wert troubled or discontented for
   being bound to the recital of them; but thou shalt recollect thy
   thoughts to say them more seriously and more devoutly than any other
   prayers of voluntary devotion, deeming for truth that, seeing it is the
   prayer of holy Church, there is no vocal prayer so profitably to be
   used by thee as it is. Thus shalt thou put away all heaviness, and by
   God's grace turn thy necessity into good will and thy Obligation into a
   great freedom, so that it shall be no hindrance to thy other spiritual
   exercises. After this thou mayest, if thou wilt, use others, as the
   Pater noster or any other, and stick to those in which thou feelest
   most savour and spiritual comfort.

   This kind of vocal prayer is commonly most profitable for every man in
   the beginning of his conversion, as being then but rude and gross and
   carnal (unless he have the more grace) nor cannot think of spiritual
   thoughts in his meditations, for his soul is not yet cleansed from his
   old sins. And therefore I hope it is most speedful to use this manner
   of prayer, as to say his Pater Noster and his Ave, and to read upon his
   psalter and such other. For he that cannot run easily and lightly by
   spiritual prayer, his feet of knowledge and love being feeble and sick
   by reason of sin, hath need of a firm staff to hold by, which staff is
   set forms of vocal prayer ordained by God and holy Church for the help
   of men's souls. By which the soul of a fleshly man that is alway
   falling downward into worldly thoughts and sensual affections shall be
   lifted up above them, and holden up as by a staff, and fed with the
   sweet words of those prayers as a child with milk, and guided and held
   up by them that he fall not into errors or fancies through his vain
   imaginations; for that in this manner of prayer is no deceit nor error
   to him that will diligently and humbly exercise himself therein.

   And hereby thou mayest learn that those men (if any such there be) who
   in the beginning of their conversion, or soon after, having felt some
   spiritual comfort, either in devotion or knowledge, and are not yet
   stablished therein, leave such vocal prayer and other outward exercises
   too soon, and give themselves wholly to meditation, are not wise; for
   ofttimes in that time of rest which they take to themselves for
   meditation, imagining and thinking on spiritual things after their own
   fancies, and following their bodily feeling, having not yet received
   sufficient grace thereto, by indiscretion overtravel their wits and
   break their bodily strengths and so fall into fancies and singular
   conceits, or into open errors, and hinder that grace which God hath
   already given them, by such vanities. The cause of all this is secret
   pride and overweening of themselves; for when they have felt a little
   grace and some sensible devotion, they esteem it so much to surpass the
   graces and favours He doth to others that they fall into vain-glory.
   Whereas if they knew but how little it were in comparison of that which
   God giveth, or may give, they would be ashamed to speak anything of it,
   unless it were in a case of great necessity. Of this kind of vocal
   prayer speaketh David in the Psalms, thus: With my voice have I cried
   unto the Lord, with my voice have I prayed to our Lord. [69] Behold how
   the prophet, for to stir other men to pray both with mouth and with
   voice, saith: With my voice I cried to God, and with my speech I
   besought our Lord.

   There is another sort of vocal prayer which is not by any set common
   form of prayer; but is, when a man or woman, by the gift of God,
   feeling the grace of devotion, speaketh to God as it were bodily in His
   presence, with such words as suit most to his inward stirrings for the
   time, or as cometh to his mind, answerable to the feelings or motions
   of his heart, either by way of rehearsal of his sins and wretchedness,
   or of the malice and sleights of his enemy, or of the mercies and
   goodness of God. And hereby he crieth with desire of heart and speech
   of mouth to our Lord for succour and for help, as a man that were in
   peril among his enemies; or in sickness, showing his sores to God as to
   a physician, saying with David: Deliver me from my enemies, O Lord.
   [70] Or else this: Heal my Soul, for I have sinned against Thee; or
   other suchlike words as they come to his mind.

   And at other times there appears to him to be so much goodness and
   grace and mercy in God that it delighteth him with great affection of
   heart to love Him, and thank Him in such words and psalms as do most
   suit to that occasion, as David saith: Confess ye to the Lord because
   He is good, because His mercy endureth for ever. [71]

   This kind of prayer pleaseth God much, for it proceedeth wholly from
   the affection of the heart, and therefore never goeth away unsped [72]
   or empty without some grace, and this prayer belongeth to the second
   part of contemplation, as I have said before. Whoso hath this gift of
   God fervently ought for a time to eschew the presence and company of
   all men, to be alone that he be not letted; [73] whoso hath it let him
   hold it as long as he can, for it will not last long in its fervour. If
   the grace of it come plenteously, it is wondrous painful to the spirit,
   though it be much pleasant also to it; for it is much wasting to the
   body whoso useth it much, for it maketh the body (if the grace of it
   come in abundance) for to stir and move here and there as if the man
   were mad or drunk and could have no rest. This is a point of the
   passion of love, the which by great violence and mastery breaketh down
   and mortifieth all lusts and likings of any earthly thing, and woundeth
   the soul with the blessed sword of love, that it makes the body sink,
   not able to bear it. The touch of love is of so great power that the
   most vicious or fleshly man living on earth, if he were once strongly
   touched with this sharp sword, he would be right sober and grave a
   great while after, and abhor all the lusts and likings of the flesh and
   all earthly things which before he took most delight in.

   Of this manner of feeling speaketh the prophet Jeremy thus: And there
   was made in my heart as a fire boiling, and shut up in my bones, and I
   fainted, not able to bear it; [74] which words may be understood thus:
   The love and feeling of God was made in my heart, not fire, but as
   boiling or burning fire; for as material fire burneth and wasteth all
   bodily things where it cometh, right so doth spiritual fire (as is the
   love of God) burneth and wasteth all fleshly loves and likings in a
   man's soul. And this fire is shut up in my bones, as the prophet saith
   of himself, that is to say: This love filleth the powers of the soul,
   as the mind, reason and will, with grace and spiritual sweetness, as
   marrow filleth the bones, and that inwardly, and not outwardly in the
   senses. Nevertheless it is so mighty within that it worketh out into
   the body, and maketh it quake and tremble. And yet it hath so little to
   do with the bodily senses, and so unacquainted is the body with it that
   it cannot skill of it and cannot bear it, but faileth and falleth down
   as the prophet saith. Therefore our Lord tempereth it and withdraweth
   this fervour, and suffereth the heart to fall into more sobriety and
   softness. He that can pray thus often, he speedeth soon in his travail,
   and shall get more of virtues in a little time than another without
   this, or exercised in any other way of prayer, shall get in a long time
   for all the bodily penance he can do. Whoso hath this need not afflict
   his body with more penance than this brings along with it, which will
   be enough if it come often.

   The third sort of prayer is only in the heart without speech, with
   great rest and quietness both of soul and body. A pure heart it
   behoveth him to have that shall pray after this manner; for such only
   attain to it who by long travail both of body and soul, or else by such
   sharp touches or motions of love, as I have before mentioned, have
   arrived to rest of spirit, so that his affections are turned into
   spiritual savour and relish, that he is able to pray continually in his
   heart, and love and praise God without great letting of temptations or
   of vanities, as is said before in the chapter of the second sort of
   Contemplation. Of this kind of prayer St Paul saith thus: If I pray
   with the tongue, my spirit prayed, but my mind is without fruit. What
   then? I will pray also in the spirit, I will pray also in the mind; I
   will sing in the spirit, I will sing also in the mind. [75] That is to
   say: If I pray with my tongue only, by the consent of my spirit, and
   with painstaking and diligence, it is meritorious, but my soul is not
   fed by it, for it feeleth not the fruit of spiritual sweetness by
   understanding. What then shall I do, saith St Paul? And he answers, I
   will pray with the exercise and desire of the spirit, and I will also
   pray more inwardly in my spirit without labour, in spiritual savour and
   sweetness of the love and the sight of God, by the which sight and
   feeling of love my soul is fed. Thus (as I understand him) could St
   Paul pray.

   Of this manner of prayer speaketh our Lord in holy Writ in a figure
   thus: Fire shall always burn upon the altar, which the priest shall
   nourish, putting wood underneath in the morning every day, that so the
   fire may not go out. [76] That is, the fire of love shall ever be
   lighted in the soul of a devout and clean man or woman, the which is
   God's altar. And the priest shall every morning lay to it sticks and
   nourish the fire, that is this man shall, by holy psalms, clean
   thoughts and fervent desires, nourish the fire of love in his heart,
   that it go not out at any time. This prayer of rest or quiet our Lord
   giveth to some of His servants, as it were a reward of their travail,
   and an earnest of that love and sweetness which they shall have in the
   bliss of heaven.

      SECTION II: How they should do that are troubled with vain Thoughts in
      their Prayers

   BUT thou wilt say that I speak too high in this matter of prayer, which
   indeed is no mastery nor difficulty for me to write it, but it were a
   great piece of mastery for a man to practise it.

   Thou sayest that thou canst not pray thus devoutly, nor so perfectly in
   heart as I speak of; for when thou wouldst have thy mind upward to God
   in thy prayer, thou feelest so many vain thoughts, either concerning
   thy own business or other men's, with many other lets and hindrances,
   that thou canst neither feel savour nor rest nor devotion in thy
   prayers, and ofttimes the more thou strivest to keep thy heart the
   further it is from thee and the harder, and sometimes continues so from
   the beginning to the end, that thou thinkest all lost that thou dost.

   In answer to that which thou saidst, that I spake too high of prayer, I
   grant well that I spake more than I myself can or may do. Nevertheless
   I spake it for this intent that thou shouldst know how we ought to
   pray; and when we cannot do so, that we should acknowledge our weakness
   with all humility and God's mercy. Our Lord Himself hath commanded us
   thus: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
   soul and with all thy might. It is impossible for any man living to
   fulfil this bidding so fully as it is said. Yet our Lord hath bidden us
   so, to the intent, as St Bernard saith, that thereby we should know our
   feebleness, and then humbly cry for mercy, and we shall have it.
   Nevertheless I shall instruct thee in this point what to do as well as
   I can.

   When thou goest about to pray, first make and frame betwixt thee and
   God in thy mind a full purpose and intention in the beginning to serve
   Him, then with all the powers of thy soul by thy present prayer, and
   then begin and do as well as thou canst. Though thou be never so much
   letted contrary to thy former purpose, be not afraid, neither be angry
   at thyself, nor impatient against God, because He giveth thee not the
   savour and spiritual sweetness in devotion as thou thinkest He giveth
   to others. But see therein thy own feebleness and bear it patiently,
   deeming it to be (as it is) feeble and of no worth in thy own sight,
   with humility of spirit; trusting also firmly in the mercy of our Lord,
   that he will make it good and profitable to thee, more than thou
   imaginest or feelest. For know thou well that thou art excused of thy
   duty, and thou shalt be rewarded for this (as well as for any other
   good work done in charity), though thy mind and intention may be not so
   fully set upon it as thou wishest. Therefore do what belongs to thee,
   and suffer our Lord to give what He will, and teach Him not. Think
   thyself wretched and negligent, and as it were in great fault for such
   things, yet for this fault and all other venials which cannot be
   eschewed in this wretched life lift up thy heart to God, acknowledging
   thy wretchedness, and cry God mercy, with a good trust of forgiveness,
   and strive no more therewith, nor stay any longer upon it, as if thou
   wouldst by main strength not feel such wretchedness, but leave off and
   go to some other good exercise, either corporal or spiritual, and
   resolve to do better the next time. Though thou shouldst fall another
   time into the same defect, yea, an hundred times, yea, a thousand, yet
   still do as I have said, and all will be well. Moreover a soul that
   never finds rest of heart in prayer, but all her life is striving with
   her thoughts, and is troubled and letted with them, if she keep her in
   humility and charity in other things, she shall have great reward in
   heaven for her good will and endeavours.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [68] Assayed.

   [69] Psalm 141.

   [70] Ps. 40.

   [71] Ps. 135.

   [72] Unprosperous.

   [73] Interrupted.

   [74] Jer. 20:9.

   [75] 1 Cor. 14:14,15.

   [76] Levit. 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER II

      SECTION I: Of Meditation

   THOU must understand that in meditation no certain rule can be set for
   every one to observe, for they are in the free gift of our Lord,
   according to divers dispositions of chosen souls, and according as we
   thrive in that state and in virtues, so God increaseth our meditations,
   both in spiritual knowing and loving of Him. For whoso is always alike,
   and at a stand in knowing of God and spiritual things, it seemeth that
   he profiteth and groweth but little in the love of God, which may be
   proved by the example of the apostles, who, when at Pentecost they were
   filled with burning love of the Holy Ghost, became thereby neither
   fools nor dolts, but became wonderful wise, both in knowing and
   speaking of God and spiritual things, as much as men could in mortal
   bodies. For thus saith the Scripture: They were all filled with the
   Holy Ghost, and began to speak the wonders of God; [77] all which
   knowledge they got by ravishing in love, through the working of the
   Holy Ghost within them. Divers sorts of meditations there be which our
   Lord putteth in a man's heart. Some of them shall I tell thee of that
   thou mayest exercise thyself in them. In the beginning of the
   conversion of such a man as hath been much defiled with worldly or
   fleshly sins, commonly his thoughts are much upon his sins with great
   compunction and sorrow of heart, with great weeping and many tears
   humbly and busily asking mercy and forgiveness of God for them. And if
   he be deeply touched in conscience for them (for then our Lord will
   soon cleanse him from them), his sins will seem ever to be in his
   sight, and that so foul and so horrible, that hardly can he be able to
   brook or endure himself for them; and though he confess himself never
   so clearly of them, yet will he find difficulty and a fretting and
   biting in his conscience about them, thinking that he hath not
   confessed right. And scarce can he take any rest, or be quiet, insomuch
   that his body were not able to undergo such vexation and pain, were it
   not that our Lord of His mercy sometimes comforteth him by the
   consideration of His Passion, and devotion wrought in him thereto; or
   by some other means as He seeth good. After this manner worketh He in
   some men's hearts more or less, as He will, and this is through His
   great mercy, that not only will He forgive the sin or the trespass, but
   will both forgive the trespass and the pain due for it in Purgatory,
   for such a little pain here felt in the remorse and biting of
   conscience. Also, to make a man rightly to receive any special gift or
   degree of the love of God, it behoveth that he first be scoured and
   cleansed by such a fire of compunction for all his great sins before
   done. Of this kind of exercise of compunction often David speaks in the
   Psalter, but especially in the psalm, Miserere mei, Deus--Have mercy on
   me, O God. [78]

   And then sometime after this travail and exercise, and sometimes
   together with it, such a man that hath been so defiled with sins, or
   else another who, by the grace of God, hath been kept in innocence, our
   Lord bestoweth on him the meditation of His humanity, or of His birth,
   or of His Passion, and of the compassion of our Lady, St Mary. When
   this meditation is made by the help of the Holy Ghost, then it is right
   profitable and gracious, and thou shalt know it by this token: when
   thou art stirred to a meditation in God, and thy thoughts are suddenly
   drawn out from all worldly and fleshly things, and thou thinkest that
   thou seest in thy soul the Lord Jesus in a bodily likeness as He was on
   earth, and how He was taken by the Jews and bound as a thief, beaten
   and despised, scourged and judged to death, how lowly He bore the cross
   upon His back, and how cruelly He was nailed thereon; also of the crown
   of thorns upon His head, and of the sharp spear that sticked Him to the
   heart; and thou in this spiritual sight feelest thy heart stirred to so
   great compassion and pity of thy Lord Jesus, that thou mournest and
   weepest, and criest with all thy might of body and soul, wondering at
   the goodness, the love, the patience, the meekness of thy Lord Jesus,
   that He would, for so sinful a caitiff as thou art, suffer so much
   pain; and, nevertheless, thou seest so much goodness and mercy to be in
   Him that thy heart riseth up into a love and a joy and a gladness in
   Him, with many sweet tears, having great trust of the forgiveness of
   thy sins and the salvation of thy soul by the virtue of this precious
   Passion; so that when the meditation of Christ's Passion, or any part
   of His humanity is thus wrought in thy heart by such a spiritual sight,
   with devout affection answerable thereunto, know well that it is not of
   thy own working, nor the feigning or working of any evil spirit, but by
   the grace of the Holy Ghost. For it is an opening of the spiritual eye
   into the humanity of Christ, and may be called the fleshly love of God,
   as St Bernard saith, inasmuch as it is set upon the fleshly nature of
   Christ, and it is right good, and a great help for the destroying of
   great sins, and a good way to come to virtues, and so after to the
   Contemplation of the Godhead. For a man shall not come to the spiritual
   light in Contemplation of Christ's Godhead, unless first he be
   exercised in imagination with bitterness and compassion, and in
   stedfast thinking of His humanity. Thus St Paul did, and therefore
   first he saith: I desired to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ
   and Him crucified. [79] As if he had said: My knowing and my faith is
   only in the Passion of Christ; and therefore he saith thus also: God
   forbid I should rejoice in anything, save in the cross of Christ.
   Nevertheless afterward he saith: We preach unto you Christ, the power
   of God and the wisdom of God. As who should say: First I preached of
   the humanity and Passion of Christ; now I preach to you of the Godhead,
   that Christ is the power of God, and the endless wisdom of God.

   But this manner of meditation a man hath not always when he would, but
   only when our Lord will give it. Unto some He giveth it all their
   lifetime by fits, when He visiteth them; some men being so tender in
   their affections that, when they hear men speak or think themselves of
   this precious Passion, their hearts melt into devotion, and are fed and
   comforted thereby against all manner of temptations of the enemy, and
   this is a great gift of God. To some men He giveth it plentifully at
   the first, and afterwards withdraws it for divers causes, either if a
   man grow proud of it in his own eyes, or for some other sin by which he
   disableth himself to receive the grace; or else our Lord withdraweth
   it, and all other devotions sometimes, because He will suffer him to be
   tried with temptations of the enemy, and thereby will dispose a man to
   understand and feel our Lord more spiritually, for so He saith to His
   disciples: It is expedient for you that I go away from you [in my
   body], for except I go the Holy Ghost will not come. [80] As long as He
   was with them they loved Him much, but it was fleshly according to His
   humanity, and therefore it was necessary that He should withdraw His
   bodily presence, that the Holy Ghost might come to them and teach them
   how to love Him and know Him more spiritually, as He did at Pentecost.
   Right so, it is expedient for some that our Lord withdraw a little the
   fleshly and bodily image from the eye of their soul, that their heart
   may be set and fixed more busily in spiritual desire and seeking of His
   divinity.

      SECTION II: Of divers Temptations of the Enemy, and the Remedies against
      them

   NEVERTHELESS it behoveth a man to suffer many temptations first, which
   shall befall some men often after that their comfort is withdrawn, and
   that sundry ways by the malice of the enemy. As thus: when the devil
   perceiveth devotion much withdrawn, that the soul is left, as it were,
   naked for a time, then sendeth he to some temptations of lust, of
   gluttony, and these so hot and burning that they shall think they never
   felt so grievous ones in all their life before, even when they gave
   themselves most to such sins. Insomuch as they think it impossible to
   stand out long from falling without help. And, therefore, have they
   then much sorrow for lack of comfort and devotion which formerly they
   have had, and much dread also of falling from God by such open sins.
   All this the devil worketh (by God's permission) to make them repent of
   their good purposes, and turn back to their former courses of sinning.
   But whoso will abide, and suffer a little pain, and not turn again to
   sin for anything, the hand of our Lord is full near, and will help them
   right soon, for He hath much care of that man that is in such a case,
   though he knoweth it not; for so saith David in the person of our Lord:
   I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and he shall glorify Me.
   [81] The devil tempteth others maliciously to spiritual sins, as to
   doubt of the articles of faith, or of the Sacrament of our Lord's
   blessed Body. Also to despair, or blaspheme of God or any of His
   saints, or to a wearisomeness of their own life, or to bitterness
   against others, or foolish melancholy and sadness, or too much fear of
   themselves, of doing hurt to their healths by giving themselves so much
   to serving of God. Some others, and namely solitary folks, he frighteth
   with dreads and ugly shapes appearing to their eyes or to their
   imaginations, causing often thereby great shakings and quakings in
   their bodies, either sleeping or waking, and so troubleth them that
   they can hardly take any rest. And also many other ways he tempteth,
   more than I can or may say.

   The remedies for such may be these. First: that they put all their
   trust in our Lord Jesus Christ, and often call to mind His Passion and
   the pains that He suffered for us, and that they then believe
   stedfastly that all sorrows and travail which they suffer in such
   temptations, which to unskilful men may seem a forsaking by God, are
   indeed no such leavings or forsakings, but trials for their good,
   either for cleansing of their former sins or for the great increasing
   of their reward and the disposing of them for more grace, if they will
   but suffer awhile and stand fast, that they turn not again willingly to
   sin.

   Another remedy is that they fear not, nor esteem these malicious
   stirrings for sins, nor lay to heart that despair or blasphemy, or
   doubtings of sacrament, or any such other, though never so ugly to
   hear; for the feeling of these temptations defile the soul no more than
   if they heard a hound bark or felt the biting of a flea. They vex the
   soul indeed, but do not harm it, if so be a man despise them and set
   them at nought, for it is not good to strive with them, as if thou
   wouldst cast them out by mastery and violence, for the more they strive
   with them the more they cleave to them. And therefore they shall do
   well to divert their thoughts from them as much as they can, and set
   them upon some business. And if they will still hang upon them, then it
   is good for them that they be not angry nor heavy through feeling of
   them; but with a good trust in God bear them (like a bodily sickness
   and scourge of our Lord for the cleansing of their sins as long as He
   pleaseth) out of love to Him, even as He was willing to be scourged and
   bear His cross for the love of them. Moreover, it is good for them to
   open their minds to some wise man in the beginning, before these
   temptations get rooting in their heart, and that they forsake their own
   wit and judgement and follow the counsel of another. But that they show
   them not unadvisedly or lightly to any unskilful or worldly man, who
   never felt such temptations, for such may happily by their
   unskilfulness bring a simple soul into despair.

   Of this manner of temptations by which a man seemeth forsaken of God,
   and is not, the help and comfort is this: The Lord saith by His
   prophet, For a little space have I left thee, but in great mercy will I
   gather thee. For a moment of indignation have I hid my face a little
   while from thee, and in mercy everlasting will I have mercy on thee.
   [82] As if He had said, I suffered thee to be troubled a little while,
   and in a point of My wrath I smote thee; that is to say, the penance
   and the pain that thou sufferest here is but a point or little prick of
   My wrath, in regard of the pain of hell or of purgatory. Yet in My
   manifold mercies I shall gather thee; when thou thinkest thyself
   forsaken, then will I of My great mercy gather thee again to Me; for
   when thou esteemest thyself, as it were, lost, then shall our Lord help
   thee, as Job saith: When thou shalt think thyself consumed, thou shalt
   arise as the daystar, and thou shalt have confidence. [83] That is to
   say, when thou art brought so low by travail into temptation that thou
   despairest of help or comfort, like a forlorn man, yet stand stiffly in
   hope and pray to God, and verily thou shalt suddenly spring up as the
   day-star, in gladness of heart, and have a sure trust in God.

   Moreover, for the comfort of such men, that they may not despair in
   temptation, the wise man saith thus of our Lord: In temptation He
   walketh with him, and bringeth fear and dread upon him, and torments
   him with His discipline, till He try him in his cogitations, and may
   trust His soul: And He will establish him, and make a direct way unto
   him, and make him glad, and will disclose His secrets to him, and will
   heap upon him as treasures knowledge of understanding and justice. [84]
   The wise man, because he would have not despair in temptation, to
   comfort them saith thus: In temptation our Lord forsaketh not a man,
   but goeth with him from the beginning to the end. For he saith first,
   He chooseth him, and that is, when He draweth a man to Him by comfort
   of devotion, and afterward bringeth upon him sorrow and dread and
   trials, and that is when He withdraweth devotion and suffereth him to
   be tempted. And he saith that He tormenteth him in tribulation until He
   hath well tried him in his thoughts, and until a man will put all his
   trust in Him fully, and then He bringeth him out into the right way,
   and fasteneth him to Him, and gladdeneth him, and sheweth him His
   secrets, and giveth him His treasure of knowing and understanding of
   righteousness.

   By these words may you see that these temptations or any other, be they
   never so ugly, are expedient and profitable to a man that by grace is
   in full will to forsake sin, if he will be willing to suffer and abide
   God's will, and not turn again to sin which he hath forsaken, for any
   sorrow, or pain, or dread of such temptations; but ever stand still in
   travail and in prayer with good hope. Our Lord of His endless goodness
   having pity and mercy of all His creatures, when He seeth time, will
   put to His hand and smite down the devil and all his power, and ease
   him of his travail, and put away all dreads and sorrows and darkness
   out of his heart, and brings into his soul the light of grace, opening
   the eye thereof to see, that all the travail that he hath had was
   expedient for him, giving him also fresh spiritual might to withstand
   all the suggestions of the fiend and all deadly sins without great
   difficulty, and leadeth him into a stability and settledness of virtue
   and good living; in which, if he keepeth himself humble to the end,
   then will He take him wholly to himself. Thus much have I said, that
   thou mightest not be troubled or letted with any such temptation, or
   too much afraid; but do as I have said, and better if thou canst, and I
   hope through the grace of Jesus Christ thou shalt never be overcome by
   thine enemy.

   But after thou hast escaped these temptations, or else if our Lord hath
   so kept thee (as He doth many by His mercy) that thou hast not been
   troubled much with any such, then it is good for thee that thou beware
   of turning thy rest into idleness; for there is many a man that taketh
   rest upon him too soon, as if he were ripe for rest in Contemplation.
   But if thou wilt do well, begin a new game and a new travail, and that
   is, by meditation, to enter within into thy own soul, for to know what
   it is, and by the knowing thereof to come to the spiritual knowledge of
   God. For St Austin saith, By the knowing of myself I shall get the
   knowledge of God. I say not that such exercise is absolutely necessary,
   and thy bounden duty, unless thou feel thyself stirred up by grace, and
   as it were called thereto. For our Lord giveth divers gifts where He
   pleaseth, not all to one man, nor one to every man, save the gift of
   charity, which is common to all.

   Therefore, if a man have received a gift from God, as devotion in
   prayer, or in the Passion of Christ, or any other, be it never so
   little, let him not leave it quickly for any other, unless he assuredly
   find and feel a better, but hold that which he hath, and exercise
   himself therein seriously, ever desiring a better when God will give
   it. Nevertheless, if that be withdrawn somewhat, and he seeth a better,
   and feeleth his heart stirred thereto, then seemeth it to be a calling
   of our Lord to the better, and then is it time that he follow after it,
   to get it, and fall to practise it as speedily as he may.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [77] Acts 2.

   [78] Ps. 1.

   [79] 1 Cor. 2.

   [80] St John 16.

   [81] Ps. 90.

   [82] Is. 54:7-8.

   [83] Job 11.

   [84] Ecclus. 4:18.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER III: That a Man should know the measure of his Gift, that he may
    desire and take a better when God giveth it

   OUR holy Fathers heretofore taught us that we should know the measure
   of our gift, and therefore to work upon it, and according to it, and
   not take upon us, out of our head or imagination, to have more in our
   feeling or ability than indeed we have. We may ever desire the best,
   but we may not ever work the best or our utmost, because we have not
   yet received that grace and ability. A hound that runneth after the
   hare only because he seeth other hounds run, when he is weary, he
   stayeth and resteth, or turneth home again; but if he run because he
   seeth or is in view of the hare, he will not spare for weariness till
   he have caught her. Right so it is in the spiritual course, whoso hath
   grace, be it never so little, and wittingly leaveth it, and the working
   upon it, and putteth himself to the exercise or practice of another
   kind, for which he hath not as yet received a gift or grace, but doth
   it only because he seeth, readeth, or heareth that some others do so,
   he may perhaps run awhile till he be weary and then will he turn home
   again, and if he be not the more wary, may hurt his feet with such
   fancies before he get home. But he that continueth working upon such
   grace as he hath, and humbly beggeth by prayer perseverantly for more,
   and after feeleth his heart stirred to follow after the grace which he
   desired, he may securely run, if he keep himself humble. Therefore,
   desire of God as much as thou wilt or canst, without measure or
   moderation at all concerning any thing that belongs to His love or
   Heaven's bliss, for he that can desire most of God shall feel and
   receive most; but work as thou mayest and cry God mercy, for that thou
   canst not do. Thus St Paul seems to mean, when he said: Every one hath
   a proper gift of God, one so, and another so. [85] Also, when he said:
   There are varieties of gifts, to one is given the word of wisdom, to
   another the word of knowledge, [86] etc. And also when he said: To
   every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the
   donation of Christ. [87] And further, where he said: That we may know
   the things that are given us by God. He saith that every one hath his
   gift of God: For to every man that shall be saved is given a grace
   according to the measure of Christ's gift. Therefore it is speedful
   that we know the gifts that are given us by God, that we may work in
   them, for by those we shall be saved, as some by bodily works, and by
   deeds of mercy, some by great bodily penance, some by sorrow and
   weeping for their sins all their lifetime, some by preaching and
   teaching, some by divers graces and gifts of devotion shall be saved
   and come to bliss.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [85] 1 Cor. 7.

   [86] 1 Cor. 12.

   [87] Ephes. 4.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART III
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER I: Of the Knowledge of a Man's Soul and the Powers thereof necessary
    to Contemplation

   THERE is one work more very needful and expedient to travail, in which
   I esteem also to be the plain highway in our working (as much as may
   be) to Contemplation: and that is, for a man to enter into himself, to
   know his own soul [88] and the powers thereof.

   By this inward sight thou shalt come to see the nobility and dignity
   that naturally it had in its first creation; and thou shalt also see
   the wretchedness and the mischief which thou art fallen into by sin.
   From this sight will arise a desire with great longing in thine heart
   to recover again that dignity and nobleness which thou hast lost. Also
   thou shalt feel a loathing and detestation of thyself, with a great
   will and desire to destroy and beat down thyself and all things that
   let thee from that dignity and that joy. This is a spiritual work, hard
   and sharp in the beginning, for those that will go speedily and
   seriously about it. For it is an exercise in the soul against the
   ground of all sins, little and great, which ground is nought else but a
   false mistrusted love of man to himself. Out of this love, as St Austin
   saith, springeth all manner of sin, deadly and venial.

   Verily until this ground be well ransacked and deep digged, and as it
   were dried up by casting out of all fleshly and worldly loves and
   fears, a soul can never spiritually feel the burning love of Jesus
   Christ nor have the homeliness of His gracious presence, nor have a
   clear sight of spiritual things by light in the understanding. This
   then must be the travail and labour of a man, to draw his heart and
   mind from the fleshly love and liking of all earthly creatures, from
   vain thoughts and from fleshly imaginations and from the love and
   vicious feeling of himself, so that the soul shall or may find or take
   no rest in any fleshly thoughts or worldly affections. Then inasmuch as
   the soul cannot as yet find her spiritual rest and satisfaction in the
   sight and love of Jesus, therefore it must needs be that in the
   meanwhile she must find and feel some pain and wearisomeness.

   This pain and travail is somewhat straight and narrow, nevertheless I
   hope it is the way which Christ teacheth to them that would be His
   perfect lovers in the Gospel, saying: Strive to enter in at the strait
   gate, for strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leadeth to
   life, and few men find it. [89] How strait this way is, He telleth us
   in another place: Whoso will come after me, let him forsake himself and
   hate his own soul. [90] That is to say, forsake all fleshly love and
   hate his own carnal life and vain liking of all his bodily senses for
   love of Me; and take the cross, that is suffer the pain of this awhile
   and then follow Me; that is to say, in Contemplation of My Humanity and
   of My Divinity. This is a strait and narrow way that no bodily thing
   can pass through it, for it is a slaying of all sin, as St Paul saith:
   Mortify your members that are upon earth, [91] not the members of our
   body but of our soul, as uncleanness, lust, evil concupiscence,
   avarice, fond love to ourselves and earthly things. Therefore as thy
   endeavour has been heretofore to resist bodily sins and open
   temptations of the enemy, and that in matters as it were from without;
   right so it behoveth thee now, in this spiritual work within thyself,
   to batter down and destroy the ground of sin in thyself as much as thou
   canst. Which that thou mayest be better able to perform, I shall give
   thee the best counsel I can.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [88] The fairness and the foulness of it.

   [89] St Luke 13.

   [90] St Matt. 16, St John 12.

   [91] Col. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER II: Of the Worthiness and Excellency of the Soul and how it was lost

   THE soul of a man is a life consisting of three powers, Memory,
   Understanding and Will, after the image and likeness of the Blessed
   Trinity; inasmuch as the Memory was made strong and stedfast by the
   power of the Father to hold and retain God in perpetual remembrance,
   without forgetting, distracting or letting of any creature, and so it
   hath the likeness of the Father. The Understanding was made bright and
   clear, without error or darkness, as perfectly as a soul in a body
   unglorified could have, and so it hath the likeness and image of the
   Son, who is infinite wisdom. The Will and affections were made pure and
   clean, burning in love towards God, without sensual love of the flesh
   or of any creature by the sovereign goodness of God the Holy Ghost, and
   so it hath the likeness of the Holy Ghost, which is blessed love.
   Whereby you may see that man's soul (which may be called a created
   Trinity) was in its natural estate replenished in its three powers with
   the remembrance, sight and love of the most blessed uncreated Trinity,
   which is God.

   This was the dignity and worth of man's soul by nature at his first
   creation, which thou hadst in Adam before the first sin. But when Adam
   sinned, choosing love and delight in himself and in the creatures, he
   lost all his excellency and dignity, and thou, also, in him, and fell
   from that Blessed Trinity into a foul, dark, wretched trinity; that is
   to say, into forgetting of God and ignorance of himself, and into a
   beastly love and liking of himself, and all this he did wittingly and
   willingly. For, as David saith in the Psalter: Man being in honour
   understood it not, and, therefore, he lost it, and became like a beast.

   See then the wretchedness of thy soul, for as the Memory was something
   established and fixed upon God, so now it hath forgotten Him and
   seeketh its rest in the creatures, now in one creature and then in
   another, and never can find full rest, having lost Him in whom is full
   rest. So it is with the Understanding and the Will and affections, both
   which were pure in spiritual favour and sweetness but now is turned
   into a foul, beastly lust and liking in itself and in the creatures and
   in fleshly favours, both in the senses as in gluttony and lechery; and
   in the imagination, as in pride, vain-glory and covetousness, insomuch
   that thou canst do no good deed but it is defiled with vain-glory; nor
   canst thou easily make use of any of thy five senses cleanly upon
   anything that is pleasant, but thy heart will be taken and enflamed
   with a vain lust and liking of it, which putteth out the love of God
   from thy heart, so that no feeling of love or spiritual favour may come
   into it.

   Every man that liveth in spirit understandeth well all this. This is
   the soul's wretchedness and our mischief for the first man's sin
   besides all other wretchedness and sins which thou hast wilfully added
   thereto. And know thou well that hadst thou never committed any sin
   with is thy body, either mortal or venial, but only this which is
   called original (for that is the first sin, and is nothing else but the
   losing of our righteousness which we were created in), thou shouldst
   never have been saved, had not our Lord Jesus Christ by His precious
   Passion delivered thee, and restored thee again.

   And, therefore, if thou think I have herein spoken too high, because
   thou canst neither understand it well, nor practise it according as I
   have delivered, I will now descend to thee, and fall as low as thou
   canst desire, both for thy profit and my own. Then say thus: though
   thou be never so much a wretch, and hast committed never so great sins,
   do but forsake thyself and all thy works done, both good and bad, and
   cry God mercy, and ask salvation only by virtue of this precious
   Passion, and that with a good trust, and without doubt thou shalt have
   it. And as for original sin, and all other thou shalt be safe, yea, as
   safe as an anchoret that is enclosed. And not only thou, but all
   Christian souls that trust upon His Passion and humble themselves,
   acknowledging their wretchedness, asking mercy and forgiveness, and the
   fruit of this precious Passion only, and submitting themselves to the
   Sacraments of holy Church, though it be so that they have been
   encumbered with sin all their lifetime, and never had feeling of
   spiritual favour or sweetness, or ghostly knowledge of God, yet shall
   they in this faith, and in their good will, by virtue of this precious
   Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ be safe, and come to the bliss of
   Heaven.

   All this thou knowest well, but yet it delights me to recite and speak
   of it, that thou mayest see the endless mercy of our Lord, how low He
   falleth to thee and to me and to all sinful caitiffs; ask mercy
   therefore, and have it. Thus saith the Prophet in the person of our
   Lord: Every one that calleth upon the Name of our Lord shall be saved;
   [92] that is to say, asketh salvation by Jesus and His Passion.

   This courtesy of our Lord some men understand aright, and are saved
   thereby, and others in trust of this mercy and this courtesy lie still
   in their sins, and think to have the benefit of it when they list, but
   they are mistaken, for they are taken ere they are aware, and so damn
   themselves.

   But thou wilt object: If this be true that thou sayest, I wonder
   greatly at that which I find in some holy men's books, for some say (as
   I understand them) that he that cannot love this blessed Name Jesus nor
   find and feel in it spiritual joy and delight with sweetness, shall be
   a stranger to the bliss of Heaven, and never come there. Verily when I
   read these words, they astonished me, making me afraid. For I hope (as
   you have said) that through the mercy of our Lord they shall be safe,
   by keeping of the commandments and by true repentance for their former
   evil life, who never felt any such spiritual sweetness, in the Name of
   Jesus, and therefore I marvel the more, to find them say (as me
   thinketh) the contrary hereto.

   To this I answer that (in my opinion) their saying (if it be well
   understood) is true, and no whit contrary to what I have said, for this
   Name Jesus is nothing else in English but healer or health. Now every
   man that liveth in this wretched life is spiritually sick, for there is
   no man that liveth without sin, which is a spiritual sickness, as St
   John saith of himself, and of other perfect men thus: If we say we have
   no sin, we beguile ourselves, and there is as no truth in us. [93]
   Therefore he can never come to the joy of Heaven, till he be first
   healed of this ghostly sickness. But this spiritual healing may no man
   have (that hath the use of reason) except he desire it, and love it,
   and have delight therein, inasmuch as he hopeth to get it. Now the Name
   of Jesus is nothing else but this spiritual health; wherefore it is
   true that they say, that no man can be safe, unless he love and like
   the Name of Jesus; for no man can be spiritually healed, until he love
   and desire spiritual health; just as if a man were bodily sick, there
   could no earthly thing be so dear, nor so needful to him, nor so much
   would he desire it, as bodily health; for though thou shouldst give him
   all the dignities and riches of this world, and not make him whole (if
   thou couldst), thou pleaseth him not. Right so it is to a man that is
   sick spiritually, and feeleth the pain thereof; nothing is so dear, nor
   so needful, nor so much coveted by him, as is ghostly health, and that
   is Jesus, without whom all the joys of Heaven cannot please him. And
   this is the reason (as I take it) why our Lord when He took man's
   nature upon Him for our salvation, would not be called by a name
   betokening His infinite essence, or His wisdom, or His justice, but
   only by that which betokened the cause of His coming, namely, the
   salvation of man's soul, which salvation this name Jesus betokened.
   Hereby, then, it appeareth that none can be saved unless he love
   salvation, to have it through the mercy of our Lord Jesus only, by the
   merits of His passion; which love he may have that liveth and dieth in
   the very lowest degree of charity.

   Also I may affirm on the other side, that he that cannot love this
   blessed name Jesus with a spiritual joy, nor increase in it with
   heavenly melody here, shall never have nor feel in Heaven the fulness
   of sovereign joy, which he that could so love it in this life by
   abundance of perfect charity in Jesus shall then have and feel in
   Heaven, and so may their saying be understood.

   Nevertheless he shall be saved, and have great reward in Heaven from
   God, whosoever in this life is in the lowest degree of charity by
   keeping God's commandments. For our Lord saith: In My Father's house
   are sundry mansions. [94] Some are perfect souls, who in this life are
   filled with charity and graces of the Holy Spirit, and sing most
   sweetly and lovingly to God in Contemplation of Him, with wonderful
   sweetness and heavenly savour. These because they have most charity and
   grace of the Holy Ghost shall have the highest reward in the bliss of
   heaven, for these are called God's darlings. Others there be, not
   disposed or enabled to Contemplation, nor having the perfection of
   charity (as the apostles and martyrs had in the beginning of the holy
   Church), these shall have a lower reward in the bliss of Heaven, for
   these are called God's friends, for thus doth our Lord call them: Eat,
   O My friends, and be inebriated, O My darlings. [95] As if He had said:
   Ye that are My friends, because ye have kept My commandments, and
   preferred My love before the love of the world, and loved me more than
   any earthly thing, ye shall be fed with the spiritual food of the Bread
   of life. But ye that are more than My friends, that not only kept My
   commandments, but also of your own free will fulfilled My counsels, and
   loved Me entirely with all the powers of your souls, and burned in My
   love with spiritual delight (as especially did the apostles and martyrs
   and all other souls that through grace came to the gift of perfection)
   ye shall be made drunken with the noblest and freshest wine in My
   cellar, which is the supreme joy of love in heaven.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [92] Romans 10.

   [93] 1 St John 1.

   [94] St John 14.

   [95] Cant. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER III
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION I: That a Man should be industrious to recover again his ancient
      Dignity and reform within him the Image of the Trinity, and how it may be
      done

   NEVERTHELESS, though this that I have said be true, through the endless
   mercy of God to thee and to me and to all mankind we are not,
   therefore, in confidence hereof to be more careless, or wilfully
   negligent in our living; but the more busy to please Him, and the
   rather, because now we are restored again in hope by the passion of our
   Lord, to the dignity and bliss which we had lost by Adam's sin. Though
   we should prove not to be able to recover it fully here in this life,
   yet should we desire and endeavour to recover the image and likeness of
   the dignity we had, so that our soul might be reformed, as it were in a
   shadow, by grace to the image of the Trinity which we had by nature,
   and hereafter shall have fully in bliss. For that is the life which is
   truly contemplative to begin here, in that feeling of love and
   spiritual knowing of God, by opening of the spiritual eye, which shall
   never be lost nor taken away, but shall be perfected in a far higher
   manner in heaven. Thus did our Lord promise to St Mary Magdalen (that
   was a true Contemplative) when He told her that she had chosen the
   better part (which was the love of God in Contemplation) that should
   never be taken from her. [96]

   I do not say that in this life thou canst recover so whole and so
   perfect a cleanness and innocency, knowing and loving of God, as thou
   hadst at first, and shalt have hereafter, neither mayest escape all the
   wretchedness and pains of sin; nor that thou living in mortal flesh
   canst wholly destroy and kill within thee all false vain loves, nor
   eschew all venial sins, but that they will (unless they be stopped by
   great fervour of charity) spring out of thy heart, as water doth out of
   a stinking well. But I wish that if thou canst not fully quench it, yet
   thou mayest somewhat slack it, and come as near as thou canst to
   cleanness of soul. For our Lord promised to the children of Israel,
   when He led them into the land of Promise, and in them by a figure to
   all Christians, saying: All the land which thy foot shall tread upon
   shall be thine. [97] That is to say, so much land as thou canst tread
   upon with thy foot of true desire, so much shalt thou have in the land
   of Promise, namely, in the bliss of Heaven, when thou comest thither.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [96] Luke 10.

   [97] Deut. 11.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION II: That this Dignity and Image is restored by Jesus, and how He
      is to be desired, sought and found

   SEEK, then, that which thou hast lost, that thou mayest find it; for
   well I wot, whosoever once hath an inward sight, but a little of that
   dignity and that spiritual fairness which a soul hath by creation, and
   shall have again by grace, he will loathe in his heart all the bliss,
   the liking and the fairness of this world, as the stink of carrion; and
   he will never have any will or mind to do other deed, night or day
   (save what mere need of nature requireth) but desire, mourn, seek, and
   pray how he may come again thereto.

   Nevertheless inasmuch as thou hast not as yet seen what it is fully,
   for thy spiritual eye is not yet opened, I shall tell thee one word for
   all, in the which thou shalt seek, desire and find it; for in that one
   word is all that thou hast lost. This word is Jesus: I mean not this
   word Jesus painted upon the wall, as written in letters on the book, or
   formed by lips in sound of the mouth, or framed in thy mind by
   imagination, for in this wise may a man that is void of charity find
   Him; but I mean Jesus Christ, that blessed Person, God and Man, Son of
   the Virgin Mary, whom this name betokeneth; that is all goodness,
   endless wisdom, love and sweetness, thy joy, thy glory, and thy
   everlasting bliss, thy God, thy Lord, and thy salvation.

   If, then, thou feelest a great desire in thy heart to Jesus, either by
   calling to mind this name Jesus, or by minding, or thinking, or saying
   of any other word; or in Prayer, or Meditation, or any other deed which
   thou dost; which desire is so much, that it putteth out, as it were, by
   force all other thoughts and desires of the world, and of the flesh,
   that they rest not in thy heart; then seekest thou well thy Lord Jesus.
   And when thou feelest this desire to God, or to Jesus (for it is all
   one), holpen and comforted by a ghostly might, insomuch that it is
   turned into love, affection, and spiritual savour and sweetness, into
   light and knowing of truth, so that for the time, the point of thy
   thought is set upon no other created thing, nor feeleth any stirring of
   vainglory, nor of self-love, nor any other evil affection (for they
   cannot appear at that time), but this thy desire is only enclosed,
   rested, softened, suppled, and anointed in Jesus, then hast thou found
   somewhat of Jesus; I mean not Him as He is, but a shadow of Him; for
   the better that thou findest Him, the more shalt thou desire Him. Then
   observe by what manner of prayer, or meditation, or exercise of
   devotion thou findest greatest and purest desire stirred up in thee to
   Him, and most feeling of Him, by that kind of prayer, exercise or work
   seekest thou Him best, and shalt best find Him. Therefore if it come
   into thy mind, asking as it were of thyself: What has thou lost, and
   what seekest thou? lift up thy mind and the desire of thy heart to
   Jesus Christ, though thou be blind, and canst see nought of His
   Godhead, and say that: Him hast thou lost, and Him wouldst thou have,
   and nothing but Him, to be with Him where His is. No other joy, no
   other bliss in Heaven or in earth, but Him.

   And though it be so, that thou feelest Him in devotion, or in knowing,
   or by any other gift or grace, rest not there, as though thou hadst
   fully found Jesus; but forget that which thou hast found, and always be
   desiring after Jesus more and more, to find Him better, as though thou
   hadst right nought found in Him. For wot thou well, that what thou
   feelest of Him, be it never so much, yea, though thou wert ravished
   with St Paul into the third heaven, yet hast thou not found Jesus as He
   is in His joy, know thou, or feel thou never so much of Him, He is
   still above it. And therefore, if thou wilt fully find Him, as He is in
   His joy, do thou never cease from spiritual desiring and loving of Him,
   whilst thou livest.

   Verily I had rather feel and have a true an; clean desire in my heart
   to my Lord Jesus Christ, though I see little of Him With my spiritual
   eye, than to have without this desire all the bodily penance of all men
   living, all visions, all revelations of Angels appearing, all songs and
   sounding to the ear, all tastes and smellings, fervours or any
   delights, or bodily feelings, and (to be brief) all the joys of heaven
   and earth which are possible to be had, without this desire to my Lord
   Jesus. David the Prophet felt (as I conceive) this desire in himself,
   when he said thus: What have I in Heaven but Thee, and what can I
   desire on earth besides Thee? [98] As if he had said, Lord Jesus, what
   heavenly joy is liking to me without desire of Thee, whilst I am on
   earth, or without love of Thee when I come to Heaven? As who should
   say, right none. If, then, thou wilt feel anything of Him, bodily or
   spiritually, covet nothing but only to feel in truth within thee a
   desire of His grace and of His merciful presence, so that thou mayest
   think that it is not possible for thy heart to find any rest in
   anything but in Him. Thus coveted David, when he said thus: My soul
   hath coveted, or longed after, the desire of thy righteousness at all
   times. [99] Seek, then, as David did, desire by desire. And if thou
   feelest, by thy desire in prayers and in meditations, the familiar
   presence of Jesus Christ in thy soul, bind thy heart fast thereto, that
   it fall not from it; and if thou shouldst stumble, that thou mayest
   soon find Him again.

   Seek, then, Jesus, whom thou hast lost, for He would be sought, and is
   desirous to be found, for He Himself saith: Every one that seeketh
   findeth. [100] The seeking is painful, but the finding is joyful; do,
   therefore, after the counsel of the wise man, if thou wilt find Him: If
   thou shalt seek wisdom (that is Jesus) like silver, and as treasures
   shalt dig her up, then shalt thou understand the fear of our Lord, and
   shalt find the knowledge of God. [101] It behoveth thee to delve deep
   in thy heart, for therein Jesus is hid, and cast out perfectly all
   loves and likings, sorrows and fears of all earthly things, and so
   shalt thou find wisdom, that is Jesus.

   Be thou, then, like the woman in the Gospel, of whom our Lord saith:
   What woman is there, that hath lost her groat and doth not light a
   candle, and turn her house upside down, and seek till she finds it?
   [102] As who should say, there is none but would do so. And when she
   hath found it, she calleth to her friends, and saith to them thus: Make
   mirth with me and melody, for I have found my groat which I had lost.
   This groat is Jesus which thou hast lost, and if thou wilt find Him,
   light up a lanthorn, that is God's Word, as David saith: Thy Word is a
   lanthorn to my feet. [103] By this lanthorn shalt thou see where He is,
   and how to find Him. And if thou wilt, thou mayest together with this,
   light up another lanthorn, that is the reason of thy soul. For as our
   Lord saith: The lanthorn (or light) of thy body is thy bodily eye.
   [104] Right so may it be said, that the lanthorn of thy soul is reason,
   by the which thy soul may see all spiritual things. By this lanthorn
   mayest thou find Jesus, that is if thou hold up this lanthorn from
   underneath the bushel, as our Lord saith: No man lighteth a (candle or)
   lanthorn to set it under a bushel, but upon a candlestick. [105] That
   is to say, thy reason must not be overlaid with earthly business, or
   vain thoughts, and earthly affections, but always upwards, above all
   vain thoughts and earthly things as much as thou canst. If thou do so,
   thou shalt see all the dust, all the filth and small motes [106] in thy
   house (for He is light itself), that is to say, all fleshly loves and
   fears in thy soul. I mean not perfectly all; for as David saith: Who
   knoweth all his trespasses? [107] As who should say, no man. And thou
   shalt cast out of thy heart all such sins, and sweep thy soul clean
   with the besom of the fear of God, and wash it with thy tears, and so
   shalt thou find thy groat, Jesus; He is thy groat, thy penny, thy
   heritage.

   This groat will not be found so easily as tis thought, for this work is
   not of one hour nor of one day, but many days and years, with much
   sweat and labour of body [108] and travail of soul. And if thou cease
   not, but seek busily, sigh and sorrow deeply, mourn stilly, [109] and
   stoop low, till thine eyes water for anguish and for pain, for that
   thou hast lost thy treasure Jesus, at the last (when His will is) well
   shalt thou find thy groat Jesus. When thou hast found Him, as I have
   said, that is when in purity of conscience feelest the familiar and
   peaceful presence of that blessed man Jesus Christ, at least a shadow
   or glimmering of Him; thou mayest, if thou wilt, call all thy friends
   to thee to make mirth with thee and melody, for that thou hast found
   thy groat Jesus.

   See then the mercy and courtesy of Jesus. Thou hast lost Him, but
   where? Soothly in thy house, that is to say, in thy soul, that if thou
   hadst lost all thy reason of thy soul by its first sin, thou shouldst
   never have found Him again; but He left thee thy reason, and so He is
   still in thy soul, and never is quite lost out of it.

   Nevertheless thou art never the nearer Him till thou hast found Him. He
   is in thee, though He be lost from thee; but thou art not in Him till
   thou hast found Him. This is His mercy also, that He would suffer
   Himself to be lost only there, where He may be found, so that thou
   needest not run to Rome, nor to Jerusalem to seek Him there, but turn
   thy thoughts into thy own soul where He is hid, as the Prophet saith:
   Truly thou art the hidden God, [110] hid in thy soul, and seek Him
   there. Thus saith He Himself in the Gospel: The Kingdom of Heaven is
   likened to a treasure hid in the field, the which when a man findeth,
   for joy thereof, he goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that
   field. [111] Jesus is a treasure hid in the soul. Then if thou couldst
   find Him in thy soul, and thy soul in Him, I am sure for joy thereof
   thou wouldst part with the liking of all earthly things to have Him.
   Jesus sleepeth in thy heart spiritually, as He did sometime bodily when
   He was in the ship with His disciples; but they, for fear of perishing,
   wakened Him, and soon after He saved them from a tempest. Do thou so,
   stir Him up by prayer, and waken Him with great crying of desire, and
   He will soon rise and help thee.

   Nevertheless I believe thou sleepest oftener to Him than He doth to
   thee; for He calleth thee full oft with His sweet, secret voice, and
   stirreth thy heart full stilly, that thou shouldst leave all other
   jangling of other vanities in thy soul, and hearken only to Him. Thus
   saith David in the person of our Lord: Hear, O daughter, and consider;
   incline thine ear, and forget thy own people and thy father's house.
   [112] That is, forget the people of thy worldly thoughts, and the house
   of thy fleshly and natural affections. Here thou seest how our Lord
   calleth thee, and all others that will hearken to Him. And what
   hindereth thee that thou canst neither see nor hear Him? Soothly there
   is so much din and noise in thy heart of vain thoughts and fleshly
   desires, that thou canst neither hear Him nor see Him? Therefore put
   away those unquiet noises, and destroy the love of sin and vanity, and
   bring into thy heart the love of virtues and full charity, and then
   shalt thou hear thy Lord speak to thee.

   As long as Jesus findeth not His image reformed in thee, He is strange,
   and the farther from thee; therefore frame and shape thyself to be
   arrayed in His likeness, that is in humility and charity, which are His
   liveries, and then will He know thee, and familiarly come to thee, and
   acquaint thee with His secrets. Thus saith He to His disciples: Whoso
   loveth Me, he shall be loved of My Father, and I will manifest Myself
   unto him. [113] There is not any virtue nor any good work that can make
   thee like to our Lord without humility and charity, for these two above
   all others are most acceptable to Him, which appeareth plainly in the
   gospel, where our Lord speaketh of humility thus: Learn of Me, for I am
   meek and humble in heart. [114] He saith not, Learn of me to go
   barefoot, or to go into the desert, and there to fast forty days, nor
   yet to choose to yourselves disciples (as I did), but learn of Me
   meekness, for I am meek and lowly in heart. Also of charity He saith
   thus: This is My commandment, that ye love one another as I loved you,
   for by that men shall know you for My disciples. [115] Not that you
   work miracles, or cast out devils, or preach, or teach, but that each
   one of you love one another in charity. If therefore thou wilt be like
   Him, have humility and charity, Now thou knowest what charity is,
   namely, To love thy neighbour as thyself.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [98] Ps. 72.

   [99] Ps. 118.

   [100] St Matt. 8.

   [101] Prov. 2.

   [102] St Luke 15.

   [103] Ps. 118.

   [104] St Matt. 6.

   [105] St Luke 8.

   [106] Molle.

   [107] Ps. 18.

   [108] Swink.

   [109] Silently.

   [110] Is. 45.

   [111] St Matt. 13.

   [112] Ps. 44.

   [113] St John 14.

   [114] St Matt. 11.

   [115] St John 13.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IV
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION I: Of the Ground and Image of Sin in us, which is first to be
      found out and laboured against, and how it is to be done

   THOU hast heard already what thy soul is, and what dignity and beauty
   it had, and how it lost it, and also how it may by grace and busy
   travail be somewhat recovered again, in feeling, in part in this life.
   Now I shall tell thee (according to my feeble ability) how thou mayest
   enter into thyself to see the ground of sin, and destroy it as much as
   thou canst, and so recover a part of thy soul's dignity.

   To do this thou shalt cease for a time from all bodily works, and from
   all outward business as much as thou canst, then shalt thou draw thy
   whole thought into thyself from all thy bodily senses, which thou must
   hold in and restrain from wandering forth, so that thou take no heed of
   anything thou seest or hearest or feelest, and after this draw in thy
   thoughts nearer from all imaginations of any bodily deeds done before
   by thee, or of any other men's deeds; and this is not difficult to be
   done at that time when thou hast devotion, but thou must do it also
   when thou hast no such devotion, and then it will be somewhat
   difficult. And set thy intent and full purpose, as if thou wouldst not
   seek nor find anything but only the grace and spiritual presence of
   Jesus.

   This will be painful; for vain thoughts will press into thy heart very
   thick, to draw thy mind down to them. And in doing thus thou shalt find
   somewhat, but not Jesus whom thou seekest, but only a naked remembrance
   of His name. But what then shalt thou find. Surely this: a dark and
   ill-favoured image of thy own soul, which hath neither light of
   knowledge nor feeling of love of God. This image, if thou behold it
   heedfully, is all inwrapped and clothed with black stinking rags of
   sin, as pride, envy, anger, covetousness, gluttony, sloth and luxury.
   This is not the image of Jesus, but the image of sin, which St Paul
   calleth a body of sin and of death. [116] This image and this black
   shadow thou bearest about with thee wheresoever thou goest; out of this
   spring many great streams of sin, and small ones also. Just as out of
   the image of Jesus, if it be reformed in the beams of spiritual light
   will spring and ascend up towards heaven burning desires, pure
   affections, wise thoughts and all comeliness of virtues. Even so out of
   this image spring stirrings of pride, of envy and such other, which
   cast thee down from the comeliness of a man into a beast's likeness.

   Peradventure now thou beginnest to think with thyself what this image
   is like, and that thou shouldst not study much upon it, I will tell
   thee. It is like no bodily thing. What is it then, sayest thou? Verily
   it is nought, or no real thing, as thou shalt find, if thou try by
   doing as I have spoken; that is, draw in thy thoughts into thyself from
   all bodily things, and then shalt thou find right nought wherein thy
   soul may rest.

   This nothing is nought else but darkness of conscience, and a lacking
   of the love of God and of light; as sin is nought but a want of good,
   if it were so that the ground of sin was much abated and dried up in
   thee, and thy soul was reformed right to the image of Jesus; then if
   thou didst draw into thyself thy heart, thou shouldst not find this
   nought, but thou shouldst find Jesus; not only the naked remembrance of
   this name, but Jesus Christ in thy soul readily teaching thee; thou
   shouldst there find light of understanding and no darkness of
   ignorance, a love and liking of Him, and no pain of bitterness,
   heaviness or tediousness of Him. But because thou art not reformed,
   therefore when thy soul draweth into herself from all bodily things and
   delights, thou findest nothing but emptiness, darkness and heaviness;
   so that thou thinkest it an hundred years till thou be out again to
   some bodily delight or vain thoughts, and it is no wonder; for he that
   cometh home to his house, and findeth nothing but stink and smoke, and
   a chiding wife, he will quickly run out of it. Even so thy soul,
   finding no comfort in itself, but black smoke of spiritual blindness,
   or great chiding of guilty or fleshly thoughts, crying upon thee that
   thou canst not be in peace, verily it will quickly be weary of being
   alone and recollected, until it be out again. And this is the darkness
   of conscience.

   Nevertheless, in this dark conscience it behoves him to labour and
   sweat; that is to say, it behoveth thee to draw thy thoughts into
   thyself from all bodily things as much as thou canst, and then when
   thou findest right nought but sorrow and pain, and blindness in this
   darkness, if thou wilt find Jesus, thou must suffer the pain of this
   dark conscience, and abide awhile therein. And here also thou must
   beware that thou take Jesus Christ into thy thoughts against this
   darkness in thy mind, by busy prayer and fervent desire to God, not
   setting the point of thy thoughts on that aforesaid nought, but on
   Jesus Christ whom thou desirest. Think stiffly on His Passion and on
   His humility, and through His might thou shalt arise. Do as if thou
   wouldst beat down this dark image, and go through-stitch with it. Thou
   shalt hate and loathe [117] this darkness, and this nought, just as the
   devil, and thou shalt despise and all to break it. [118] For within
   this nought is Jesus hid in His joy, whom thou shalt not find with all
   thy seeking, unless thou pass this darkness of conscience.

   This is the ghostly travail I spake of, and the cause of all this
   writing is to stir thee thereto, if thou have grace. This darkness of
   conscience and this nought is the image of the first Adam. St Paul knew
   it well, for he said thus of it: As we have before borne the image of
   the earthly man, that is the first Adam, right so that we might now
   bear the image of the heavenly man, which is Jesus, the second Adam. St
   Paul bore this image oft full heavily, for it was so cumbersome to him
   that he cried out of it, saying thus: O who shall Deliver me from this
   body and this image of death? [119] And then he comforted himself and
   others also thus: The grace of God through Jesus Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [116] Rom. 6.

   [117] Agrise.

   [118] Brest it.

   [119] Rom. 7.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION II: What the said Image of sin is, properly, and what cometh out
      of it

   I HAVE already told thee of this image, that it is nought,
   Nevertheless, if thou canst not understand how this should be an image,
   seeing nought can be nothing else but nought, and so for all my telling
   thou canst make nothing of it, I shall therefore tell thee more plainly
   of this image as methinketh.

   This image is a false inordinate love of thyself. Out of this there
   come all manner of sins by seven rivers, Which are these: pride, envy,
   anger, sloth, covetousness, gluttony and lechery. Lo, this is somewhat
   that thou mayest understand. By some one of these rivers runneth out
   all manner of sin, and putteth thee out of the state of charity, if it
   be a deadly sin; or letteth the fervour of thy charity if it be venial.
   Now mayest thou grope [120] at least that this image is not altogether
   nought; but it is much of bad, for it is a great spring of love unto
   thyself, with such rivers as I have said.

   But now, sayest thou, how can this be true? For I have forsaken the
   world, and am shut up in a monastery; I meddle with no man, I chide
   not, I strive not, I neither buy nor sell, I have no worldly business,
   but by the mercy of God keep myself chaste, and withhold me from
   delights. And, besides this, I pray, I watch, I labour bodily and
   ghostly, as well as I can; how should this image then be so much in me
   as thou speakest of?

   To this I answer, granting thee that I hope thou dost all these works
   and more; and yet may it be true as I say. Thou art busy to thy power
   to stop these rivers without, but the spring within perhaps thou
   leavest whole. Thou art like to a man which had in his yard a stinking
   well, with many runnings from it, who went and stopped the runnings,
   and left the spring whole, and thought all was well; but the water
   sprang up at the ground of the well, and stood still insomuch that it
   corrupted all the fairness of his garden, and yet did no water run out.
   Right so may it be with thee, if it be so that thou hast by grace
   stopped the rivers of this image without, so far that all is done well,
   but beware of the spring within; surely unless thou stop and cleanse
   that as much as thou canst, it will corrupt all the flowers of the
   garden of thy soul, show they never so fair outwardly in sight of men.

   But now, sayest thou, whereby shall I know that the ground is stopped,
   if I go about it? As to this I shall tell thee, how by trying and
   experience thou shalt know this image if it be in thee, and how much it
   is in thee, and thereby shalt thou know how much it is stopped in thee,
   and how little also. And inasmuch as pride is the principal river, I
   shall begin with it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [120] To feel.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER V
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION I: Of the Seven Deadly Sins, and first of Pride, what it is, and
      when it is a deadly Sin and when but venial

   PRIDE is nothing else (as the learned say) but love of thy own
   excellency, that is, of thy own worship. The more thou lovest and
   likest thine own honour, the more thou hast of this pride; the more
   thou hast of this image in thee. If thou feel in thy heart a stirring
   of pride, that thou art holier, wiser, better and more virtuous than
   others, that God hath given thee grace to serve Him better than others
   do, and thinkest all others beneath thee, and thyself above them, or
   any other thought of thyself, which showeth to the eye of thy soul an
   excellency and a surpassing of others, and thou feelest a love and
   delight in this stirring, and a vain pleasing in thyself, that indeed
   thou art so; this is a token that thou bearest this black image, which,
   though it be privy from the eyes of men, yet it appeareth openly in
   God's sight.

   But thou sayest that thou canst not eschew such stirrings of pride, for
   oft thou feelest them against thy will, and therefore thou holdest them
   no sin; or, if they be sin, they be nought but venial.

   As to this, I answer that the feeling of these stirrings of pride, or
   of any other sin, which spring either out of the corruption of this
   foul image or by incasting or suggestion of the enemy, is no sin so far
   as to the feeling of them. Nevertheless, when by negligence and thy own
   blindness this feeling is received unwarily in thy thoughts, and turned
   into love and liking, then is there sin in it more or less according to
   the measure of this love, sometime venial and sometime deadly.

   This is a grace and privilege by virtue of Christ's passion granted to
   all Christians baptized in water and the Holy Ghost. For verily to Jews
   and Saracens, who believe not in Jesus Christ, all such stirrings are
   deadly sins. For St Paul saith: Whatsoever is done without faith in
   Christ is sin. But we Christians have this privilege through His mercy,
   that such feelings are no sins, but the pain of original sin.

   But when it is venial and when it is deadly I cannot fully tell thee;
   nevertheless, a little I shall say, as methinketh. When the stirrings
   of pride are received and turned into liking, so far that the heart
   chooseth them for a full rest and a full delight, and seeketh no other
   end, but only the liking therein, then is this pride deadly sin; for he
   maketh and chooseth this delight as his god, without any opposing of
   his reason or will, and therefore it is deadly sin.

   But now, sayest thou, who is such a fool as to choose pride for his
   God? No man living, sure, will do so. To this I answer that I cannot
   tell thee in special who sinneth deadly in pride. But in general I
   shall say that there be two sorts of pride, one bodily and the other
   spiritual. Bodily pride is of fleshly living men; spiritual is of
   hypocrites and heretics. These three sin deadly in pride; I mean such
   fleshly living men as St Paul speaks of: If ye live after the flesh, ye
   shall die. [121] Then say I thus: That a worldly man who loveth and
   seeketh principally the worship of himself, and chooseth the liking of
   it as the rest of his heart, and the end of his bliss, he sinneth
   deadly.

   But now thou wilt say: Who doth choose the love of his worship, credit
   or honour, instead of his God; I answer, that he that loveth his
   worship, as for to seem better and greater of estate than any other,
   and travaileth about it as much as he can; if he love it so much that
   for the getting, or keeping, or the saving of it, he breaketh the
   commandment of God, or breaketh love and charity to his neighbour, or
   is ready, or in full will to break it rather than he would forbear his
   worship, or lose anything of it, either in his name, or in his estate,
   or of fulfilling his will; soothly he sinneth deadly, for he loveth his
   worship, and chooseth it more than the love of God and of his
   neighbour. And nevertheless, the man that sinneth thus deadly will say
   with his mouth that he will not choose pride for his god, but he
   beguileth himself, for he chooseth it for his god in his deeds.

   Nevertheless, another worldly man that loveth his own worship and
   pursueth after it, if he love it not so much, that he would not for the
   getting or the saving of it do a deadly sin, or break charity to his
   neighbour, he sinneth not deadly but venially, more or less according
   to the measure of his love and of his liking, with other circumstances.

   But a man or woman that disposeth himself or herself, to live
   contemplatively, if it be so that he forsake himself as to his own
   will, and offer up himself wholly to God with a full general will, that
   he will not sin in pride wittingly, nor have any joy in himself
   wilfully, but only in God, as far as he can, and may; and
   notwithstanding after this full will offered up to God, feeleth many
   stirrings of vain-glory, and delighteth in them for the time (because
   at the first he did not so well perceive them), this liking is but
   venial sin, and, namely, if it be so, that when he cometh to himself he
   reproveth himself, and withstandeth this stirring with displeasure of
   his will, and asketh mercy and help of God; then the liking which
   before was some sin, our Lord of his mercy soon forgiveth it; and
   moreover he shall have reward [122] for his good travail in
   withstanding it.

   And this is a courtesy of our Lord, granted to all those who are
   specially His servants and domestics [123] of His court, as are all
   those that for His love forsake, with a good true will, all worldly and
   all fleshly sin, and give themselves wholly both body and soul unto His
   service, with all their might and cunning, as do truly Anchorites
   enclosed, and all truly religious persons, who for the love of God and
   salvation of their own souls enter into any religious order approved by
   holy Church. Or else, if it be so, that they enter first for worldly
   respects, or for their bodily sustenance, or some other such; if they
   repent them and turn it into a spiritual respect, as for the service of
   God; these as long as they keep this will and pursue it as well as
   their frailty will permit, are true religious persons.

   Also, what man or woman soever he be; in what degree soever he liveth
   in holy Church, priest, clerk or layman, widow, maid or wife that will
   for the love of God and salvation of his, or her, own soul forsake all
   the worships and likings of this world, in the world, in his or her
   heart truly and fully betwixt God and themselves, and all unnecessary
   business and earthly things, even to what they have bare need of, and
   offer up their will entirely to be His servants, in the constant
   exercise of devout prayers and holy thoughts, with other good deeds
   that they may do bodily and ghostly, and keep their will whole to God
   stedfastly, all such are God's special servants in holy Church. And for
   this good will and good purpose that they have by the gift of God, they
   shall increase in grace and in charity here all their life long; and
   they shall have for this special will a special reward in the bliss of
   heaven above other chosen souls, who offered not wholly their will and
   their body to God's service, neither openly nor privately as they did.
   All these, whom I call God's servants, and of His court more specially,
   if they, through frailty and ignorance, when they feel such stirrings
   of vainglory, for the time delight therein, and perceive not that they
   do so, for that their reason and senses are letted through that liking
   which they feel, so that they cannot so well see those stirrings, they
   sin not deadly in this liking of vainglory. For that will that they
   have in general set in their heart before, to please God, and to
   forsake all manner of sin, if they knew it, keepeth them here, that
   they sin not deadly in such stirrings, and in all other that come of
   frailty, and will keep them still as long as the ground of that will is
   kept whole.

   I say moreover for thy comfort, and for the comfort of all others who
   live in the state of Anchorets enclosed, and also by God's grace, for
   the comfort of all them that enter into any religious order approved in
   holy Church, that all those who through the mercy of God among them
   shall be saved, shall have a special reward, and a singular worship in
   the bliss of heaven; for their state of living before other souls that
   had not that state in holy Church, though they were never so holy;
   which worship is better than all the worship of this world without
   comparison; for if thou couldst see what it is, thou wouldst not for
   the worship of this world, if thou mightest have it without sin, change
   thy state either of Anchoret or of religious, neither lose that
   singular reward in heaven, which reward is called the Accidental
   Reward.

   Nevertheless, that other men may not mistake this that I say, therefore
   I shall say it more plainly. Thou shalt understand that there be two
   rewards in the bliss of heaven, which our Lord giveth to chosen souls.
   The one is Sovereign and Principal, and is called the Essential Reward,
   and that is the knowing and loving of God according to the measure of
   charity given by God to the soul while she lived here in mortal body.
   This reward is best and Sovereign, for it is God Himself, and is common
   to all the souls that shall be saved, in what state or degree soever
   they live in holy Church, more or less according to the quantity and
   the muchness of their charity in this life, what degree soever they
   live in. For he that loveth God by charity most shall have most reward
   in the bliss of heaven for he shall there love God and know Him most
   and that is the Sovereign, or Essential reward, and according to this
   reward it may and shall fall out, that some manner of man or woman, as
   a lord or a lady, knight or esquire, merchant or ploughman, or what
   degree he be, in man or Yeoman may and shall have more reward than some
   priest or friar, monk or canon, or Anchoret enclosed. And why so?
   Soothly, because he loved God more in charity.

   Another reward there is that is Secondary, or Accidental, which our
   Lord giveth for special good deeds, which a man doth voluntarily, over
   that he is bound to do. Of these deeds three principal ones the Doctors
   of holy Church do make mention of, namely, Martyrdom, Preaching and
   Virginity. [124] These works, inasmuch as they pass all others in
   excellency, shall have a special reward, which is called an Aureola,
   which is nought else but a singular worship and a special token
   ordained by God for reward of that special deed they did above others,
   over and above that Sovereign or Essential reward of the love of God
   which is common to him and to all others. Right so it is of all other
   special good deeds, which, if they be done sincerely, are specially
   acceptable in the sight of God, and in the judgement of holy Church are
   very excellent, as are the enclosing of Anchorets, done by the
   authority of holy Church, also entering into religion approved, and the
   stricter that the religion is, the more excellent is the deed in the
   judgement of holy Church.

   Also after these, and beneath these, are the taking of the order of
   Priest, either for cure of men's souls, and to minister the Sacraments
   of holy Church, or else for singular Devotion to please God, and profit
   our neighbour, by the sacrifice of the precious body of our Lord Jesus
   Christ. Soothly these are special deeds, and declared to be excellent
   by the judgement of holy Church, and in the sight of our Lord. When
   they are done truly for God, they are excellent, and shall have special
   reward, each man in his degree, in the bliss of Heaven. The state of
   Bishop and Prelate is above all these deeds, as to the Accidental
   reward. That this is so, appeareth out of holy Writ, where it saith
   thus in the Prophet Daniel: But go thou until the time prefixed, and
   thou shalt rest and stand in thy lot until the end of the days; [125]
   which is to say thus much: The Angel when he had showed Daniel the
   secrets of God, he said to him thus: Go thou to the rest of this bodily
   death, and thou shalt stand in thy lot as a prophet at the last day.
   And verily as Daniel shall stand as a prophet at the last day of doom,
   and have the worship and excellency of a prophet above the Sovereign
   blessed reward of the love and sight of God, right so shalt thou stand
   as an Anchoret in that lot, and a Religious in the lot of the
   Religious, and so shall it be with other excellent deeds, and have a
   singular worship, passing other men at the day of doom.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [121] Rom. 8.

   [122] Mede.

   [123] Homely.

   [124] Manhood.

   [125] Dan. 12.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION II: How Pride in Heretics and in Hypocrites is deadly sin

   AN heretic sinneth deadly in pride, for he chooseth his rest and
   delight in his own opinion, and in his own sayings, for he imagineth
   them to be true; which opinion or sayings are against God and holy
   Church, and, therefore, he sinneth mortally in pride, for he loveth
   himself and his own will and wit so much, that though it be plainly
   against the ordinance of holy Church, he will not leave it, but resteth
   thereon, as upon the truth, and so maketh he it his god; but he
   beguileth himself, for God and holy Church are so united and accorded
   together that whoso doth against the one doth against both. And,
   therefore, he that saith he loveth God, and keepeth His biddings, and
   despiseth holy Church, and setteth at nought the laws and ordinances
   thereof, made by the head and supreme thereof appointed to govern all
   Christians, he lieth, for he chooseth not God, but chooseth the love of
   himself, contrary to the love of God, and so sinneth mortally. And
   wherein he imagineth most to please God, he most displeaseth Him; for
   he is blind, and will not see.

   Of this blindness and this false resting of an heretic in his own
   feeling, speaketh the wise man thus: There is a way that seemeth right
   to a man, and the last end of it bringeth him to endless death. [126]
   This way specially is called heresy: for other fleshly sinners that sin
   mortally and lie therein, commonly condemn themselves, and feel biting
   in conscience, because they go not the right way; but an heretic
   supposeth that he doth well, and teacheth well, yea, and that no man
   doth and teacheth so well as he, and so judgeth his way to be right,
   and, therefore, feeleth he no biting of conscience nor humility in
   heart. And, soothly, if God of His great mercy sendeth him not humility
   at the last end, he goeth to hell. And, nevertheless, yet weeneth he to
   have done well and that he shall get the bliss of Heaven for his
   teaching.

   The hypocrite also sinneth deadly in pride. He is an hypocrite that
   chooseth vain joy in himself, as the rest and full delight of his heart
   in this manner.

   When a man doth many good deeds bodily and ghostly, and then is put
   into his mind by the suggestion of the enemy, the beholding of himself
   and those good deeds, how good, how holy he is, how worthy in men's
   deem, and how high in God's sight, above other men, he perceiveth this
   stirring, and receiveth it willingly, for he judgeth it to be good, and
   from God, forasmuch as it is true (for he doth these good deeds better
   than other menu). And when it is received thus by consent of his will,
   there ariseth from it in his heart so great a love and delight in
   himself, that he hath so much grace, that for the time it ravisheth his
   mind out of all other thoughts, both corporal and spiritual, and
   setteth it upon vain joy in himself, as on a rest of his heart. This
   ravishing in spiritual pride is delectable, and, therefore, he keepeth
   it, holdeth it, and nourisheth it as much as he can. For this love and
   delight he prayeth, watcheth, weareth haircloth, and doth other
   afflictions, and all these trouble him but little. He pretends to love
   God, and thanketh Him sometimes with his mouth; sometimes wringeth a
   tear out of his eye, and then he thinketh all safe enough. But soothly,
   all this is for love of himself which he chooseth, and mistaketh for
   love and joy in God, and therein lies all his sin. Not that he
   willingly chooseth sin, as it is sin, but chooseth this delight and joy
   that he takes for good, as the rest and repose of his soul. Which,
   because he doth without any striving against it, or displeasure at it
   in his will, therefore is it sin; for he judgeth it to be a joy in God,
   and it is not so, and, therefore, sinneth he mortally. Job saith thus
   of an hypocrite: The joy of an hypocrite is as it were for a moment. If
   his pride rise up even to the heavens, and his head touch the clouds,
   at the last end he shall be cast out as a dung-heap. [127] The joy of
   an hypocrite is but a point, for if he worship himself never so much,
   and joy in himself never so much, all his lifetime, and bepaint himself
   with all his good deeds, in the sight and praisings of the world, at
   the last it will prove right nought but sorrow and pain.

   But thou wilt say: Sure there be few or none such that are so blind as
   to hold and choose vain joy in themselves for joy in God.

   As to this I cannot answer, nor will, though I could; only I will tell
   thee this one thing, that there be many hypocrites, and, nevertheless,
   they think themselves to be none, and that there be many that dread and
   fear themselves to be hypocrites, and soothly are none; who is the one,
   and who is the other, God knows, and none but He. Whoso will humbly
   dread, shall not be beguiled; and whoso thinketh himself secure, he may
   lightly fall. For St Paul saith: Whose esteemeth himself to be
   something, whereas indeed he is nothing, he beguileth himself. [128]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [126] Prov. 14.

   [127] Job 20.

   [128] Gal. 4.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION III: A short Exhortation to Humility and Charity, with a
      Conclusion how a Man may know how much Pride he hath in him

   Now by what hath been said, thou mayest (if thou wilt understand them)
   conceive comfort for thy degree of living, and also matter of humility.
   For though it be true, that (in case thou come to Heaven) thou shalt
   there receive so much reward in special, for thy state of life;
   nevertheless it may be that there is many a wife, and many a woman,
   living at large in the world, that shall be nearer God than thou, and
   shall love God more, and know Him better than thou, for all thy
   religious state, and that ought to be a shame to thee. Yet if thou
   labour to get love and charity as fully and as perfectly as those that
   live in the world (for thou mayest have it by the gift of God, as much
   as they that live in worldly business), then shalt thou have as much of
   the Sovereign or Essential reward as they; and, moreover, shalt also
   have another singular and accidental reward and worship, for thy state
   of Religion which the others shall not have. If then thou wilt do well,
   be humble, and forget thy state, as if it were right nought; for in
   sooth it is so, that is, right nought in itself. And let thy desire and
   business be to destroy sin, and to get charity, and humility, and other
   ghostly virtues, for therein lieth all.

   I have well-nigh forgotten that image I spake of, but now I turn again
   thereto. If thou wilt know how much pride is therein, thou mayest try
   it thus: Look to it wisely, and flatter not thyself; if loving,
   praising or worshipping, or human favours of worldly men or others, be
   pleasing to thy heart, and thou turnest them into vain gladness, and
   well paying of thyself, thinking secretly in thy heart, that men ought
   to praise thy life, and reward thy speeches more than other men's; and
   also on the contrary, if it be so, that when men reprove thee, and set
   thee at nought, hold thee for a fool, or an hypocrite, or slander thee,
   or speak evil of thee falsely, and in any other way disease [129] thee
   unreasonably, and for this thou feelest in thy heart a grievous
   heaviness against them, and a great rising in thy heart, with an
   unwillingness to suffer any shame or disgrace in the sight of the
   world; if, I say, it be thus with thee, it is a token that there is
   much pride in this dark image, seem thou never so holy in the sight of
   men. For though these stirrings be but little and venial, nevertheless
   they show well that there is much pride hid in the ground of thy heart,
   as the fox dareth in his den. These stirrings, with many more, spring
   so fast out of this image that thou scarcely canst do any good deed but
   it will be mingled with some pride or vain delight in thyself, and so
   with thy pride thou defileth all thy good deeds, and makest them
   loathesome in the sight of thy Lord. I say not that they are lost
   because they are mingled with this pride. But I say that those good
   deeds are not so pleasant to thy Lord as they would be if they were
   simple and truly rooted in the virtue of humility. And, therefore, if
   thou wilt have cleanness of heart, to come to the love of God, it
   behoveth thee not only to fly the rest and repose of thy heart in
   vain-glory, by willingly consenting to pride, and also the wretchless
   liking therein out of frailty against thy will, but also the very
   feeling itself of pride, as well as thou canst, which will not be done
   unless thou be full quick and diligent about the keeping of thy heart,
   as I shall tell thee hereafter.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [129] Defame.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VI
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION I: Of Envy and Wrath and their Branches, and how, instead of sin,
      the Person is often hated

   TURN this image upside down, and look well therein, and thou shalt find
   two members or limbs of envy and anger fastened thereto, with several
   branches springing out of them, which hinder the love and charity which
   thou oughtest to have toward thy neighbour. The branches of these two
   sins are these: Hatred, evil suspicion, false and rash or unskilful
   judging, melancholy, risings of heart against them, despising,
   unkindness, and backbiting, or other ill-speaking of them, misliking,
   unskilful or causeless blaming of them, misconstruing their words or
   deeds, anguish and heaviness against those that despise us, or speak
   any evil of us, or speak against us, a joy or gladness at their pain, a
   selfness or bitterness against sinful men and others that will not do
   as we think they should do, with great desire and eagerness of heart
   (under colour of charity and justice), that they were well punished and
   chastised for their sin.

   Such motions and stirrings as these seem good; nevertheless, if thou
   ransack it well, thou shalt find it more fleshly and sensual sometimes
   against the person than spiritual against the sin; for thou shouldst
   love the man, be he never so sinful, and hate the sin in every man
   whatever he be. Many are beguiled in this, for they set the bitter
   instead of the sweet and take darkness instead of light, contrary to
   the prophet, saying: Wo to you who call evil good, and good evil;
   putting darkness for light, and light for darkness; putting bitter for
   sweet, and sweet for bitter. [130] Thus do all they who, when they
   should hate the sin of their neighbour and love his person, hate the
   person instead of the sin, and imagine that they hate the sin.
   Wherefore it is a special craft and art by itself whoso can do it well.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [130] Is. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION II: That it is a Mastery and noble Skill to love Men's Persons,
      and yet wisely to hate their sins, and how

   IT is no mastery to watch and fast till thy head ache; nor to run to
   Rome or Jerusalem on pilgrimage upon thy bare feet; nor for to stir
   about and preach, as if thou wouldst turn all men by thy preaching. Nor
   is it any mastery to build churches or chapels, or to feed poor men and
   build hospitals. But it is a mastery for a man to love his neighbour in
   charity, and wisely hate his sin, and love the man. For though it be
   true that all those deeds before said be good in themselves, yet are
   they common to good men and to bad, for every man may do them if that
   he would and have wherewith. And for thee to do that which every man
   may do, I hold it no mastery; but to love thy neighbour in charity and
   hate his sin can no man do, save only good men, who have it by the gift
   of God and not by their own travail, as St Paul saith: Love and charity
   is shed abroad in your hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given to you.
   [131] And, therefore, it is more precious and more dainty to come by.
   All other good deeds without this make not a man good nor worthy of the
   bliss of heaven, but this alone, and only this, maketh a man good and
   all his good deeds to be medeful. All other gifts of God and works of
   man are common to good and bad, to the chosen and the reprobate; but
   this gift of charity is proper only to good and chosen souls.

   And, therefore, for the learning of this hard lesson, thou must
   understand and consider that a good man for the love of God fasteth,
   watcheth, goeth on pilgrimage and forsaketh all the pleasures of the
   world sincerely in his heart, without feigning, and he hath his reward
   in heaven; and an hypocrite doth the same deeds out of vain-glory and
   for love of himself, and receiveth his reward here. Also, a true
   preacher of God's Word, filled with charity and humility, sent of God
   and received and approved by the Church, if he preach and teach God's
   Word, shall have a special reward of God; that is the aureola for his
   preaching. And an hypocrite or an heretic that hath no humility or
   charity, nor is sent of God nor yet of holy Church, if they preach,
   they have their reward here. Also a good man living in the world for
   the love of God buildeth many churches, chapels, abbeys, hospitals and
   doth other many good deeds of mercy, and he shall have his reward in
   the bliss of heaven, not for the deed in itself, but for the good will
   and the charity that he hath in him by the gift of God for to do these
   good deeds. Another man out of vanity of himself and worship and
   pleasing of the world and for his own name doth the same good deeds,
   and hath his reward here. The cause in all these is that the one hath
   charity and the other none; but which is the one and which is the
   other, our Lord knoweth, and none but He.

   From this, therefore, we are to learn these two lessons. First, that we
   should love and worship all men in our hearts, and approve and think
   well of and receive all their deeds that have the likeness of goodness,
   though the doers be bad in the sight of God, except they be the deeds
   of known and open heretics, or of open cursed (or excommunicated) men;
   for of these two we are specially to fly and eschew their company and
   coming amongst them. And we are also to reprove and refuse their deeds,
   seem they never so good, as long as they are rebels to God and holy
   Church. And if a worldly, cursed (or excommunicated) man build a
   church, or feed poor men, thou mayest safely hold and judge such his
   doings to be noughts and deem them as they are. Also if an open
   heretic, who is a rebel to holy Church, preach and teach, though he
   convert a hundred thousand souls, thou mayest hold the deed, as to
   himself, right nought; for these men are openly out of charity, without
   which all is nought that a man doth.

   Secondly, that it is a great mastery for a man to know how and to be
   able to love his neighbour in charity; all which may be plainly proved
   by St Paul's words, thus: If I speak with the tongues of men and
   angels, if I have not charity, I am right nought; and if I have so
   great faith that I can overturn hills and bear them away, and have not
   charity, I am right nought. And also, though I had all manner of
   knowledge of all mysteries, and if I give all that I have to the poor,
   and my body to be burnt, and have not charity, it profiteth me right
   nought. [132]

   Here it seemeth by St Paul's words that a man may do all good deeds
   bodily without charity, and that charity is nought else but to love God
   and his neighbour as himself. How should, then, any wretched caitiff
   upon earth, whatever he be, have any delight or trust or security in
   himself for anything he doth or is able to do with all his bodily
   powers or natural wit, sith all this is nought worth without love and
   charity to his neighbour? And this charity cannot be gotten by his own
   working, for it is the free gift of God, sent only into an humble soul,
   as St Paul saith. Who then dare be so bold as to say: I have Christ, or
   I am charity? Verily no man can say it securely, [133] or of a
   certainty, but he that is perfectly and truly humble; other men may
   trow of themselves, and hope that they be in charity by tokens; but he
   that is perfectly humble feeleth it, and therefore may say it securely.
   Thus humble was St Paul, and therefore said he thus of himself: Who
   shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
   anguish, or distress, [134] etc.? And he answereth himself, and saith:
   I am persuaded that no creature shall be able to separate me from the
   charity of God in Christ Jesus. Many men do deeds of charity, and have
   no charity, as I have said. To reprove a sinner for his sin to his
   amendment, in a convenient time, is a deed of charity; but to hate the
   sinner instead of the sin, is against charity. He that is verily humble
   can part the one from the other, and none but he. For though a man had
   all moral virtues of all the philosophers, he could not do this; he
   could be able to hate sin in other men (for he hateth it in himself),
   but he could not be able to love the man in charity, with all his
   philosophy. Also, if a man had the knowledge of all books and divinity,
   and be not withal truly humble, he shall lightly stumble and err in
   this point, and take the one for the other. But humility is worthy to
   receive a gift from God, which cannot be gotten or learned by cunning
   of man, and therefore he that is humble can hate the sin and truly love
   the man.

   But now peradventure thou beginnest to be afraid for that which I have
   said, that charity cannot be gotten by any work that thou canst do; how
   shalt thou then do

   To this I answer, that there is nothing so hard to get as charity; this
   is truth, as to the getting of it by our own travail and labour. And,
   on the contrary, I say that there is no gift of God that may so lightly
   or easily be had as charity, for our Lord giveth no gift so freely, nor
   so gladly, nor so commonly, as He doth it. How shalt thou, then, have
   it, sayest thou? Be meek and lowly in spirit and thou shalt have it;
   and what is lighter to be done than to be humble? Soothingly nothing.
   Then it followeth that there is nothing so lightly to be had as
   charity, and, therefore, thou need not be much afraid; be humble, and
   have it. Thus saith St James: Our Lord resisteth the proud, but giveth
   grace to the humble. Which grace is properly charity; for according to
   the measure of thy humility, so shalt thou have charity. If thou have
   humility imperfectly only in will, not in affection, then hast thou
   imperfect charity, which indeed is good, for it sufficeth for
   salvation, as David saith: Lord, with the eyes of mercy thou seest my
   imperfection. [135] But if thou have humility perfectly, then shalt
   thou have perfect charity, and this is best. The other we must
   necessarily have if we will be saved. This we should ever desire and
   labour for. If thou ask me now who is perfectly humble, I shall tell
   thee no more concerning humility at this time but this: He is humble
   that truly knoweth himself as he is.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [131] Rom. 5.

   [132] 1 Cor. 13.

   [133] Sickerly.

   [134] Rom. 8.

   [135] Ps. 138:16.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION III: How a Man shall know how much Wrath and Envy is hid in the
      ground of his Heart, and how he may know whether he loves his Enemies, and
      the Examples we have thereof in our Saviour

   Now turn we again to this image. If thou wilt, try how much anger and
   envy is hid in thy heart, which thou feelest and perceivest not. Look
   well and behold thyself wisely when such stirrings of anger and envy
   against thy neighbour spring out of thy heart. The more that thou art
   stirred by melancholy or wicked will against him, the more is this
   image in thee. For the more thou grudgest by impatience, either against
   God for any tribulation or sickness, or other bodily disease sent by
   Him, or against thy neighbour, for aught that he doth against thee, the
   less is the image of Jesus reformed in thee. I say not that such
   grudgings or fleshly angriness are deadly sins; but I say that they
   hinder the cleanness of heart and peace of conscience, that thou canst
   not have perfect charity, by the which thou shouldst come to life
   Contemplative. For that end is the purpose of all my saying, that thou
   shouldst not only cleanse thy heart from deadly sins, but also from
   venial as much as thou canst; and that the ground of sin might by grace
   of Jesus Christ be somewhat shaked in thee.

   For though it be so that thou feelest no evil against thy neighbour for
   a time, yet art thou not secure that the ground of anger is quenched in
   thee; neither yet art thou lord and master of the virtue of charity.
   For let him but touch thee a little angrily, or by a shrewd word, and
   thou shalt see presently whether thy heart be yet made whole by perfect
   charity. The more thou art stirred and evil-willed against his person,
   the further art thou from charity. And if thou be nothing stirred
   against his person, neither by any angry carriage or gesture outwardly,
   nor by any privy hate in thy heart, either to despise or judge him, or
   undervalue, or set him at nought; but the more shame or villainy he
   doth to thee by word or deed, the more pity and compassion thou hast of
   him, as thou wouldst have of a man that were out of his wits, and
   thinkest that thou canst not find in thy heart to hate him (because
   love is so good in itself) but pray for him and help him and desire his
   amendment, not only with thy mouth, as hypocrites can do, but with
   affection of love in thy heart; then hast thou perfect charity to thy
   neighbour.

   This charity had St Stephen perfectly when he prayed for them that
   stoned him to death. This charity counselled Christ to those that would
   be His perfect followers when He said thus: Love your enemies, do good
   to them that hate you, pray for them that persecute you. [136] And,
   therefore, if thou wilt be one of Christ's followers, be like Him in
   this craft. Learn to love thine enemies and sinful men, for all these
   are thy neighbours. Look and bethink thee how Christ loved Judas, who
   was both His deadly enemy and a sinful caitiff; how goodly Christ was
   to him, how benign, how courteous, and how lowly to him whom He knew to
   be damnable. And nevertheless He chose him to be His apostle, and sent
   him to preach with His other apostles. He gave him power to work
   miracles; He showed the same good cheer to him in word and deed as He
   did to other apostles. He washed his feet, and fed him with His
   precious Blood, and preached to him as He did to His other apostles. He
   bewrayed him not openly (for He did it privily); He miscalled him not,
   despised him not, never spake evil of him; notwithstanding if He had
   done all these things, He had said nothing but truth. Moreover, when
   Judas took Him, He kissed him, and called him His friend. All this
   charity showed Christ unto Judas, whom He knew to be damnable; and this
   He did in no way of counterfeiting or flattering, but in reality and
   truth of good love and clean charity. For though it was true that Judas
   was not worthy to have any gift from God, or any sign of love for his
   wickedness; nevertheless, it was worthy and seemly that our Lord should
   show Himself to be that which He is, and that is love and goodness to
   all His creatures, as He was to Judas. I say not that He loved him for
   his sin, nor that He loved him as one of His chosen, as He did St
   Peter; but He loved him inasmuch as he was His creature, and showed him
   tokens of love, if he would have been mended thereby. Follow thou His
   example somewhat as much as thou canst; for though thou art shut up in
   a house as to thy body, nevertheless in thy heart (where the seat of
   love is) thou mayest have part in such love to thy neighbour, as I have
   spoken of.

   Whoso thinkest himself to be in his life a perfect lover and follower
   of Christ's teaching (as some men perhaps esteem themselves to be,
   because they preach and teach, and are poor in worldly goods, as Christ
   was) and cannot follow Christ in this love and charity, to love their
   neighbours, even every man, both good and bad, friend and foe, without
   feigning or flattery, or despising him in his heart, without angriness
   or malicious reproving, soothly he beguileth himself. The nearer he
   thinketh himself to be to Christ's example, the further is he off; for
   Christ said to them that would be His disciples, thus: This is My
   bidding, that you should love one another as I have loved you. [137]
   For if ye love as I have loved, then are ye My disciples.

   But now thou wilt say: How shall I love him that is bad as well and
   truly as him that is good?

   To this I say thus: That thou shalt love both good and bad in charity,
   but not for the same cause as I shall tell how. Thou shalt love thy
   neighbour as thyself. Now, thou shalt love thyself only in God, or else
   for God. In God thou lovest thyself, when thou art righteous and
   virtuous through grace, and lovest not thyself but only for that
   righteousness and virtues that God giveth thee, then lovest thou
   thyself in God, for thou lovest not thyself, but God. Also, thou lovest
   thyself for God, when being in deadly sin thou desirest to be made
   righteous and virtuous, for then thou lovest not thyself as thou art
   (for thou art unrighteous), but as thou wouldst be. Right so shalt thou
   love thy neighbour. If he be good and righteous thou shalt love him by
   charity in God only; in that he is good and righteous; for then lovest
   thou God (who is goodness and righteousness) in him, and so thou lovest
   him more than if he were bad or in deadly sin. As, for example, thy
   enemies who hate thee, or any other of whom thou hast full evidence
   they are not in grace; yet notwithstanding shalt thou love them, not as
   they are, nor as good and righteous men (for they are bad and
   unrighteous), but thou shalt love them for God, that they may be good
   and righteous. And so shalt thou hate nothing in them, but that thing
   which is contrary to righteousness, and that is sin. This is as I
   understand the doctrine of St Augustine, for to distinguish the love of
   the man from the hatred of his sin, and the love of thy neighbour. He
   that is humble, or desires truly to be humble, can thus love his
   neighbour, and none but he.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [136] S. Matt. 5.

   [137] St John 13.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VII: Of Covetousness and how a Man may know how much of it is hid in
    his Heart

   HEAVE up this image, and look well about it, and into it, and then
   shalt thou see covetousness and love of earthly things possess a great
   part of this image, though it seem little of it. Thou hast forsaken
   riches and the having much of this world, and art shut up in a cell,
   but hast thou cleanly forsaken the love of all this? I fear not yet,
   for it is less mastery to forsake worldly goods than to forsake the
   love of them. Peradventure thou hast not forsaken thy covetousness, but
   only hast changed it from great things unto small; from a pound unto a
   penny, and from a silver dish unto a dish of a halfpenny. This is but a
   simple change; thou art no good merchant. These examples are childish,
   nevertheless they signify much more. If thou believe not what I say,
   put thyself upon the trial. If thou have love and delight in the having
   and holding of anything that thou hast, how mean soever it may be, with
   the which love thou feedest thy heart for a time, or if thou have a
   desire and yearning for to have something that thou hast not, with the
   which desire thy heart is disquieted and stumbled through unreasonable
   thinking of the thing, that the pure desire of virtue and of God cannot
   rest therein; this is a sign that there is covetousness in this image.
   And if thou wilt put thyself further to the trial, look if anything
   that thou hast be taken away from thee by violence, or by borrowing, or
   any other way, so that thou canst not get it again, and for this thou
   art disquieted, angered, and troubled in thine heart, both for the loss
   of that thing which thou wouldst have again, and canst not; and also
   art stirred against him that hath it, to strive and chide with him that
   may restore it, and will not, this is a token that thou lovest worldly
   goods. For thus do worldly men when their goods and riches are taken
   from them; they are heavy, sorry and angry, chiding and striving with
   them that have them, openly, both by word and deed. But thou dost all
   this in thy heart privily, where God seeth, and therein thou art in
   more default than a worldly man; for thou hast forsaken in appearance
   the love of worldly things, but a worldly man hath not so, and
   therefore he is excused, though he strive and pursue for his goods by
   lawful means, for to have them again.

   But now sayest thou, that it behoveth thee to have thy necessaries of
   such things as belong unto thee, as well as a worldly man. I grant well
   thereto; but thou shouldst not love it for itself, nor have liking in
   the holding nor in the keeping, nor feel sorrow and heaviness in the
   losing, or in the withdrawing of it. For as St Gregory saith: As much
   sorrow as thou hast in losing of a thing, so much love hast thou in the
   keeping of it. And therefore if so be thy heart made whole, and thou
   hadst truly felt a desire of spiritual things, and therewith hadst a
   true sight of the least spiritual thing that is, thou wouldst set at
   nought all the love and liking of any earthly thing, it would not
   cleave to thee.

   For to love and have more than thou reasonably needest, only for lust
   and liking, is a great fault. Also, to fix thy love upon the thing
   which thou needest, for the thing itself, is a fault also, but not so
   great. But to have and use that thing that thou needest without love of
   it, more than nature and need requireth, without which the thing cannot
   be used, is no fault.

   Soothly in this point I fear that many who have taken upon them the
   state and likeness of poverty are much letted and hindered in their
   pursuit of the love of God; I accuse no man, nor reprove any state, for
   in each state there be some good, and some otherwise; but one thing I
   say to every man or woman that hath taken the state of voluntary
   poverty, whether he be religious or secular, or what degree he be in,
   as long as his love and his affection is bounden and fastened, and as
   it were glued with the love of any earthly thing, which he hath, or
   would have, he cannot have nor feel soothfastly the clean love, and the
   clear sight of spiritual things. For St Austin said to our Lord thus:
   Lord, he loveth Thee but little, that loveth anything with Thee, which
   he loveth not for Thee. For the more love and covetousness of any
   earthly thing is with thee, the less is the love of God in thy heart.
   For though it be so, that this love of earthly things putteth them not
   out of charity; but if it be so much that it strangleth the love of God
   and of their neighbour, verily it hindereth and letteth them from the
   fervour of charity, and also from that special reward which they should
   have in the bliss of heaven for perfect poverty, and that is a great
   loss if thou couldst see it. For who so could understand the spiritual
   reward, how good, how precious and how worthy it is (for it is
   everlasting), he would not for the love of all earthly joy, or having
   all earthly things (though he might have them without sin) hinder, no,
   nor lessen the least reward of the bliss of heaven, which he might have
   if that he would; but God knows I speak more than I do myself. But I
   pray thee do thus as I say, by the grace of God, if thou canst, or any
   other man that will, for it would be a comfort to my heart (though I
   have it not in myself that which I say) that I might have it in thee,
   or in any other creature, which hath received more plenty of His grace
   than I.

   But see, now then, since covetousness, in the naked ground of it,
   letteth a man or woman so much from the spiritual feeling of the love
   of God, how much more, then, doth it let and cumber worldly men and
   women, who by all their wits and bodily business night and day, study
   and travail how they may get riches and plenty of worldly goods? They
   can have no other delight but in worldly things; nay, they will not,
   for they seek it not. I say no more of them at this time; for in this
   writing I spake not to them. But this I say, that if they would see, or
   could see what they do, they would not do so.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VIII
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION I Of Gluttony and how a Man shall know when he sinneth not in
      Eating and Drinking, and when he sinneth venially, and when deadly

   STILL mayest thou see more in this image, though it be dark, namely,
   sensual love to thyself, in gluttony, sloth and lechery. These fleshly
   likings make a man full beastly, and far from the inward savour of the
   love of God and from the clear sight of spiritual things. But thou wilt
   say that thou must needs eat and drink and sleep, which thou canst not
   do without liking, therefore thou thinkest this liking is no sin.

   As unto this I say: That if in eating, drinking and other takings of
   necessaries for thy body, thou observe and keep measure; which is that
   thou do but what is needful for nature, and thou receivest or admittest
   no further pleasure or delight in the taking, than the nature of the
   thing doth needs bring with it; and all this thou dost not of purpose
   to please thy sensuality, but for ghostly delight which thou feelest in
   thy soul, and the upholding of thy body in the service of God, I grant
   that for a truth thou then sinnest right nought therein, but mayest
   well eat and sleep in that manner as thou hast mentioned.

   Soothly and without doubt I am full far from knowing how to do better
   in this point, and further from doing of it, for to eat I have by kind
   or nature, but to skill how to eat, I cannot but by the grace of God.
   St Paul had this cunning by the grace of God, as he saith himself thus:
   I am cunning in all things, through Him that strengtheneth me; for I
   can hunger, and I can eat, I can with plenty, and I can with poverty, I
   can do all things. St. Austin saith thus to our Lord: Lord, thou hast
   taught me that I should take meat as a medicine: hunger is a sickness
   of my nature, and meat is a medicine thereof. Therefore the liking and
   delight that cometh therewith, and accompanieth eating, inasmuch as it
   is natural, and followeth of necessity, it is no sin; but when it
   passeth into lust, and into a voluntary and sought or intended
   pleasure, then it is sin.

   Therefore here lieth all the mastery and skill to be able to
   distinguish wisely need from lust and voluntary liking, being so knit
   together that the one cometh with the other. So that it is hard to take
   the one (which is the meat or drink) as need requireth, and to reject
   or not to admit the other, namely, the voluntary and willingly admitted
   lust and liking, which often cometh under the colour of need.

   Nevertheless, sith it is so, that need is the ground of this, and that
   need is no sin; for be a man never so holy, it behoveth him to eat, and
   drink and sleep; therefore the lust and liking that cometh under the
   colour of this need, and often exceedeth this need, is the less sin.
   For it is true that he who chooseth lust and the liking of his flesh,
   and delight in welfare of meat or drink, as the full rest of his heart
   that he would never have any other life nor other bliss, but live ever
   in such lust of his flesh, if he might, it is no doubt but he sinneth
   deadly; for he loveth his flesh more than God. But he that lieth in
   deadly sin of pride or envy, or such other, he is so blinded by the
   devil, that for the time he hath no power of his free will, and
   therefore he cannot well withstand fleshly likings when they come, but
   falleth down willingly to them, as a beast doth to carrion; and
   inasmuch as he hath no general will before to God principally, because
   that he is in deadly sin, therefore the lust of gluttony into which he
   falleth easily, is to him deadly sin, for he maketh no resistance
   either general or special. But another man or woman, who being in grace
   or charity, hath alway a good general will to God in his soul, whether
   he sleep or wake, eat or drink, or whatsoever good deed he doth, so
   that it be not evil in itself; by the which will and desire he chooseth
   God above all things, and had rather forbear all things in the world,
   than anger his God for love of Him. This will, though it be but
   general, is of so great virtue through the grace of our Lord Jesus,
   that if he fall by frailty in lust and in liking of meat and of drink,
   or of such other infirmity, either by exercise, in eating too much, or
   too often, or too greedily, or too lusty and delicately, or too often
   before the set times of eating, it saveth and keepeth him from deadly
   sin. And this is truth, as long as he is in charity in his other works,
   and keepeth his general will in all that he doth; and especially if
   anon after such his miscarriage he acknowledge his own wretchedness and
   cry for mercy, and be in purpose specially to withstand such fleshly
   lusts for the time to come. For our Lord is good and merciful, and
   forgiveth right soon these venial sins and miscarriages, or excesses
   about meat and drink (by reason that the occasions of them are hardest
   to eschew, because of the necessity there is of seeking and taking of
   them for the upholding of our corporal lives and healths) unto an
   humble soul.

   And these stirrings and likings of gluttony, among all other sins, are
   most excusable and least perilous. And therefore thou shalt not rise
   against the ground of this sin as thou shalt against the ground of all
   other sin, for the ground of this sin is only natural need and
   necessity, the which thou canst not eschew, unless thou shouldst do
   worse, namely, slay this need (as many unwise persons do, by destroying
   their bodies or healths), whereas they should only slay the thief and
   spare the true man. That is to say, slay unreasonable lust and sensual
   voluntary liking, and spare and keep natural liking and corporal
   ability, and they do not so. But against all other sins thou shalt
   arise to destroy, not only deadly sins and the greater venials, but
   also against the ground of them by suppressing the stirrings and
   motions of them, and also avoiding the occasions and motives and
   incentives to them as much as thou canst; but this thou canst not do
   here with all thy skill, for thou canst not live without meat and
   drink, but thou mayest live without lechery or carnal pleasure if thou
   wilt, and never better than when without it. And therefore thou shalt
   not fly only the deeds of it (namely, the doing of any external thing
   against chastity) but also thou shalt suppress and destroy within thee
   all mere inward and mental desires against the virtue of chastity (the
   which mental desires or thoughts are sometimes only venial sins, and
   sometimes mortal); but also thou shalt labour against the ground of the
   said sin, and seek to destroy the feeling and the rising of fleshly
   stirrings.

   But this travail and labour against the ground of lechery must be
   spiritual, by prayers and spiritual virtues, and not by bodily penance
   only; for wot thou well, that if thou fast and watch and scourge
   thyself, and do all that thou canst, thou shalt never have cleanness
   and chastity without the gift of God, and without the grace or virtue
   of humility. Thou shalt sooner kill thyself, than kill fleshly
   stirrings and feelings of lust and lechery, either in thy heart or in
   thy flesh, by any bodily penances; but by the grace of Jesus, in an
   humble soul, the ground may be much stopped and destroyed, and the
   spring may be much dried, the which will cause true chastity in body
   and in soul.

   The same may be said of pride and of covetousness, and of such other,
   for thou mayest live though thou wert not proud at all, nor covetous,
   nor luxurious, and therefore thou shalt labour to destroy the very
   feelings of them as much as thou canst, and so seek to cleanse and take
   away the very ground of those sins. But in gluttony it is otherwise,
   because the ground thereof, which is natural appetite and need, must
   remain as long as thou livest, therefore must thou only arise and fight
   against the unreasonable desires of thy natural appetite therein, the
   which do creep in under pretense, and by occasion of the said just and
   reasonable need; smite these unreasonable stirrings, and keep the
   ground whole.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION II: That a Man should be busy to put away and hinder all Motions
      of sin, but more busy about those of Spiritual sins than those of Bodily

   AND therefore he that riseth against the feeling of fleshly liking in
   meat and drink, more fully and more sharply than against those of
   pride, or covetousness, or lechery, or envy (the which because they be
   more spiritual and less perceivable, seem perhaps less evil, and are
   less reprehended). I say that he is half-blind, for he seeth not his
   spiritual uncleannesses (as of pride and envy), how foul they are in
   God's sight, for, I believe that if a man could see with his spiritual
   eye how foul pride and covetousness are in God's sight, and how
   contrary they are to Him, he would more loathe a stirring of pride, and
   the vain liking of it; and also he would more abhor and rise against
   that evil will of envy, or anger to his neighbour than many a stirring
   or liking either of gluttony or of lechery. Nevertheless, all men do
   not think so, for commonly men are more shy or troubled to feel a
   stirring of fleshly sin, and have for it more sorrow and heaviness than
   for great likings in vain-glory or in other ghostly sins. But they are
   not wise; for if they would understand the holy Scriptures and sayings
   of doctors they should find it as I say, which I neither may nor will
   rehearse now.

   I will not excuse them that fall in the likings and delights of
   gluttony and lechery, as if they sinned not; for I wot well that all
   the kinds of them are sins more or less, according to the measure of
   the lust and misbehaviour in the sin, and other likings, with
   consideration of how far voluntary it was with other circumstances. But
   my desire is, that thou mightest know and esteem all sins according as
   they are, indeed, the greater to be the greater, as are spiritual sins;
   and the less to be the less, as are fleshly or sensual sins; and yet
   nevertheless would I have thee to hate and fly all, both bodily and
   spiritual, with all thy might. For know thou well, that fleshly desires
   and unreasonable likings in meat and drink, or any likings that belong
   to the body, exceeding reasonable needs, though they be not always
   great sins to him that is in charity. Nevertheless, to a soul that
   desireth cleanness and purity of heart, and a spiritual feeling of God,
   they are full heavy, painful and bitter, and greatly to be eschewed;
   for the spirit cannot feel his kindly savour within, till the flesh
   hath lost his beastly savour without.

   And, therefore, if thou wilt come to cleanness of heart, thou must
   strive against the unreasonable stirrings of fleshly desires, but
   against the ground of them thou shalt not rise; for the ground of it is
   Need, as natural hunger, which thou must necessarily feel, and must
   attend thereto, and satisfy it in fitting time and manner, and help
   thyself against it by medicine of meat, as thou wouldst help thyself in
   a reasonable manner against a bodily sickness, that thou mayest more
   freely serve God both bodily and spiritually. For know thou well, that
   what man or woman that shall be occupied spiritually in thoughts, great
   pain or hunger wilfully undertaken or bodily sickness or pain in the
   stomach, or in the head, or in other parts of the body for want of good
   ruling of themselves in too much fasting, or in any other way, will
   much let the spirit, and much hinder him from the knowing and beholding
   of spiritual things, unless he have much grace, and be arrived to great
   abilities in the Contemplative life. For though it be true, that bodily
   pain either of penance, or of sickness, or of bodily occupation,
   sometime letteth not the fervour of love to God in devotion, but oft
   increaseth it, yet I believe that they let the fervour of love in
   Contemplation, the which may not be had nor felt fully, but in rest and
   freedom of body and soul from all the aforesaid corporal pains, wants,
   employments and solicitudes.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION III: What Remedy a Man should use against the Faults in Eating and
      Drinking

   THEREFORE, thou shalt behave thyself discreetly about thy body,
   yielding it necessaries reasonably, and then let God send thee what He
   pleaseth, either health or sickness; take it gladly, and grudge not
   willingly against Him.

   Do as I say, take thy meat as it cometh, or provide it according to
   reason, and take it gladly, as a thing that thou needest; but be well
   aware of lusts that cometh with need, eschew too much as well as too
   little. And having done, if after it there arise in thee a remorse or
   biting of conscience, that thou hast eaten too much, and thereupon thou
   becomest sad and heavy with overmuch bitterness against thyself, lift
   up the desire of thy heart to thy good Lord Jesus, and acknowledge
   thyself a wretch, and a beast, and ask Him forgiveness, and say that
   thou wilt amend it, and pray that he will forgive thee. Leave off then,
   and think no further of it, nor strive so much with the vice, as if
   thou wouldst destroy it utterly, for it is not worth the doing so,
   neither shalt thou be ever able to bring it about that way; but set
   thyself about some other business bodily or ghostly, according as thou
   findest thyself best disposed, that thereby thou mayest profit more in
   other virtues, as in humility and charity. For wot thou well, that he
   that hath in his desire and in his endeavours no other respect to no
   other thing but Humility and Charity, always crying after them, how he
   may have them, he shall through such desire and manner of working
   profit and increase, not only in those two virtues, but also in all
   other virtues together with them, as in chastity, abstinence and such
   other (though he have but a little regard to them in comparison of the
   other, namely, Humility and Charity) more in one year than he should,
   without the said desire and manner of working, profit in seven years,
   though he strive against gluttony, lechery and such other continually,
   and beat himself with scourges each day from morning to even-song time.

   Set thyself, therefore, about Humility and Charity, and using all thy
   diligence and industry to come by them, yet shalt thou have enough to
   do in getting of them. And if thou canst get them, they will direct
   thee, and measure thee privily and secretly, how thou shalt eat, and
   how thou shalt drink, and succour all thy bodily needs, that there
   shall no man know of it, unless thou thyself do tell it him, and that
   thou shalt not be in perplexity, scruples, vexation, anguishment, or
   heaviness, nor with any lust or adhering to the delights and likings of
   sensuality, but shalt do all in peace of a glad conscience with all
   quietness and satisfaction. I have spoken more than I thought to have
   done in this matter, but nevertheless do (as far as thou canst) as I
   say, and I hope God shall make all well.

   By this that I have said, thou mayest in some measure see into this
   image of sin, and perceive how much it hinders thee. The Gospel saith,
   how that Abraham spake to the rich man that was buried in hell, on this
   wise: There is betwixt us and you a great chaos; [138] that is to say,
   a thick darkness betwixt thee and us, that we cannot come to thee, nor
   thou to us. This dark image in thy soul and mine may be in like manner
   called a chaos, that is, a great darkness, for it letteth us that we
   cannot come to Abraham, which is Jesus, and it letteth Him, that He
   will not come to us.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [138] St Luke 16.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IX: Of the Five Windows of this dark Image, and what cometh in by
    them, and how they are to be ordered

   LIFT up thy lanthorn, and thou shalt see in this image five windows, by
   which sin cometh into thy soul, as the Prophet saith: Death cometh in
   by our windows. [139] These are the five senses by which thy soul goeth
   out of herself, and fetcheth her delight, and seeketh her feeding in
   earthly things, contrary to the nobility of her own nature. As by the
   eye to see curious and fair things, and so of the other senses. By the
   unskilful using of these senses willingly to vanities, thy soul is much
   letted from the sweetness of the spiritual senses within; and therefore
   it behoveth thee to stop these windows, and shut them, but only when
   need requireth to open them.

   And this would be little mastery or difficulty for thee to do, if thou
   didst once see thy own soul by clear understanding what it is, and how
   fair it is in its own nature, and so is still, were it not so overlaid
   with a black mantle of this foul image. But because thou knowest it
   not, therefore leavest thou the inward sight of thyself, and seekest
   thy food without, abroad, like a brute beast. Thus saith our Lord in a
   threatening way to a chosen soul in holy Writ: Thou fairest among
   women, if thou knowest not thyself, go out, and walk after the steps of
   the flock of thy fellows, and feed thy kids. [140] And it is as much as
   to say: Thou soul, fair by nature, made after the likeness of God,
   frail in thy body as a woman, by reason of the first sin, that thou
   knowest not thyself, nor how that angels' food should be thy delights
   within, therefore goest thou out by thy bodily senses, and seekest thy
   meat and thy liking as a beast of the flock, that is as [141] one
   outcast and rejected, and therewith thou feedest thy thoughts and thine
   affections, which are unclean as goats. It is a shame for thee to do
   so.

   And, therefore, turn home again into thyself and hold thee within, and
   beg no more without, namely, swines' meat. For if thou wilt needs be a
   beggar, ask and crave within of thy Lord Jesus, for He is rich enough,
   and gladlier would give thee than thou canst ask, and run no more out
   as a beast of the flock, that is a worldly man or woman, that hath no
   delight but in his bodily senses. And if thou do thus, thy Lord Jesus
   will give thee all that thou needest, for He will lead thee into His
   wine cellar, and make thee to taste and try His wines, which liketh
   thee best for he hath many tuns. Thus a chosen soul, joying in our
   Lord, saith of Him in holy Writ: The King brought me into His wine
   cellar. [142] That is to say: Inasmuch as I forsook the drunkenness of
   fleshly lusts and worldly likings, which are bitter as wormwood,
   therefore the King of bliss, the Lord Jesus, led me in; that is, first
   into myself for to behold and know myself, and after He led me into His
   cellar; that is to say, above myself by ascending and passing into Him
   alone, and gave me a taste of His wine; that is for to taste a
   certainty of spiritual sweetness and heavenly joy. These are not the
   words of me, a wretched caitiff, living in sin, but they are the words
   of the spouse of our Lord in holy Writ; and these words I say to thee,
   to the end that thou mightest draw in thy soul from without, and follow
   on further as well as thou canst.

   I will show thee furthermore (for thy desire draweth more out of my
   heart than I thought to have said in the beginning) when the use of thy
   senses be deadly sin, and when venial. Thus, therefore, our Lord saith
   in the Gospel: A man made a great supper, and called many thereto, and
   sent his servant at supper-time, after them that were bidden. The first
   excused himself, and said on this wise, that he could not come, for he
   had bought a farm. The other also excused himself, that he could not
   come, for he had bought five yoke of oxen, and went to try them. The
   third, for that he had married a wife. [143] I forbear to speak of the
   first and of the last, and will tell ye of the middlemost of them, that
   had bought the oxen, for he is to our purpose. Five yoke of oxen
   betoken the five senses, which are beastly as an ox. Now this man that
   was called to the supper was not rejected because he bought the oxen,
   but because he went to try them, and so he would not come. Right so say
   I to thee; for to have thy senses, and to use them in need, it is no
   sin, but if thou go voluntarily to try them by vain delights in
   creatures, then it is sin. And if thou choose that delight as a final
   rest of thy soul, and as a full liking, that thou carest not to have
   any other bliss but such worldly vanities, then is it deadly, for thou
   choosest it as thy God, and so shalt thou be put from thy supper; for
   St Paul forbids us to use our senses in that manner when he said thus:
   Thou shalt not go after thy lusts, nor voluntarily try thy likings. A
   man or a woman that is encumbered with deadly sin shall hardly escape
   deadly sin in this business, though he perceiveth it not; but I hope
   this toucheth not thee.

   Nevertheless, if thou through frailty delight thee in thy senses, and
   in such vanities, but yet keepest thyself in charity and the grace of
   God as to other things, and choosest not this delight for a full rest
   of thy soul, but always settest up God above all things in thy desire,
   this sin in thee is venial; and that more or less according to its
   circumstances; nor shalt thou for these venial sins be put from the
   supper in the bliss of heaven, but thou shalt want the tasting and the
   assaying of that delicate supper, whilst thou livest here on earth,
   unless thou be busy with all thy might to withstand and conquer such
   venial sins, for though it be so that venial sins break not charity,
   yet soothly they let the fervour and the ghostly feeling of charity.

   But thou wilt say again, that thou canst not keep from hearing of
   vanities, for divers, both those that live in the world and others,
   come oft to speak with thee, and tell thee some tales of vanity.

   As unto this I say thus, that thy communing with thy neighbour is not
   much hurt to thee, but helpeth thee sometimes, if thou order thy
   business wisely; for that thou mayest try and find out thereby the
   measure of thy charity to thy neighbour, whether it be much or little.
   Thou art bounden (as all other men and women are) to love thy neighbour
   principally in thy heart, and also in deeds to show him tokens of
   charity, as reason asketh, according to thy might and knowledge. And
   since it is so that thou oughtest not to go out of thy house to seek
   occasion how thou mightest profit thy neighbour by deeds of charity,
   because thou art enclosed; nevertheless thou art bound to love all men
   in thy heart, and to show some tokens of true love to them that come to
   thee. And therefore, whoso will speak with thee, whatsoever he be, or
   of what degree soever, though thou knowest not what he is, nor why he
   cometh, yet be thou soon ready with a good will to ask what his will
   is, be not dainty, nor suffer him long to wait for thee, but look how
   ready and how glad thou wouldst be if an angel of heaven should come
   and speak with thee, so ready and so buxom be thou in will for to speak
   with thy neighbour when he cometh to thee, for thou knowest not what he
   is, nor why he cometh, nor what need he hath of thee, or thou of him,
   till thou hast tried. And though thou be at prayer, or at thy
   devotions, that thou thinkest loth to break off, for that thou thinkest
   that thou oughtest not leave God for to speak with anyone, I think not
   so in this case, for if thou be wise thou shalt not leave God, but thou
   shalt find Him, and have Him, and see Him, in thy neighbour, as well as
   in prayer, only in another manner.

   If thou canst love thy neighbour well, to speak with thy neighbour with
   discretion shall be no hindrance to thee. Discretion shalt thou have on
   this manner as me thinketh; Whoso cometh to thee, ask him meekly what
   he would have; and if he come to tell thee his disease or trouble and
   to be comforted by thy speech, hear him gladly, and suffer him to say
   what he will, for ease of his own heart; and when he hath done, comfort
   him if thou canst, gladly, gently and charitably, and soon break off.
   And then, after that, if he will fall into idle tales, or vanities of
   the world, or of other men's actions, answer him but little, and feed
   not his speech, and he will soon be weary, and quickly take his leave.

   If it be another man that cometh to teach thee, as some Churchman,
   etc., hear him humbly, and with reverence to his order; and if his
   speeches comfort thee, ask of him more what thou needest, and take not
   upon thee to teach him, for it falleth not to thy share to teach a
   priest, but in case of necessity. If his speech comfort thee or profit
   thee not, answer little, and he will soon take his leave.

   If it be another man that cometh to give thee his alms, or else for to
   hear thee speak, or to be taught by thee, speak gently and humbly to
   them all, reprove no man for his faults, for that belongeth not to
   thee, unless he be the more homely or familiar with thee, that thou
   knowest that he will take it well from thee. And to be short in this
   matter of thy telling of another of his faults, I say, that when thou
   conceivest that it will do him good (namely, in his soul) thou mayest
   tell him thy mind, if thou hast opportunity, and if he is likely to
   take it well. And above all other things, in this matter of conversing
   with thy neighbour, keep silence as much as thou canst, and then shalt
   thou see that by so doing thou shalt in short time be troubled with
   little press or company that would come to hinder thy devotions. This
   is my opinion herein; do thou better if thou canst.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [139] Jerem. 9.

   [140] Cantic. 1.

   [141] Reprieved.

   [142] Cantic. 2.

   [143] St Luke 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER X: Of another Hole or Window that is to be stopped as well as the
    Windows of the Senses, namely, the Imagination

   BUT thou wilt say that thou hast done all this, namely, stopped the
   windows of thy five senses, so that thou seest no worldly things, nor
   hearest them, nor hast any use of thy senses, more than need requireth;
   and for that end thou art enclosed. And to this I answer: If thou do
   thus, as I hope thou dost, then hast thou stopped a great window of
   this image, but yet art thou not secure; for that thou hast not stopped
   the privy holes of the imaginations of thy heart. For though thou seest
   me not with thy bodily eye, yet mayest thou see me at the same time in
   thy soul by imagination; and so mayest thou do of all bodily things.
   If, then, thou feedest thy soul willingly and wittingly by imaginations
   of vanities of the world, and desiring of worldly things; as a comfort
   or pleasure and ease; verily though thy soul be kept within as to thy
   bodily senses, it is notwithstanding far without by such vain
   imaginations.

   But now thou wilt ask me whether it be any great sin for a soul to busy
   itself in such vanities, either by the outward senses or by the inward
   imaginations and thoughts. As unto this I say; that I would never have
   thee ask any man this question; for he that will truly love God, he
   asketh not commonly, whether this or that be the greater sin? For he
   will think that whatsoever letteth him from the love of God is a great
   sin, and will think nothing sin but that thing which is not good, and
   letteth him from the love of God. What is sin but a wanting or a
   forbearing of good? I say not that it will or ought to grieve him so
   much as a mortal sin would, or a venial sin should, neither say I but
   that he knoweth and distinguisheth a mortal sin from a venial, and
   fleeth it more than the other.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XI: A Brief Rehearsal of what hath been said in the former Chapters,
    with a Portraiture of this dark Image of sin

   BY this that I have said mayest thou see a little the darkness of this
   image of sin, not that I have described it fully to thee as it is, for
   I cannot; nevertheless by this little thou mayest see more if thou look
   well.

   But thou wilt say, how know you that I bear about me such an image as
   you speak of? To which I answer, that I may take to me a word said by
   the prophet, which is this: Inveni idolum mihi--I have found an idol in
   myself; [144] that is, a false image, which some call an idol, very
   foul, disfigured and misshapen with wretchedness of all those sins
   which I have spoken of, by the which I am cast down into fleshly or
   sensual pleasures and worldly vanities, from cleanness of heart, and
   feeling of spiritual virtues, more than I can or may say: and such fall
   of mine much grieveth me, and I cry God mercy for it. By this
   wretchedness which I feel in my own self, more than I have said, may I
   the better tell thee of thy image, for we all came of Adam and Eve,
   clothed with clothes of beasts' skins, as the Scripture saith: Our Lord
   made to Adam and his wife clothes of a beast's hide. [145] In token
   that by sin they were come to be misshapen like to a beast, in which
   beastly clothes we all are born, and wrapped, and disfigured from our
   kingly shape.

   This then is an ugly image to look upon; whose head is pride; for pride
   is the first and principal sin, as the wise man saith: The beginning of
   all manner of sin is pride. [146] The back and hinder part of it is
   covetousness, as St Paul saith: I forget that which is behind (vizi,
   all worldly things) and I stretch forward to that which is before.
   [147] The breast (in which is the heart) is Envy; for it is no fleshly
   sin, but it is a devil's sin, as the wise man saith: By envy of the
   devil death came into the world, [148] for all those that are of his
   party follow him therein. The arms of it are wrath, inasmuch as a man
   wreaketh or revengeth himself by his arms, contrary to Christ's bidding
   in the Gospel: If a man smite thee upon one cheek, thou shalt not smite
   him again, but offer him the other. [149] The belly of this image is
   gluttony, as St Paul saith: Meat serveth for the belly, and the belly
   for meat, but God shall destroy them both; [150] namely, at the last
   day, when shall be the full reforming of his chosen, and damning of the
   reprobate, The members of it are lechery, of the which St Paul saith
   thus: Yield not your members to be instruments of iniquity unto sin;
   especially to this sin of lechery. The feet of it are sloth; therefore
   the wise man said to the slow and lazy person (to stir him up to do
   good deeds), Run, make haste, raise thy friend, [151] that is to say,
   run quickly about to good works, and make haste, for the time passeth,
   and raise up thy friend, which is Jesus, by devout Prayer and
   Meditation. Here hast thou heard the members of this image.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [144] Joel 12.

   [145] Gen. 3.

   [146] Ecclus. 10.

   [147] Phil. 3.

   [148] Wisd. 2.

   [149] St Matthew 5.

   [150] 1 Cor. 4.

   [151] Prov. 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XII: A comparing of this Image with the Image of Jesus, and how it
    is to be dealt with

   THIS is not the image of Jesus, but it is liker an image of the Devil,
   for the image of Jesus is made of virtues, with humility and perfect
   love and charity; but this is made of false fleshly love to thyself,
   with all those members, spoken of in the former chapter, fastened
   thereto. This image bearest thou, and every man whatsoever he be, until
   by grace of Jesus it be somewhat destroyed and broken down. Thus David
   seemeth to say in the Psalter: Man passeth away as an image, and is
   troubled in vain. [152] Which is as if he had said: Though it be so
   that man in the beginning was made after the image of God, stable and
   stedfast; nevertheless because of sin, he proceedeth far in this image
   of sin, living in this world, by the which he is unstable and troubled
   in vain. Also St Paul speaketh of this Image thus: As we have
   heretofore borne the image of the earthly man, the first Adam, that is,
   the image of sin, Right so now (if we will come to the love of God) let
   us bear the image of the heavenly man Jesus, [153] which is the image
   of virtues.

   What shalt thou do with this image? I answer thee by a word that the
   Jews said to Pilate of Christ--Crucify Him. Take thou this body of sin,
   and do Him on the Cross; that is to say, break down this image, and
   slay the false love of sin in thyself; as Christ's body was slain for
   our sins and trespasses; right so it behoveth thee, if thou wilt be
   like Christ, slay thy bodily liking and fleshly lusts in thyself. Thus
   said St Paul: Those that are Christ's followers have crucified and
   slain their flesh (that is, the image of sin) with all the lusts, [154]
   and the unreasonable desires and appetites of it. Slay then and break
   down Pride, and set up Humility; also break down Anger and Envy, and
   raise up Love and Charity to thy neighbour. Also instead of
   Covetousness, poverty of Spirit; instead of Sloth, fervour in devotion
   with cheerful readiness to all good deeds; and instead of Gluttony and
   Lechery, Sobriety and Charity in body and soul. This considered St
   Paul, when he said thus: Putting off the old man with all his members,
   which is rotten according to the desires of error, ye shall shape you
   and clothe you in the new man, which is the image of God by holiness
   and righteousness [155] and perfection of virtues. Who shall help thee
   to break down this image? Verily thy Lord Jesus. In the virtue and in
   the Name of Him shalt thou break down this mawment (or idol) of sin,
   pray to Him earnestly, and desire it, and He shall help thee.

   Gather then thy heart together, and do after the counsel of the wise
   man, when he saith thus: With all diligence keep thine heart, for out
   of it cometh life, [156] and that is when it is well kept, for then
   wise thoughts, clean affections and burning desires of virtues and of
   charity, and of the bliss of Heaven come out of it, making the soul to
   live a blessed life. But on the contrary, if it be not kept, then as
   our Lord saith in the Gospel, evil thoughts and unclean affections come
   out of the heart which defile the man. They either benumb and kill the
   life of the soul by mortal sin, or else they enfeeble the soul and make
   it sick, if they be venial. For what is a man but his thoughts and his
   loves? These alone make a man good or bad. So much as thou lovest God
   and thy neighbour, and knowest Him, so much is thy soul, and if thou
   love Him little, little is thy soul, and if thou love Him not at all,
   nothing at all is thy soul. It is nothing as to good, but it is much as
   to sin. And if thou wilt know what thou lovest, look and observe what
   thou thinkest upon most, for where our love is, there is our eye; and
   where our liking is, upon that our heart is thinking most. If thou love
   God much, thou likest to think much upon Him, and if thou love Him
   little, then little dost thou think upon Him. Rule well thy thoughts
   and thine affections, and then art thou virtuous.

   Undertake then the breaking down of this image, when thou hast first
   well bethought thee of thyself, and of thy wretchedness, inwardly, as I
   have said, how proud, how vain, how envious, how melancholy (or
   froward), how covetous, how fleshly, and how full of corruption. Also
   how little knowing, feeling or savour thou hast of God and of spiritual
   things, how wise, how quick and how much savour thou hast in earthly
   things. And (that I may say all in one word) how thou art as full of
   sin as an hide or skin is full of flesh, yet be not thou too much
   dejected, though thou thinkest thus of thyself. And when thou hast done
   thus, lift up then the desire of thy heart to thy Lord Jesus, and pray
   for His help, cry to Him with great desires and sighings that He will
   help thee to bear this great burthen of this image, or else that He
   will break it. Think also what a shame it is for thee to be fed with
   swines' meat of fleshly savours, that oughtest to feel a spiritual
   savour of heavenly joy.

   If thou dost thus, then beginnest thou to rise against the whole ground
   of sin in thee, as I have said. And it may be that thou shalt feel pain
   and sorrow, for thou must know that no soul can live without pain,
   heaviness and sadness, unless that she take delight or have her rest
   either in her Creator or in some creature. And, therefore, when thou
   risest against thyself by a fervent desire for to attain to the feeling
   of thy Lord Jesus within thee, and for to draw away thy love from all
   bodily things, and from rest in all bodily feelings, insomuch that thou
   art even a burthen to thyself, and it seems to thee that all creatures
   are risen up against thee, and all the things, which heretofore thou
   tookest delight in, do now turn thee to pain and heaviness. And when
   thou hast thus forsaken thyself, and canst not likely, for all that, as
   yet find comfort in God, needs must thy soul feel and suffer pain in
   this case. Nevertheless, I hope that he that will suffer this pain
   awhile, stedfastly, cleaving to the desire and naked mind after Jesus
   Christ, and to that his desire, that he will have nothing but his Lord,
   and will not lightly depart therefrom, nor seek any other comfort from
   without for a time (for it lasteth not long), our Lord is nigh to him,
   and soon shall ease his heart, for He will help him to bear his body or
   sensuality, which is full of corruption; and will, with His merciful
   power of His gracious presence, break down this false image of love in
   him; not all at once, but by little and little, till he be in some
   measure reformed to His likeness.

   After such a total rising and resolution made by thee against thyself,
   when it is passed thou shalt more soberly, more gently and more easily
   rule thyself, and more charily keep and guard thy thoughts and thine
   affections, and shalt note and discern them, whether they be good or
   bad. And thereupon if afterwards thou feel (I put this for an example)
   a stirring of pride in any manner or spice of it, be then presently
   well aware, as well and as soon as thou canst, and suffer it not to
   escape away lightly, but take it in mind, and there rent it, break it
   and despise it, and do all the shame thou canst unto it; look thou
   spare it not, nor believe it, though it speak never so fair, for it is
   false, though it seem to be truth; as the Prophet saith: My people,
   they who call thee blessed, do deceive thee (by their so saying) and
   would bring thee into error. [157]

   And if thou be diligent to do thus, thou shalt, by the grace of Jesus,
   within short time, stop much of the spring of Pride and much abate the
   vain delight thereof, so that thou shalt very early feel any such
   motion in thee. And when thou feelest it, it shall be so weak and, as
   it were, half dead, that it shall not much trouble thee. And then shalt
   thou have a spiritual sight of the virtue of Humility, and see how good
   and how fair it is, and thou shalt desire it and love it for its
   goodness, so that it shall please thee both to behold and see thyself
   as thou art indeed, and also to be esteemed and held by others to be
   such a one, that is full of corruption, and (if need be) to suffer
   gladly despite and reproof for love of righteousness.

   In like manner when thou feelest any stirrings of wrath, or anger, or
   of melancholic risings of heart, or any other evil will against thy
   neighbour, for any manner of cause, though it seem reasonable, and not
   to be against charity, beware of it, and be ready with thy thought to
   restrain it, that it turn not into a further liking or consent; resist
   it as much as thou canst, and follow it not neither by word nor deed,
   but as it riseth, smite it down again, and so shalt thou slay it with
   the sword of the fear of God, that it shall not trouble thee, for know
   well in all these stirrings of pride, vain-glory, envy, or any other,
   that as soon as thou perceiveth it, and resistest it with displeasure
   of thy will and of thy reason, thou slayest it. Though it be so, that
   it cleave still upon thy heart against thy will, and will not lightly
   pass away, fear it not, for though it letteth thy soul from peace, yet
   doth it not defile her.

   Right so in like manner shalt thou do against all evil stirrings of
   Covetousness, Sloth, Gluttony and Lechery; that thou be always ready
   with thy reason and thy will to reprove them and despise them.

   And this mayest thou do the better, and the more readily, if thou be
   diligent and careful to set thy heart most upon one thing, and that is
   nought else but a spiritual desire after God, how to please Him, love
   Him and know Him, to see Him and to enjoy Him by grace here in a little
   feeling, and in the bliss of Heaven in a full being. This desire, if
   thou keep it, it will tell thee what is sin, and what is not; and what
   thing is good and what better; and if thou wilt but fasten thy thoughts
   to the same desire, it shall teach thee all that thou needest, and it
   shall procure thee all that thou wantest. And, therefore, whensoever
   thou risest against the ground of sin in general, or against the ground
   of any particular sin, hang fast upon this desire, and set the point of
   thy thoughts more upon God whom thou desirest than upon the sin which
   thou abhorrest. And if thou do so, then God fighteth for thee, and will
   destroy sin in thee. And thou shalt much sooner come to thy purpose if
   thou doest thus, than if thou shouldst leave thy humble desire
   principally after God, and set thy heart only against the stirrings of
   sin, as though thou wouldst destroy it by thy own mastering of it, but
   thou shalt never so bring it about.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [152] Ps. 38.

   [153] 1 Cor. 15.

   [154] Ga. 5.

   [155] Ephes. 4.

   [156] Prov. 4.

   [157] Is. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XIII: How a Man shall be shapen to the Image of Jesus, and Jesus
    shapen in him

   Do as I have said, and better if thou canst, and I hope by the grace of
   Jesus thou shalt make the devil ashamed, and shalt break down all such
   wicked stirrings, that they shall not much trouble thee. And by this
   course may the image of sin be broken down in thee and destroyed, by
   the which thou art misshapen from the kindly shape of Christ's image;
   and thou shalt be reformed and shapen again to the image of the
   Humanity of Jesus, by humility and charity, and afterwards shalt thou
   become full shapen to the image itself of the Godhead, whilst thou
   livest here, as it were in a shadow of it in contemplation, and
   hereafter in verity and full reality in the bliss of Heaven.

   Of this shaping to the likeness of Christ St Paul speaks thus: My
   little children whom I travail with again (as a woman that were with
   child with you) until Christ be shapen again in you. [158] Thou hast
   conceived Christ within thee by faith, and He liveth in thy soul by
   grace, inasmuch as thou hast a good will and a desire to serve Him and
   please Him; but He is not yet fully shapen in thee, nor thou in Him by
   perfection of charity. And therefore St Paul bare thee and me and
   others also with travail, as a woman beareth a child, until the time
   that Christ hath His full shape in us, and we in Him. Of this treateth
   the second book.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [158] Gal. 4.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XIV: The Conclusion of this Book, and of the Cause why it was made,
    and how she for whom it was made was to make use of it

   WHOSO thinkest to attain to the working and to the full use of
   contemplation and not by this way, that is by perfection of virtues,
   and taking full heed thereto, cometh not in by the door, and therefore
   as a thief he shall be cast out. I say not but that a man may have by
   the gift of God, at by times, a tasting and a glimmering of the
   contemplative life; some I say at the beginning of their conversion.
   But the solid feeling of it shall he not have, until he have gotten in
   him some perfection of virtues. For Christ is the door, and is also the
   porter, and without His leave and His liberty no man may come in; as He
   Himself saith: No man cometh to the Father but by Me. [159] That is to
   say, no man can come to the contemplation of the Godhead but he that is
   first reformed by perfection of humility and charity, to the likeness
   of Jesus in His Humanity.

   Lo, then, have I told thee a little, as methinketh, first of
   Contemplative life, what it is; and then of the ways which, by the
   grace of God, lead thereunto. Not as if I had it myself in feeling and
   in working, as I have it in talking. Nevertheless, I would by this
   writing of mine (such as it is) first stir up my own negligence to do
   better than I have done; and also my purpose is, to stir thee, or any
   other man or woman that hath taken the state of life Contemplative, to
   travail more diligently and more humbly in that manner of life, by such
   simple words as God hath given me grace for to say. And therefore if
   there be any word therein that stirreth thee or comforteth thee more to
   the love of God, thank God, for it is His gift and not of the words
   written. And if it comforteth thee not, and thou understandest it not
   readily, study not too long about it, but lay it aside till another
   time, and go to thy prayers or some other business; take it as it will
   come, and not all at once.

   Also these words which I write, take them not too strictly, but when
   thou thinkest, upon good consideration, that I write too short, either
   for lack of English or lack of reason, I pray thee amend it only where
   need is. Also these words which I write to thee, belong not all of them
   to one that is of an active life, but to thee or to any other which
   hath the state of life contemplative.

   The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [159] St John 14.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

THE SECOND BOOK
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART I
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER I

      SECTION I: That a Man is the Image of God after the Soul and not after the
      Body; and how he is restored and reformed thereto that was misshapen by
      Sin

   FORASMUCH as thou desirest greatly, and askest it for charity, to hear
   more of that image of which I have spoken in the former book in part;
   therefore I shall willingly, with fear, fall to thy desire, and by the
   help of our Lord's grace, in whom I fully trust, shall open to thee a
   little more of this image.

   I tell thee in truth, that I understand nought else thereby, but thy
   soul. For thy soul and my soul and every rational soul is an image, and
   that a worthy one, for it is the image of God, as the Scripture saith:
   Man is God's Image and made to the image and likeness of Him; [160] not
   in His bodily shape without, but in his faculties within, as holy Writ
   saith: Our Lord God shaped man in His soul to His own image and
   likeness. This is the image that I have spoken of. This image, made
   after the image of God in its first shaping, was wonderful fair and
   bright, full of burning love and ghostly light, but through the sin of
   the first man Adam it was disfigured and misshapen into another
   likeness, as I have said before, for it fell from that ghostly light
   and that heavenly feeding into painful darkness and lust of this
   wretched life, exiled and driven out from the inheritance of Heaven,
   that it should have had if it had continued, into the wretchedness of
   this earth, and afterward into the prison of hell, there to have been
   without end; from which prison it should never return to the heavenly
   inheritance until it were reformed to the first shape and likeness. But
   that reforming could not be made by any earthly man, for every man was
   in the same mischief, and none was sufficient to help himself, and so
   much less another man. Therefore it needed to be done by Him that was
   more than man, that is God alone. And it was needful that He should
   reform and restore man to bliss (if ever he were to be saved) who of
   His infinite goodness first created him thereto. Now, then, I shall
   tell thee, how he might be reformed, and how he is reformed to his
   first likeness by Him that first made and framed him, for that is the
   intent of this writing. The justice of God requireth that a sin
   committed be not forgiven, unless that amends be made for it, if it may
   be done. Now it is certain that mankind that was perfect in Adam the
   first man (sinning so grievously against God, when he broke His special
   command, and assented to the false counsel of the devil) deserved
   justly to be separated from Him, and damned to hell without end, so far
   forth, that according to God's Justice, he could not be forgiven,
   unless amends were first made, and full satisfaction given. But this
   amends could none make that was man only, and proceeded out of Adam by
   generation; because that the trespass and dishonour done to God was
   endless great, and therefore it passed man's power to make amends for
   it. And, secondly, because he that had offended, and would make amends
   for it, ought to give and pay unto him whom he had offended, all that
   he owed him, though he had not offended, and over and besides that, to
   give and pay him something that he owed not, in regard of the same
   offence and injury done. But mankind had not wherewith to pay God for
   his trespass, over and above that which he owed him, for what good
   soever man could do in body or soul was but his debt; for every man
   ought, as the Gospel saith: For to love God with all his heart, and all
   his soul, and all his might; and better than this could he not do; and
   nevertheless this deed was not sufficient to the reforming of mankind,
   nor could he do this until he was first reformed. Then needed it, that
   if man's soul should be reformed, and the trespass made good, that our
   Lord God Himself should reform this image, and make amends for the
   trespass, since no man could. But that might He not do in His Godhead,
   for He might not, nor ought not, to make amends by suffering pain in
   His own nature, therefore it was necessary, that He should take the
   same nature that had trespassed, and so become man. And that could He
   not do by the common way of generation, for it was impossible for God's
   Son to be born of touched woman, therefore must He become man through a
   gracious generation by the working of the Holy Ghost of a pure gracious
   virgin our Lady St Mary; and so it was done; for our Lord Jesus, God's
   Son, became man; and through His precious death which He suffered, made
   amends to the Father of Heaven for man's guilt. And that could He well
   do, for He was God, and ought not anything for Himself, but only as He
   was man, born of the same kind that Adam was that first trespassed, and
   so though He ought it not for His own person, for that He had not
   sinned. Nevertheless He ought it of His free will, for the trespass of
   mankind, having taken upon Him their nature for the salvation of man,
   out of His endless mercy.

   Forsooth it is, there was never any man that could yield to God
   anything of his own which he owed not, but only this blessed Jesus, for
   He could pay God something which He owed not, for Himself, which was
   but one thing, namely, to give His precious life by voluntary
   undertaking death for love of justice, this He owed not. As much good
   indeed as He was able to do in this life, for the honour of God was all
   but due debt; but to undergo death for the love of justice, He was not
   bound thereto. He was bound to justice, but He was not bound to die:
   for death is only a pain ordained to man for his own sin. But our Lord
   Jesus Christ never sinned, neither could sin, and therefore He ought
   not to die. Since then He ought not to die, and yet died willingly,
   therefore paid He to God more than He ought. And since that was the
   best man's deed, and most worthy that ever was done, therefore, was it
   reasonable that the sin of mankind should be forgiven. Inasmuch as
   mankind had found a man of the same kind, without spot of sin, that is
   Jesus; that might make amends for the trespass done, and might pay our
   Lord God all that He ought; and over and above, that which He ought
   not. Since, then, that our Lord Jesus, God and man, died thus for the
   salvation of man's soul, it was just that sin should be forgiven, and
   man's soul, that was His image, should or might be reformed and
   restored to the first likeness, and to the bliss of Heaven.

   This passion of our Lord, and this precious death is the ground of all
   the reforming of man's soul; without which man's soul could never be
   reformed to the likeness of Him, nor come to the bliss of Heaven; but
   blessed be He for all these His works. Now so it is, that through the
   virtue of His precious passion, the flaming sword of the Cherubim that
   drove Adam out of Paradise is now put away; and the endless gates of
   Heaven are open to every man that will enter in thereto. For the person
   of Jesus is both God and King of Heaven in the bliss of the Father, and
   as man, He is porter at the gate, ready to receive every soul that will
   be reformed here in this life to His likeness. For now may every soul,
   if he will, be reformed to the likeness of God; since that the trespass
   is forgiven, and the amends through Jesus is made for the first guilt.
   Nevertheless though this be true, yet all souls have not the profit nor
   the fruit of this precious passion, nor are reformed to the likeness of
   Him.

      SECTION II: That Jews and Pagans and also false Christians are not
      reformed effectually through the virtue of the Passion through their own
      Faults

   TWO manner of men are not reformed by the virtue of this passion. One
   is of them that know it not; another is of them that love it not. Jews
   and Pagans have not the benefit, because they know it not. Jews
   understand not that Jesus the son of the virgin Mary is God's Son. Also
   the Pagans know it not that the sovereign wisdom of God would become
   the son of man, and in His manhood would suffer the pains of death. And
   therefore the Jews held the preaching of the Cross and of the Passion
   nought but slander and blasphemy; and the Pagans held it nought but
   fancy and folly. But true Christians hold it the sovereign wisdom of
   God and His mighty power. Thus saith St Paul: We preach unto you Christ
   crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles
   foolishness; but to those that be called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ
   the Power of God and the Wisdom of God. [161] And therefore these men,
   through their unbelief, put themselves from the reforming of their own
   souls, and continuing in this unbelief, shall never be saved nor come
   to the bliss of Heaven. Forsooth it is, from the beginning of the world
   to the last ending was there never any man saved, nor shall be, unless
   he believe generally or specially in Jesus Christ, to come, or already
   come. For right as all chosen souls, that were before the Incarnation
   under the Old Testament, believed in Christ that He should come, to
   reform men's souls; and that either with an open and clear belief, as
   the Patriarchs and Prophets and other holy men did; or else with a
   secret and general belief, as children and other simple and imperfect
   souls had that had no special or explicit clear knowledge of the
   Mystery of the Incarnation; right so, all chosen souls under the New
   Testament have belief in Christ already come; either openly and
   feelingly, as spiritual men and wise men have, or else generally, as
   children have that are christened, and other simple and unlearned souls
   have, that are nourished in the bosom of holy Church.

   Since this is so, methinks that those men err greatly and grievously
   who say that Jews and Turks, by keeping of their own law, may be saved,
   though they believe not in Jesus Christ, as holy Church believeth;
   inasmuch as they believe that their own faith is good, and secure, and
   sufficient for their salvation. And in that belief they do as it seems
   many good deeds of justice and righteousness, and peradventure if they
   knew that the Christian faith were better than their own, they would
   leave their own and take it; and therefore they shall be saved. But I
   say this is not enough, for Christ, God and man, is both the way and
   the end. And He is the mediator betwixt God and man, and without Him
   can no soul be reconciled, nor come to the bliss of Heaven, and
   therefore they that believe not in Him who is both God and man, can
   never be saved nor come to bliss.

   Other men also, that love not Christ, nor His Passion, are not reformed
   in their souls to His likeness, and these are false Christians, which
   are out of grace and charity, and live and die in deadly sin. These men
   know well, as it seemeth, that Jesus is God's Son, and that His passion
   sufficeth to the salvation of man's soul; and they believe also the
   other articles of faith. But it is an unshapen and dead faith, for they
   love Him not, nor choose the fruit of His passion, but lie still in
   their sins, and in the false love of this world, unto their last end;
   and so they be not reformed to the likeness of God, but go to the pains
   of Hell endlessly, as Jews and Turks do, and into much more, and
   greater pains than they, inasmuch as they had the truth and kept it
   not; for that makes their sin greater than if they had never known it.

   If then thou wilt know what souls are reformed here in this life to the
   image of God through the virtue of His Passion; verily, only those that
   believe in Him and love Him; in which souls, the image of God that was
   misshapen through sin, as it were, into a foul beast's likeness, is
   restored and reformed to its first shape, and to the worthiness and
   worship that it had in the beginning; without which restoring and
   reforming never shall any soul be saved nor come to bliss.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [160] Gen. 1.

   [161] 1 Cor. 1.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER II: Of two Manners of reforming of this Image, one in fulness,
    another in part

   NOW thou wilt say: How can this be, that the image of God, which is
   man's soul, should be reformed here in this life to His likeness in any
   creature? Whereas the contrary seemeth true, nay, it seems that it
   cannot possibly be so? For if it were reformed, then should it have a
   stable memory, a clear sight or understanding, a clear burning love to
   God and spiritual things everlastingly, as it had in the beginning. But
   these hath no creature living here in this life, as thou perceivest;
   for as for thyself, thou canst truly say, that thou art far from it.
   Thy memory, thy reason, and thy love of thy soul, are so much set upon
   the beholding and loving of earthly things, that of spiritual things
   thou feelest right little. Thou feelest no reforming in thyself, but
   art so wrapped about with this black image of sin, for all that thou
   canst do, that upon what side soever thou turnest, thou feelest thyself
   defiled and spotted with fleshly stirrings of this foul image; and
   other changings thou feelest none, fresh fleshliness into
   spiritualness, neither in the inward faculties of thy soul within, nor
   in bodily feelings or thy senses without. Wherefore it seems to thee
   that it cannot be that this image should be so reformed.

   Thou askest, therefore, how it can be reformed?

   To this I answer, and say thus: There be two manners of reforming of
   the image of God which is man's soul, whereof one is in fulness,
   another is in part. Reforming in fulness cannot be had in this life,
   but is deferred till after, to the bliss of Heaven, where man's soul
   shall fully be reformed; not to that state that it had at the first by
   nature, or might have had through grace if it had stood whole; but it
   shall be restored to much more bliss, and much higher joy through the
   great mercy and the endless goodness of God, than it should have had if
   it had never fallen. For then shall the soul receive the whole and the
   full feeling of God in all its faculties, without any other love or
   affection to anything else interposing itself. And it shall see mankind
   in the person of Jesus exalted above the kind or nature of Angels,
   united to the Godhead, for then shall Jesus, both God and man, be all
   in all, and only He, and none other but He, as the Prophet saith: Our
   Lord (Jesus) in that day shall be exalted only. [162] And also the body
   of man shall then be glorified, for it shall receive fully the rich
   dowry of immortality, with all that belongeth thereto. This shall a
   soul have with the body, and much more than I can say; but that shall
   be the bliss of Heaven, but not in this life. For though it be so that
   the Passion of our Lord be the cause of all this full reforming of
   man's soul; nevertheless it was not His will to grant it straightways
   after passion, to all chosen souls that were living at the time of His
   Passion, but He delayed it unto the last day, and that for this reason:
   Manifest it is that our Lord Jesus Christ of His mercy hath ordained a
   certain number of souls to salvation, which number was not fulfilled in
   the time of His Passion, and therefore it needed that by length of time
   through natural generation of men that number should be made up; then
   if it had so been, that so soon as after the death of our Lord, every
   soul that would have believed in Him should have been blessed and fully
   reformed by His life, without any further delay, there would no
   creature that lived then have been that would not have received the
   Faith for to have been made blessed, and then should generation have
   ceased. And so should we that are now chosen souls living, and other
   souls that come after us, not have been born, and so should our Lord
   have failed of His number. But that might not be, and therefore our
   Lord provided much better for us, in that He delayed the full reforming
   of man's soul till the last end, as St Paul saith; God providing better
   for us, that they should not be consummate without us. [163] That is,
   our Lord providing better for us in the delaying of our reforming, than
   if He had granted it then, for this reason, that the chosen souls
   should not make a full end without us that come after.

   Another reason is this: Since that man in his first creation was set in
   his free will, and had free choice whether he would have God fully or
   no, it was therefore reasonable that since he would not choose God
   then, but wretchedly fell from Him, if he should afterwards be
   reformed, that he should be set again in the same free choosing that he
   was first in, as whether he would become reformed or no. And this may
   be also a cause why man's soul was not fully reformed speedily upon the
   Passion of Jesus Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [162] Is. 2.

   [163] Heb. 11.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER III: That Reforming in part is in two manners, one in Faith, another
    in Feeling

   ANOTHER reforming of this image is in part, and this may be had in this
   life, and if it be not had in this life, it will never be had, nor the
   soul ever come to be saved.

   But this reforming is on two manners; one is in Faith only, another is
   in Faith and in Feeling. The first sufficeth to salvation, the second
   is worthy to have passing great reward in the bliss of Heaven. The
   first may be had easily and in short time, the second not so, but
   through length of time and much spiritual pains. The first may be had,
   and yet the man may have together with it the stirrings and feelings of
   the image of sin. For though a man feel nothing in himself but all
   stirrings of sin and fleshly desires, notwithstanding those feelings,
   if he do not voluntarily assent thereto, he may be and remain reformed
   in Faith to the likeness of God.

   But the second putteth out the liking in, and delight felt in sensual
   motions and worldly desires, and suffereth no such spots to abide in
   this image. The first is only of beginning and profiting souls, and of
   active men. The second is of perfect souls, and of contemplative men.
   For by the first reforming the image of sin is not destroyed, but it is
   left, as it were, all whole in feeling. But the second destroyeth the
   old feelings of this image of sin, and bringeth into the soul new
   gracious feelings, through the workings of the Holy Ghost. The first is
   good, the second is better; but the third, that is in the bliss of
   Heaven, is best of all. First let us speak of that one, and then of
   that other, and so we shall come to the third.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IV: That through the Sacrament of Baptism (which is grounded in the
    Passion of Christ) this Image is reformed from Original Sin

   Two manner of sins make the soul to lose the image and likeness of God.
   The one is called Original, that is the first sin; the other is Actual,
   that is committed by our own will. These two sins put away a soul from
   the bliss of Heaven, and damn it to the endless pains of hell; unless,
   through the grace of God, it be reformed to His likeness, before it
   pass hence out of this life. Nevertheless, two remedies are there
   against these two sins, by the which a misshapen soul may be restored
   again. One is the Sacrament of Baptism against original sin, another is
   the Sacrament of Penance against actual sin. A soul of a child that is
   born, as is not christened, by reason of original sin, hath no likeness
   of God; he is nought but an image of the fiend, and a brand of hell,
   but as soon as it is christened, it is reformed to the image of God,
   and through the virtue of the faith of holy Church is suddenly turned
   from the likeness of the fiend, and made like an Angel of Heaven. Also
   the same falleth to a Jew or to a Turk, the which before they be
   christened, are nought but bondslaves of hell; but when they forsake
   their error, and fall humbly to the truth in Christ, and receive the
   baptism of water in the Holy Ghost, surely without any further tarrying
   they are reformed to the likeness of God, so fully that the holy Church
   believeth that if presently after baptism they should happen to die,
   they should straight fly up to Heaven without any more letting, though
   they had before in the time of their unbelief committed never so many
   or so great sins; nor should they ever feel the pains of hell nor of
   purgatory, and that privilege should they have by the merit of Christ's
   Passion.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER V: That through the Sacrament of Penance (that consisteth in
    Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction) this Image is reformed from Actual
    Sin

   MOREOVER, Christian men or women that have lost the likeness of God
   through a deadly sin in breaking God's commandments, if he through the
   touching of grace in his heart doth truly forsake his sin, with sorrow
   and contrition of heart, and be in full purpose to amend and turn to a
   good life; and in this foresaid purpose and will receiveth the
   Sacrament of Penance, if he may come by it, or if he cannot have a will
   and desire to come by it, surely, I say, that this man or woman's soul,
   that was before misshapen to the likeness of the devil through deadly
   sin, is now by the Sacrament of Penance restored and shapen again to
   the image of our Lord God.

   This is a great courtesy of our Lord, and an endless mercy, who so
   lightly forgiveth all manner of sin, and so suddenly giveth plenty of
   grace to a sinful soul that asketh mercy of Him. He requireth not great
   doing of Penance, nor painful suffering in the flesh, before He
   forgiveth it. But He requireth a loathing of sin, and a full forsaking
   in the will for love of Him, and a turning of the heart to Him. This He
   asketh, for this He giveth. And then when He seeth this, without any
   further delay He forgiveth the sin, and reformeth the soul to His
   likeness. The sin is forgiven, that the soul shall not be damned,
   nevertheless, the pain due to the sin is not yet fully forgiven, unless
   that the contrition and love be the greater. And therefore shall he go
   and show himself, and make his confession to his ghostly Father, and
   receive the penance which he enjoineth him for his trespass, and
   perform it gladly, so that both the sin and the punishment may be done
   away before he pass hence.

   And this is the wise ordinance of holy Church, to the great benefit of
   man's soul, that though the sin be forgiven through the virtue of
   contrition, nevertheless for the exercise of humility, and for to make
   entire satisfaction, he shall (if he have means for it) show to his
   priest a plenary confession, for that is his token and warrant against
   all his enemies, of the forgiveness of his sins, and such a token or
   warrant will it be needful for him to have. Just as if a man had
   forfeited his life against a king on earth, it were not enough for him
   (as to his full security and discharge) to have only forgiveness of the
   king, unless he have a charter from him, which may be his token and
   warrant against all other men. Right so may it be said spiritually, if
   a man through deadly sin have forfeited his life against the King of
   Heaven, it is not enough for him (as to his full security) to have
   forgiveness of God only by contrition between God and him, unless he
   have a charter also made by holy Church (if he may come by it), and
   this is the Sacrament of Penance, which is his charter and token of
   forgiveness. For sith it was so, that he had offended and forfeited
   both against God and His Church, it is skilful that he have forgiveness
   from that one, and a warrant from that other. And this is one cause why
   Confession is needful.

   Another reason is this: That since this reforming of a soul standeth in
   Faith only, and not in Feeling (for the forgiveness is only believed
   and not felt) therefore a fleshly or sensual man, that is at first
   gross and rude in understanding, and cannot easily judge and conceive,
   but only outward bodily things, would not easily have believed that his
   sins had been forgiven him, if he had not received some outward or
   bodily token of it, and that is Confession, through the which token he
   is made secure of forgiveness if he do his part and duty in the
   business. This is the belief of holy Church, as I understand it.
   Another reason is this: Though the ground of forgiveness stand not
   principally in Confession, but in contrition of the heart, and in
   detestation or forethinking of sin; nevertheless, I believe that there
   is many a soul that would never have felt true contrition, nor had
   arrived at forsaking of sin, if Confession had not been, for it falleth
   out oftentimes, that in the time of Confession, grace of compunction
   cometh to a soul that before never felt grace, but ever was cold and
   dry, and farther off from feeling of grace. And therefore sith
   Confession was so profitable to the more party of Christian men, holy
   Church ordained, for the more security generally to all Christian men,
   that every man and woman should once in the year, at the least, confess
   all their sins to their ghostly Father, that come to their mind, though
   they had never so much contrition before time. Nevertheless, I hope
   well, that if all men had been as careful about the keeping of
   themselves and eschewing of all manner of sin; and had arrived at as
   great knowledge and feeling of God as some men have, holy Church would
   not have ordained the said token of Confession as an obligation, for it
   had not been needful. But because all men are not so perfect, and
   peradventure much or the greater part of Christians are imperfect,
   therefore holy Church ordained Confession by way of general obligation,
   to all Christians that will acknowledge holy Church as their Mother,
   and will be obedient to her laws.

   If this be true, as I hope it is, then erreth he greatly that generally
   saith that Confession of sins to the priest is neither necessary nor
   profitable, and that no man is bound thereto; for by that which I have
   said, it is both necessary and profitable to all those souls who in
   this wretched life are defiled with sin, and namely to those who
   through deadly sin are misshapen from the likeness of God, who cannot
   be reformed to His likeness but by the Sacrament of Penance which
   principally standeth in contrition and sorrow of heart, and secondarily
   in confession of mouth following after it if it may be had. And thus
   through this Sacrament of Penance is a sinful soul reformed to the
   image and likeness of God.

   But this reforming standeth in Faith and not in Feeling. For right as
   Faith's property is to believe that which thou seest not, so also is it
   to believe that which thou feelest not. For he that is reformed in his
   soul by the Sacrament of Penance to the image of God, feeleth not any
   change in himself, neither in his external corporal nature, nor within
   in the substance of his soul, other than he did before. For as to his
   feeling, he is as he was, and feeleth the same stirrings of sin, and
   the same corruption of his flesh in his passions and worldly risings in
   his heart, as he did before. Yet he ought to believe that through grace
   he is reformed to the image of God, though he neither feel it nor see
   it. He may easily feel in himself a sorrow for his sins, and a turning
   of his will from sin to cleanness of living, if he have grace and take
   good heed of himself. But he can neither see nor feel the reforming of
   his soul, how it is wonderfully and unperceivably changed from the
   foulness of the fiend unto the fairness of an Angel, through a secret
   gracious working of the Holy Ghost. This cannot he see but only believe
   it; and if he believe it, then is his soul reformed in truth. For right
   as Holy Church believeth, a Jew or Saracen, or a child, by the
   Sacrament of Baptism duly administered, to be reformed in soul to the
   image of God, through a secret unperceivable working of the Holy Ghost,
   notwithstanding all the fleshly stirrings of his body of sin, which he
   feeleth, after his Baptism as well as before; right so, by the
   Sacrament of Penance humbly and truly received, a bad Christian who
   hath been encumbered with deadly sin all his lifetime, is reformed
   within in his soul, unperceivably, saving that he finds a turning of
   his will to God through a secret power, and a gracious working of the
   Holy Ghost, which suddenly worketh, and in a moment or the twinkling of
   an eye, setteth right a froward soul, and turneth it from a spiritual
   foulness to an invisible fairness, and maketh her, of a servant of the
   fiend, a son of joy; and of a prisoner of hell, an inheritor of Heaven,
   notwithstanding all the fleshly feelings of this sinful image, that is
   the corporal nature.

   For thou must know, that the Sacrament of Baptism or of Penance, is not
   of that virtue to hinder and destroy utterly all the stirrings of
   fleshly lusts and of inordinate passions, that the soul should never
   feel any risings nor stirrings of them at any time; for if it were so,
   then were a soul fully reformed here to the dignity it had at its first
   creation. But that cannot be fully in this life. But it is of that
   virtue, that it cleanseth the soul from all sins before done; and if
   she, being in that case, chance to die, it saveth her from damnation;
   or if it continue in the body, it giveth her grace to withstand the
   stirrings of sin, or of the passions of the flesh, so that be they
   never so grievous, they shall not hurt her, nor separate her from God,
   as long as she doth not willingly consent thereto. So meant St Paul
   when he said thus:--There is no condemnation to them that walk not
   after the flesh. [164] That is, those souls that are reformed to the
   image of God by Faith, through the Sacrament of Baptism or of Penance,
   shall not be damned for the feeling of this image of sin, if so be that
   they go not after the motions of sensuality by deed doing.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [164] Rom. 8.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VI: That we are to believe stedfastly the reforming of this Image,
    if our Conscience witness to us a full forsaking of Sin, and a true turning
    of our Will to good living

   OF this reforming in Faith speaketh St Paul in these words: The just
   man liveth by Faith. [165] That is, he that is made righteous by
   Baptism or Penance, he liveth by Faith, which sufficeth to salvation,
   and also to heavenly peace, as St Paul saith: Being justified by Faith,
   we have peace with God. That is, we that are made righteous and
   reformed through Faith in Christ, have peace and accord made betwixt
   God and us, notwithstanding the vicious motions of our body of sin. For
   though this reforming be secret, and cannot well be felt here in this
   life, nevertheless whoso stedfastly believeth it, and is careful to
   shape his life accordingly, and turns not again to deadly sin, surely
   when the hour of death cometh, and the soul is departed, then shall he
   find that true which I say now. St John in comfort of chosen souls that
   live here in Faith under the feeling of this painful image, saith thus:
   Little children, now are we the sons of God, and it appeareth not what
   we shall be; but we know that when Christ shall appear, we shall also
   appear like Him in glory. [166] That is, we are now, whilst we live
   here, the sons of God, for we are reformed by Faith in Christ to His
   likeness, but it appeareth not plainly what we are, but it is kept
   secret. Nevertheless, we know well, that when our Lord shall appear at
   the last day, then shall we appear with Him, like to Him in glory.

   If then, thou wouldst know if thy soul be reformed to the Image of God
   or no, thou mayest be resolved by that which I have said, ransack thy
   conscience and look what thy will is, for; therein consisteth the whole
   business. If it be turned from all manner of deadly sin, so that thou
   wouldst not for all the world wittingly and wilfully break the
   commandments of God; and for what thou hast done amiss heretofore
   contrary to His bidding, hast humbly made thy confession, with full
   intent to leave it, and art sorry that thou didst it; I say then,
   surely that thy soul is reformed in Faith to the likeness of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [165] Heb. 10.

   [166] 1 John 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VII: That all the Souls that live humbly in the Faith of Holy
    Church, and have their Faith enlivened with Love and Charity, be reformed by
    this Sacrament, though it be so that they cannot feel the special gift of
    Devotion or of spiritual feeling

   IN this reforming, which is only in Faith, the most part of chosen
   souls lead their lives, setting their wills stedfastly to flee all
   manner of deadly sin, and keeping themselves in love and charity to
   their neighbour, and keeping the commandments of God according to their
   knowledge. And when it is so that wicked stirrings and evil desires of
   pride, envy, wrath or luxury, or of any other capital sin rise in their
   hearts, they resist and strive against them, by being displeased at
   them in their will, so that they follow not those wicked motions in
   their deeds; and if through frailty they fall, as it were against their
   will, and through ignorance, their conscience soon after so grieveth
   and paineth them for it, that they can take no rest till they have made
   their confession, and had absolution for it.

   Surely all these souls that thus live in this state of reforming, and
   be found therein at the hour of their death, shall be saved, and shall
   come to a full reforming in the bliss of Heaven though it were so, that
   they never had spiritual feeling, nor inward taste of devotion, nor any
   special gift of grace of sweetness or comfort in all their lifetime.
   For if thou shouldst say, that no soul shall be saved, unless she were
   here reformed in spiritual feeling, so that she hath felt devotion and
   spiritual sweetness in God, as some souls through special grace have
   done; then should very few souls be saved, in comparison of the
   multitude of the other.

   Nay, it is not so to be supposed, that only for the souls that have had
   such extraordinary devotion, or have through great grace come to a
   spiritual feeling, and for no more, our Lord Jesus should have taken
   upon Him the nature of man, and suffered the bitter passion of His
   death. It had been such a small purchase for Him to have come from so
   far to so near, and from so high to so low, for so few souls; no, His
   mercy is spread larger than so. But on the contrary, if thou imaginest
   the Passion of our Lord to be so precious, and His mercy so great, that
   there shall no soul be damned, and namely, no Christian, do he never so
   wickedly, as some fools do imagine, surely thou errest greatly.

   Go, therefore, in the middle way, and hold thee there, and believe as
   holy Church believeth, and that is, that the most sinful man that
   liveth on earth, if through grace he turn his will from deadly sin by
   true repentance to the service of God, he is reformed in his soul, and
   if he die in this state, he shall be saved. Thus hath our Lord promised
   by His Prophet, saying: At what time soever a sinner shall be
   converted, and sorry for his sins, he shall live, and not die.

   And on the other side, whoso liveth in deadly sin, and will not leave
   it, nor amend him thereof, nor receive the Sacrament of Penance, or
   else if he receive it, taketh it not truly, for the love of God (that
   is, for the love of virtue and cleanness, but only for dread or shame
   of the world, or only for fear of the pains of hell), he is not
   reformed to the image of God, and if he die in that state, he shall not
   be saved, his Faith shall not save him, for it is but a dead faith,
   because it lacketh love, and therefore it will not serve his turn. But
   they that have Faith quickened with love and charity, though it be but
   the least degree of charity, as are simple souls who feel not the gift
   of special devotion, nor have spiritual knowledge or feeling of God, as
   some spiritual men have, but believe in general as holy Church
   believeth, though they know not fully what that is (for it is not
   necessary that they should know so fully), but in that belief keep
   themselves in love and charity to their neighbour as well as they can,
   and eschew all deadly sin according to their best skill, and do deeds
   of mercy to their neighbours; all these belong to the bliss of Heaven.
   For thus is it written in the Apocalypse: Ye that fear God, both great
   and small, praise Him. By great ones are understood souls that are
   profiting in grace, or that are perfect in the love of God, which are
   reformed in spiritual feeling. By small, imperfect souls of worldly men
   and women, and others that have but a childish knowledge of God, and
   full little feeling of Him, but are brought forth in the bosom of holy
   Church, and nourished with the Sacraments, as children are fed with
   milk. All these ought to love God, and thank Him for the salvation of
   their souls, which proceedeth from His endless mercy and goodness. For
   holy Church, which is mother of all these, and beareth tender love to
   all her ghostly children, prayeth and asketh for them all tenderly of
   her Spouse, that is of Jesus, and getteth them health of soul through
   virtue of His Passion; and namely for them that cannot speak for
   themselves by spiritual prayer for their need.

   Thus I find in the Gospel that the woman of Canaan asked of our Lord
   health for her daughter that was troubled with the fiend; and our Lord
   at first made dainty of the matter, because she was an alien.
   Nevertheless she ceased not to cry till our Lord had granted her
   asking, and said to her thus: O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto
   thee as thou wilt. In the same hour was her daughter made whole. This
   woman betokeneth holy Church, that asketh help of our Lord for simple
   ignorant souls, that are encumbered with temptations of the world, and
   cannot speak perfectly to God by fervour of devotion, nor by burning
   love in Contemplation. And though our Lord seemeth to make dainty at
   first, because they are, as it were, aliened from Him, nevertheless,
   for the great faith and desert of holy Church, He granted to her all
   that she will. And for these simple souls that believe stedfastly as
   holy Church believeth, and put themselves wholly upon the mercy of God,
   and submit themselves under the Sacraments and Laws of holy Church, are
   saved through the prayers and faith of their holy Mother the Church.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VIII: That Souls reformed need ever to fight and strive against the
    Motions of sin while they live here. And how a Soul may know when she
    assenteth to these Motions and when not

   THIS reforming in Faith is easily gotten, but it is not so easily held.
   And, therefore, that man or woman that is reformed to the likeness of
   God in Faith, must use much labour and diligence, if they will keep
   this image whole and clean, that it fall not down again through
   weakness of will to the image of sin. He may not be idle or careless;
   for the image of sin is so near fastened unto him, and so continually
   presseth upon him by divers stirrings of sin, that unless he be very
   wary, he shall very easily through consent fall again thereto. And,
   therefore, he needeth to be ever striving and fighting against the
   wicked stirring of this image of sin, and that he make no accord with
   them, nor have friendship with them, to be pliable to their unlawful
   biddings, for in so doing he beguileth himself. But verily if he strive
   with them, he need not be much afraid of consenting; for striving
   breaketh peace and false accord. It is good indeed that a man have
   peace with all things, save with the fiend and this image of sin, for
   against them ought he ever to fight in his thoughts and in his deeds,
   till he hath gotten the mastery, which will never be fully in this
   life, as long as he beareth and feeleth this image. I say not but that
   a soul may, through grace, have the upper hand of this image, so far
   that he will not follow nor assent to the inordinate motions of it, but
   to be clean delivered from it, so that he shall feel no suggestions nor
   jangling of fleshly affections or of vain thoughts at any time, that
   can no man come to in this life.

   I trow that a soul that is reformed in feeling, by ravishing of love in
   contemplation of God, may be far from the sensuality and from vain
   imaginations, and so far drawn out and parted from the fleshly motions
   for a time, that she shall feel nothing but God; but such a case
   lasteth not always. And, therefore, I say, that every man ought to
   strive against this image of sin, and namely he that is reformed in
   faith only, who may so easily be deceived by the same. In the person of
   which men St Paul saith: The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the
   spirit against the flesh. [167] That is, a soul reformed to the
   likeness of God fighteth against the sensual motions of the image of
   sin, and also this image of sin fighteth against the will of the
   spirit.

   This kind of fighting between these two several images St Paul knew and
   felt, when he said thus: I find a law in my members fighting against
   the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of sin. [168] By
   these two laws in a soul I understand this double image: by the law of
   the spirit I understand the reason of the soul, when it is reformed to
   the image of God; by the law of the flesh I understand the sensuality,
   which I call the image of sin. In these two laws a soul reformed leads
   his life; as Paul saith in these words: With my mind I serve the law of
   God, but with the flesh the law of sin.

   Nevertheless, that a soul reformed should not despair though she serve
   the law of sin by feeling of the vicious sensuality against the will of
   the spirit, because of the corruption of corporal nature, St Paul
   excuseth it, saying thus of his own person: For not that good that I
   would, do I, but the evil that I hate that I do; but if I do the evil
   that I hate, it is not I that worketh it, but sin that dwelleth in me.
   That is, I would feel no fleshly stirrings, but that do I not, but the
   sinful stirrings of my flesh I hate, and yet I feel them. Nevertheless,
   since it is so that I have the wicked stirrings of my flesh, and yet I
   feel them and oft delight in them against my will, they shall not be
   laid to my charge to my condemnation, as if I had done them. And why?
   For the corruption of this image of sin doth them, and not I.

   Lo St Paul in his own person comforteth all souls that through grace
   are reformed in Faith, that they should not too much dread the burthen
   of this image with the inordinate motions thereof, if it be so that
   they do not willingly and deliberately yield thereto. Yet in this
   point, many souls that are reformed in truth, are ofttimes much
   tormented and troubled in vain, as thus: When they have felt fleshly
   motion of pride, or of envy, of covetousness or luxury, or of any other
   chief sin, they know not whether they consent thereto or no, and it is
   no great wonder; for in time of temptation frail man's thoughts are so
   troubled and so overlaid that he hath no clear sight nor freedom of
   himself, but is overtaken often with liking unwarily, and so that
   liking passeth perhaps a good while within him ere he will perceive it,
   and, therefore, falleth sometime in doubt and dread whether they sinned
   in time of temptation or no.

   As to this point I say, as methinketh, that a soul may discern by this
   means whether he consent or no. If it be so that he is moved or tempted
   to any kind of sin, and the liking of it is so great in his fleshly
   feeling that it troubleth his reason, and, as it were, with mastery
   possesseth the affection of his soul, and yet he restraineth himself,
   that he performeth not the sin in deed, nay, nor would not if he might,
   but is rather pained to feel the liking of that sin, and fain would put
   it away if he could; and when that stirring is over, is glad and well
   repaid that he is delivered from it; by this may he gather, that were
   the liking never so great in his fleshly feeling, yet he consented nor
   sinned, not especially mortally in the business.

   Nevertheless, a good and secure remedy it ere for such simple souls
   being in such a case, and cannot help it, that they be not too bold in
   themselves utterly weening that such fleshly stirrings with liking are
   no sins at all, for so they may fall into carelessness and a false
   security. Neither on the other side that they be too fearful, or
   foolish, as to deem them all as deadly sins, or as great venials; for
   neither is true, but that he hold them all as sins and wretchedness,
   and that he have sorrow for them, and be not too busy in judging them
   either deadly or venial. But if his conscience be greatly grieved, that
   he go speedily, and show to his Confessor in general or in special such
   stirrings, and, namely, every stirring that beginneth to fasten any
   root in the heart, and most possesseth it, for to draw it down to sin
   and worldly vanity. And when he hath thus confessed in general or in
   particular, let him assuredly believe that they be forgiven, and
   dispute no more about them that are passed and forgiven, whether they
   were mortal or venial. But let him be the more careful to carry himself
   better against such as shall afterwards arise. And if he do so, then
   may he come to have quiet in his conscience. But some are so unwise and
   so gross that they would feel or see, or hear the forgiveness of their
   sins, as clearly and palpably as they might see or feel a bodily thing;
   and because they cannot, therefore they fall oft into such fears and
   doubts of themselves, and never come to rest; and in that they are
   unwise, for Faith goeth before feeling.

   Our Lord, when He healed a man sick of the palsy, said thus to him:
   Trust (my son) that thy sins are forgiven thee; that is, believe
   steadfastly. He said not to him, See, feel, how that thy sins are
   forgiven (for the forgiveness of sins is done spiritually and
   invisibly, through the grace of the Holy Ghost) but believe it. On the
   same manner, every one that desireth to have peace of conscience, it
   behoveth him (having done what lay in his power) to believe without
   spiritual feeling and forgiveness of his sins. And if at first he
   believe it, he shall afterward, through grace, feel it and understand
   it that it is so. Thus said the Apostle: Unless ye believe, ye shall
   not understand. Faith goeth before, and understanding cometh after, and
   this understanding (which I call the light of grace that cometh from
   God) a soul cannot have but through great cleanness, as our Lord saith:
   Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. [169] Not with
   their fleshly eye, but their inward eye, that is, their understanding,
   cleaned and enlightened through grace of the Holy Ghost, to see the
   truth; the which cleanness a soul cannot feel, unless she have firm
   faith and belief going before, as the Apostle saith: By faith,
   purifying the heart; that is, our Lord through faith cleanseth the
   hearts of His chosen. It is necessary, therefore, that a soul first
   believe in the reforming of himself made through the Sacrament of
   Penance, though she see it not; and that he dispose himself fully to
   live righteously and virtuously, as his Faith requireth; so that
   afterward he may come to sight, and to the reforming in feeling.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [167] Gal. 5.

   [168] Rom. 8.

   [169] St Matt. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IX: That this Image is both fair and foul whilst it is in this Life
    here, though it be reformed; and of the Differences of the secret Feelings
    of those that be reformed and those that be not

   FAIR is a man's soul, and foul is a man's soul. Fair, inasmuch as it is
   reformed in faith to the likeness of God. But foul, inasmuch as it is
   mingled with sensual feelings and inordinate motions of this image of
   sin. Foul it is without, like a beast; fair within, like an Angel. Foul
   in the feeling of sensuality, fair in truth of reason. Foul for the
   fleshly appetites, fair for the good will. Thus is a chosen soul both
   fair and foul, according to the saying of Holy Writ: I am black, but
   beautiful, O daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, and as the
   curtains of Solomon. [170] That is, O ye Angels of Heaven, that are
   daughters of the high Jerusalem, wonder not at me, nor despise me for
   my black shadow. For though I be black without, because of my fleshly
   nature, as the tents of Kedar, yet am I full fair within, as the
   Curtains of Solomon, in that I am reformed to the image of God. By
   Kedar is understood a reprobate soul, which is the tent of the devil.
   By Solomon is understood our Lord Jesus, for He is peace, or peaceable.
   By the curtain of Solomon is understood a blessed Angel, in whom our
   Lord dwelleth, and is hid in him.

   Now may a chosen soul with humble trust in God, and joy of heart, say
   thus: Though I be black, because of my body of sin, like a reprobate
   soul, that is one of the tabernacles of the fiend; yet within am I fair
   (through faith and good will) like an Angel of Heaven. For so saith he
   in another place: Look not upon me, because that I am black, for that
   the sun hath altered my colour. [171] The sun maketh a skin swarth only
   without and not within; and it betokeneth this fleshly life. Therefore
   thus saith the chosen soul: Rebuke me not because I am swarth, for the
   swartness I have is all without, by the touching and carrying about me
   this image of sin; but it is nothing within. And, therefore, soothly
   though it be so that a chosen soul, reformed in faith, dwell in this
   body of sin, and feel the same fleshly stirrings, and use the same
   bodily works, as doth a tabernacle of Kedar so far forth that in man's
   judgement there be no difference betwixt the one and the other, yet
   within in their souls, and in the sight of God there is a full great
   difference. [172] But to know this, which is the one, and which is the
   other, is only kept to God; for it passeth man's judgement and man's
   feeling. And, therefore, we ought not to judge any man evil, for that
   thing that may be used both evil and well.

   A soul that is not reformed is so fully taken up with the love of the
   world, and so much over laid with the liking of his flesh in all his
   sensuality, that he chooseth it as a full rest of his heart, and in the
   secret desires thereof nothing else would he have, but only that he
   might ever be sure thereof; he feeleth within him no liquor of grace,
   moving him to loathe his fleshly life, nor to desire Heaven or bliss.
   And, therefore, we may say that he beareth not this image of sin, but
   is borne of it; like a man that is sick and so weak that he cannot bear
   himself, and, therefore, is laid on a bed, and borne in a litter. Right
   so, such a sinful soul is so weak and impotent, for lack of grace, that
   he can neither move hand nor foot to do any good deed, nor to resist
   (by displeasing of will) the least motion of sin, when it cometh, but
   falls down thereto, just like a beast upon carrion. But a soul that is
   reformed, though he use his fleshly senses and feel fleshly stirrings,
   yet he loatheth them in his heart, for he would not for any good rest
   in them fully, but fleeth any such rest in them, as the biting of an
   adder, and had rather have his rest and the love of his heart in God,
   if he could; and sometimes actually aspireth thereto, and often
   grudgeth at the fleeing of the pleasures of this life, for love of the
   life everlasting. This soul is not borne by this image of sin, like a
   sick man, though he feel it; but he beareth it, for through grace he is
   made mighty and strong to suffer and bear his body, with all the evil
   stirrings of it, without hurting or defiling himself, inasmuch as he
   loveth them not, nor followeth them, nor consenteth to deadly sins, as
   another doth.

   This was bodily fulfilled in the gospel by a man sick of the palsy, who
   was so feeble that he could not go, and therefore was laid and borne in
   a litter, and brought to our Lord; and then he saw him in that misery,
   of His goodness He said to him: Arise, and take up thy bed, and go home
   to thy house; [173] and so he did, and was whole. And soothly, right as
   this man bare upon his back, when he was made whole, the bed that
   before bare him; right so it may be said in the spiritual sense, that a
   soul, reformed in faith, heareth this image of sin, which bare him
   before. And therefore be not too much adread of thy blackness that thou
   hast by bearing of this image of sin; but only for the shame of the
   discomfort that thou hast from the beholding of it, and also for the
   upbraiding that thou feelest in thy heart of thy ghostly enemies, when
   they say to thee thus: Where is they Lord Jesus? What seekest thou?
   Where is the fairness that thou speakest of? What feelest thou else but
   blindness of sin? Where is that image of God, that thou sayest is
   reformed in thee? Comfort thyself, and be faithful stiffly, as I said
   before, and if thou do so, thou shalt, by this faith, destroy all the
   temptations of thy enemies. Thus saith St Paul: Take unto you the
   buckler of faith, with which thou shalt be able to quench all the
   burning darts of the enemy. [174]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [170] Cant. 1.

   [171] Cant. 1.

   [172] Twining.

   [173] St John 5.

   [174] Ephes. 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER X: Of three sorts of Men, whereof some be not reformed, and some be
    reformed only in Faith, and some both in Faith and Feeling

   BY that which I have said, thou mayest perceive, that according to the
   divers parts of the soul are divers states of men. Some are reformed to
   the likeness of God, and some are not; and some are reformed only in
   faith, and some both in faith and feeling. For thou must understand
   that a soul hath two parts. The one is called sensuality, and that is
   fleshly feeling by the five outward senses, which is common to man with
   beasts; of the which sensuality, when it is unskilfully and
   inordinately ruled, is made up the image of sin. That is, when it is
   not ruled after reason, for then is the sensuality sin. The other part
   is called reason; and that is parted also into two, into the superior
   and inferior part. The superior part is likened to a man, for it should
   be master and sovereign, and that is properly the image of God, for by
   that only the soul knoweth God, and loveth Him. And the inferior is
   likened to a woman, for it should be obedient to the other part of
   reason, as woman is subject to man. And this consisteth in the knowing
   and ruling of earthly things, for to use them discreetly according as
   we have need of them, and to refuse them when we have no need of them,
   and to have ever with it an eye upwards towards the superior part of
   reason with dread and reverence, to follow and be guided by it.

   Now may I say, that a soul that liveth after the likings and lusts of
   his flesh, is, as it were, a brute beast; and neither hath knowledge of
   God nor desire of virtues, nor of good living, but is all blinded in
   pride, fretted with envy, overlaid with covetousness, defiled with
   lechery, and other great sins; is not reformed to the likeness of God;
   for it lieth and resteth fully in the image of sin, that is, in
   sensuality. Another soul, that feareth God, and resisteth deadly
   stirrings of the sensual part, and followeth them not but liveth
   according to reason in ruling and ordering of worldly things, and
   setteth his intent and his will for to please God by his outward works,
   is reformed to the likeness of God in faith; and though he feel the
   same stirrings of sin as the other doth, they shall not disease him,
   for he resteth not in them as the other doth. But another soul, that
   through grace fleeth all deadly stirrings of sensuality, and all
   venials also, so far forth that he feeleth them not, keeping under the
   very first risings, is reformed in feeling; for he followeth and is led
   by the superior part of reason, and this he doth by the beholding of
   God and spiritual things, as I shall tell thee afterwards.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XI: How Men that abide and live in Sin, misshape themselves into the
    likeness of divers Beasts, and they be called the Lovers of the World

   A WRETCHED man is he then that knoweth not the worthiness of his soul,
   nor will know it, how it is the most worthy creature that ever God
   made, except an angel, to whom yet it is like; high above all others,
   the which nothing can satisfy as its full rest, but only God. And
   therefore should he not love nor like anything, but Him only, nor covet
   nor seek anything, but how he may be reformed to His image; for he
   knoweth not this, therefore seeketh he and coveteth his rest and his
   liking outwardly in bodily creatures that are worse than himself.
   Unnaturally doth he, and unreasonably, that leaveth the sovereign Good
   and everlasting Life (which is God) unsought and unloved, unknown and
   unworshipped, and chooseth his rest and his bliss in the fading delight
   of an earthly thing. And yet thus do all the lovers of this world, that
   have their joy and their bliss in this wretched life. Some have it in
   pride and vain glory of themselves, that when they have lost the fear
   of God they travail and study night and day how they may come to the
   worship and praise of the world, and care not by what means they come
   thereto, and surpass all other men, either in learning or any other
   skill, in name or in fame, in riches or in respect, in sovereignty and
   mastership. Some men have their rest in riches, and in outrageous
   getting of worldly goods, and set their hearts so fully to get them,
   that they seek nothing else but how they may come thereto. Some have
   their liking in fleshly lusts of gluttony and lechery, and other bodily
   uncleanness, and some in one thing, and some in another.

   And thus wretchedly these that do thus, misshape themselves from the
   worthiness of a man, and turn themselves into the likeness of divers
   beasts. A proud man is turned into a lion, for pride; for he would be
   feared and worshipped by all, and that none should withstand the
   fulfilling of his fleshly will, neither in word nor deed. And if any
   one contradict his proud will, he becometh angry and wroth, and would
   revenge himself [175] on him, as a lion wreaketh himself on a little
   beast. He that doth this is not a man, for he doth unnaturally and
   unreasonably against the kind of a man, and so is turned and
   transformed into a lion.

   Envious and angry men are turned into hounds, through wrath and envy,
   that barketh against his neighbour, and biteth him by wicked and
   malicious words, and with wrongful deeds grieveth them that have not
   trespassed against him, harming them both in body and soul, contrary to
   God's bidding.

   Some men are misshapen into asses, that are slow to the service of God,
   and evil willed to do any good deed to their neighbour. They are ready
   enough to run for worldly profit, and for earthly honour or for
   pleasing of earthly man. But for procuring reward in heaven, for
   helping of their own souls, or for the worship of God, they are soon
   weary, they have no list thereto; and if they must go about any such
   thing, they go but slowly and with an unwilling mind.

   Some are turned into swine, for they are so blind in their
   understandings and so brutish in their manners that they have no fear
   of God, but follow only the lusts and likings of the flesh, and have no
   regard to the virtues and honesty beseeming the noble nature of man,
   nor to order themselves according to the rules of right reason, nor to
   refrain the unreasonable motions of sensual nature, but as soon as a
   fleshly or sensual motion of sin riseth within them, they are ready to
   fall down thereto, and follow it as swine.

   Some men are turned into wolves, that live by ravening; as bad covetous
   men do that, through violence or might, rob or deceive their neighbours
   of their worldly goods; and some are turned into foxes, as false and
   deceiving people that live in treachery and guile.

   All these and many more, that live not in the fear of God, but break
   His commandments, transform themselves from the likeness of God, and
   make themselves like beasts, yea and worse than beasts, for they are
   like to the fiend of hell. And therefore verily these men that live
   thus, if they be not reformed when the hour of death cometh and their
   souls part from their bodies then shall their eyes be opened, which are
   now blinded with sin, and then shall they find and feel the torment of
   their wretchedness that they lived in here. And, forasmuch as the image
   of God was not reformed through the Sacrament of Penance in them
   neither in faith nor feeling here in this life, they shall be cast out
   from the blessed face of our Creator as cursed, and shall be condemned
   with the devil into the depth of hell, there to remain for ever. Thus
   saith St John in the Apocalypse: The fearful and unbelievers, the
   cursed, murderers, fornicators, sorcerers, idolaters, and all that love
   and make a lie, their portion shall be in the pit that burns with fire
   and brimstone. [176] If the lovers of this world would often think of
   this, how all this world shall pass away, and draw to an end, and how
   that all wicked love shall be most severely punished, they would in a
   short time loathe all worldly lusts which they now take most delight
   in, and would lift up their hearts to love God, and would carefully
   seek and labour how they might be reformed to His likeness ere they
   pass hence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [175] Wroken of him.

   [176] Apoc. 21.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XII
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION I: How Lovers of this World in divers ways disenable themselves
      from becoming reformed in their Souls

   BUT some now will say thus: I would fain love God, and be a good man,
   and forsake the love of the world if I might; but I have not grace for
   it. If I had the same grace that a good man hath, I should do as he
   doth; but because I have it not, I cannot, and so I need [177] seek to
   do no more, but am excused.

   Unto these men I answer thus: True it is as they say, that they have no
   grace, and therefore they lie still in their sin, and cannot rise out.
   But that availeth them not before God, for it is their own fault. They
   disenable themselves in divers ways, so that the light of grace cannot
   shine into them, nor rest in their hearts. For some are so froward that
   they will not have grace, nor be good men at all; for that they know
   well, if they should turn good men, they must part with the great
   liking and lust of this world, which they have in earthly things; but
   that they will not do, for they think they are so sweet that they will
   not part with them. And they must also do works of penance, as fasting,
   watching, praying and many other good works, in chastising of their
   flesh and in withdrawing of their fleshly will, and these may they not
   do, for they seem so sharp and so terrible to their thinking, that they
   shrink [178] and loathe to think upon them, and so they cowardly and
   wretchedly still dwell in their sins.

   Some would seem desirous of grace, and begin to dispose themselves for
   it, but their will is exceedingly weak, for as soon as any stirring of
   sin cometh, though it be contrary to the command of God, they fall
   presently thereto, for they are (through former custom of often falling
   and assenting to sin) so as it were bound and tied to sin, that they
   think it impossible to withstand it; and so their imagined difficulty
   of being able to make such resistance maketh their will weak, and
   smiteth it down again.

   Some also feel the stirrings of grace, as when they have bitings of
   conscience for their evil living, and motions to leave it, but it seems
   so painful and grievous to them that they will not suffer it nor abide
   it, but fly from it and forget it if they can, so that they run to seek
   comfort and contentment outwardly, at such times, in fleshly creatures,
   to the end that they may not feel such pangs of conscience within their
   souls. And moreover some men are so blind and so brutish that they
   think there is no other life but this; nay that there is no soul other
   than of a beast, and that the soul of a man dieth with the body as the
   soul of a beast; and therefore they say: Let us eat and drink and make
   merry here, for of this life we are secure, we see no other heaven.

   Verily such are some wretches that say thus in their hearts though they
   say it not with their mouths. Of which men the Prophet saith thus: The
   fool hath said in his heart there is no God. Such a fool is every one
   that loveth or liveth in sin, and chooseth the love of the world as the
   rest of his soul; he saith there is no God, not with his mouth, for he
   will speak of Him sometimes, when the world goes well with him, as it
   were in reverence of Him, saying: Blessed be God. And sometimes in
   despite, when he is angry against God or his neighbour and sweareth by
   his blessed body or any of his members. But he saith in his thoughts
   that there is no God, and that is because he imagineth that God seeth
   not his sin, or that He will not punish it so severely as the Scripture
   saith; or that He will forgive him his sin though He see it; or else
   that there shall no Christian be damned, do he never so ill. Or else,
   if he fasts the fasts of our Lady, or say every day so many prayers, or
   hear every day two or three Masses, or do some bodily work, as it were
   for the honour of God, he thinketh he shall never go to hell, do he
   never so much sin, and continue in it. This man saith in his heart that
   there is no God, but is unwise, as the Prophet saith, for he shall one
   day find and feel in torments that He is a God whom he forgot and set
   at nought; but set by the wealth of the world, as the Prophet saith:
   Pain only will give understanding. [179] For he that knoweth not this
   here, nor will know it, shall know it well when he is in torments.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [177] It is to me to wyte no more.

   [178] Uggen.

   [179] Jer. 28.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION II: A little Counsel how Lovers of this World should do, if they
      will be reformed in their Souls before their departure hence

   THESE men, though they know well that they are out of grace, and in
   deadly sin, they have no care nor sorrow nor thought therefore, but
   give themselves to sensual mirth and worldly solace as much as they
   can. And the farther they be from grace the more mirth they make, and
   perchance some of them hold themselves well apaid that they have no
   grace, that they may as it were the more fully and freely follow the
   liking of fleshly lusts as though God were asleep and did not see them.
   And this is one of the greatest faults that can be. And thus, by their
   own perverseness, they stop the light of grace from their own soul,
   that it may not rest therein. The which grace, for its part, is most
   willing and ready to shine to all creatures, and enter into the souls
   of men, that will but be willing to receive it, even as the sun shineth
   upon all creatures bodily, where it is not hindered. Thus saith St John
   in the Gospel: The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness
   comprehendeth it not. [180] That is, these blind hearts receive not the
   gracious light, nor have the benefit of it, but even as a blind man is
   becompassed with the light of the sun when he standeth in it, and yet
   seeth it not, nor receiveth any benefit of it, as for going, or
   walking, or working by it. Even so, spiritually, a soul blinded with
   deadly sin is all encompassed with this spiritual light, and yet he is
   never the better, for he is blinded, and will not see nor know his
   blindness, and this is one of the greatest impediments of grace, that a
   man so wretched will not, by reason of his pride, be aknown of his
   blindness; or else, if he know it, careth not for it, but maketh merry,
   as if he were very secure and safe.

   Therefore, unto all these men that are thus blinded and bound with the
   love of this world, and are fallen from the natural fairness of man,
   and are become misshapen, I say and counsel that they would think on
   their souls, and dispose themselves for grace as much as they can;
   which they may do on this wise, if they will, when they find themselves
   out of a state of grace, and overlaid with deadly sin, let them first
   think with themselves what a miserable and dangerous thing it is to be
   out of the state of grace and separated from God; for there is nothing
   that holdeth them from falling into the pit of hell presently, save the
   bare single thread of this bodily life, whereby they hang; and what may
   more easily be broken in two than a single thread? For, were the breath
   stopped in their body (and that may easily happen) their soul would
   presently pass out, and would instantly be in hell, there to remain
   everlastingly. And if they would but thus think with themselves for
   some time, they would shake and tremble at the righteous judgements of
   God and at His severe punishing of sins, and they would begin to grieve
   and sorrow for their sins, and for their want of God's grace and
   favour, and then would they cry and pray that they might have grace,
   and if they did thus, then would grace enter in and put out darkness
   and hardness of heart and weakness of their will, and give them might
   and strength to forsake the false love of this world, so far at least
   as it is deadly sin; for there is no soul so far from God through
   wilfulness of deadly sin (I except none that liveth in this body of
   sin) that may not, through grace, become righteous, and be restored to
   cleanness of living, if he will but bow and submit his will to God with
   humility, for to amend his life, and heartily ask grace and forgiveness
   of Him, and excuse our Lord and wholly accuse himself. For holy Writ
   saith: I will not, saith the Lord, the death of a sinner, but rather
   that he be converted and live, [181] for our Lord's will is that the
   most froward man that liveth, and who through sin is misshapen in soul,
   if he will but change his will and ask grace, may be reformed to His
   likeness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [180] St John 1.

   [181] Ezec. 33.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART II
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER I: OF REFORMING IN FAITH AND FEELING ALSO: That this Reforming
    cannot be suddenly gotten, but in length of Time, by Grace, and much
    Spiritual and Corporal Industry

   THE reforming in Faith, which I have before treated of, may easily be
   gotten. But after this cometh reforming in Faith and Feeling, which
   will not easily be gotten, but by much pains and industry. For
   reforming in Faith is common to all chosen souls, though they be in the
   lowest degree of charity. But reforming in Feeling is only in those
   souls that are coming to the state of perfection, and that cannot be
   attained unto suddenly, but after great plenty of grace, and much and
   long spiritual exercising, and thereby shall a man attain thereto, and
   that will be after that he is first healed of his spiritual sickness,
   and after that all bitter passions and fleshly lusts and other old
   feelings are burnt out of the heart by the fire of desire: and new
   gracious feelings are brought in with burning love and spiritual light.
   Then doth the soul draw very near to perfection, and to reforming in
   feeling.

   And here it is no otherwise then, as when a man through bodily sickness
   is brought near to death, though he receive a medicine, by the which he
   is restored, and is freed from the danger of death, yet cannot he,
   therefore, presently rise up, and go to work as a sound man may; for
   the feebleness of his body keeps him down, so that he must rest, and
   follow the use of medicines, and use a good diet, by measure, according
   to the advice of a physician, till he hath fully recovered his health.
   Right so in this spiritual business, he who through deadly sin is
   brought to a spiritual death, though through the medicine of the
   Sacrament of Penance he be restored to life, so that he shall not be
   damned, nevertheless he is not presently whole, and cured of all his
   passions and of all his fleshly desires, nor is apt for contemplation;
   but he must abide a great while, and take good heed to himself and
   order himself so, that he may recover perfect health of soul; for he
   shall linger a great while, ere he be fully whole. Yet if he take
   medicines, by the counsel of a good spiritual Physician, and use them
   in time with measure and discretion, he shall much the sooner be
   restored to his spiritual strength, and come to reforming in feeling.
   For reforming in Faith is the lowest state of all chosen souls, for
   beneath that they cannot well be.

   But reforming in feeling is the highest state in this life that the
   soul can come to. But from the lowest to the highest a soul cannot
   suddenly start, no more than a man that would climb upon a ladder that
   is high, and setteth his foot on the lowest stave, can at the next step
   get up to the highest, but must go by degrees from one to another till
   he come to the highest.

   Even so it is spiritually, no man becometh suddenly supreme or high in
   grace, but through long exercise and cunning [182] working of the soul
   may he come thereto, namely when He (in whom all grace lieth) helpeth
   and teacheth a wretched soul, for without His special help and inward
   teaching can no soul arrive thereto.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [182] Sly.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER II
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION I: The Causes why so few Souls in comparison of the Multitude of
      others, come to this Reforming that is both in Faith and Feeling

   BUT now thou wilt say, Since our Lord is so courteous of His goodness,
   and so free of His gracious gifts, it is a wonder that so few souls (as
   it seems) in comparison of the multitude of others come to this
   reforming in feeling. It would seem that either He is unwilling, but
   that is not so; or that He hath no regard of His creatures, who by
   receiving of Faith are become His servants.

   Unto this I answer that one occasion is this: Many that are reformed in
   Faith, set not their hearts to profit in grace, nor to seek a higher
   estate of good living, through much industry in praying and thinking,
   and other bodily and spiritual exercises; but think it enough for them
   to keep themselves from deadly sins, and to stand still in the plight
   they are in. For they say it is enough for them to be saved, and have
   the least degree in Heaven, they will covet no more.

   Thus perchance, do some souls, who are in the state of grace, and lead
   an active life in the world, say or think; and it is no wonder, for
   they are so busied with worldly things that are needful to be done that
   they cannot fully set their hearts to profit in spiritual exercises.
   But nevertheless, such proceeding is perilous to them, for they fall
   daily, and are now up, and now down, and cannot come to the stability
   of good living, yet are they somewhat excusable, by reason of their
   condition of life. But other men and women who are free from worldly
   businesses if they will, and may have their needful sustenance without
   much solicitude about it, especially religious men and women, who have
   bound themselves by entering into religion to the state of perfection,
   and other men also in secular estate that have good abilities and
   understanding, and may (if they will dispose themselves) come to much
   grace; these men are more to blame. These persons, I say, are more to
   blame, for they stand still, as idle, and will not profit in grace, nor
   in further seeking to come to the love and knowledge of God.

   For verily it is perilous for a soul to be reformed only in Faith, and
   will not seek to make any further progress, nor give himself diligently
   to spiritual exercises, for so he may easily lose that he hath, and
   fall again into deadly sin. For a soul cannot stand still always in one
   state, for it is either profiting in grace, or decaying through sin.
   For it fareth with him, as it doth with a man that were drawn out of a
   pit, and when he is up, would go no further than the pit's brink,
   surely he were a very fool, for a little puff of wind, or an unwary
   moving of himself, might soon cast him down again, and that worse than
   he was before. But if he fly as far as he can from the brink and go
   forward, on further ground, then, though there come a great storm, he
   is the more secure from falling into the pit. Right so is it in this
   spiritual business; he that is drawn out of the pit of sin through
   reforming of Faith, and when he is out of deadly sin thinketh himself
   secure enough, and therefore will not profit, but remaineth still at
   the pit's brink, as near as he may, he is not wise; for upon the least
   temptation of the enemy, or of his flesh, he falleth into sin again.
   But if he flee from the pit, that is, if he set his heart fully to come
   to more grace, and to use his best industry to come thereto, and give
   himself heartily to prayer, meditating and other good works, though
   great temptations rise against him, he falleth not easily to deadly sin
   again.

   And verily it is a wonder to me, that seeing grace is so good and so
   profitable, why a man, when he hath but a little thereof, yea so little
   that he can scarce have less, should say: Ho, I will have no more of
   this, for I have enough. When yet I see a worldly man, though he have
   of worldly goods much more than he needeth, yet will he never say: Ho,
   I have enough, I will have no more of this; but will covet more and
   more, and bestir all his wits and might, and will never set a stint to
   his covetousness to get more. Much more, then, should a chosen soul
   covet spiritual good, which is everlasting, and which maketh a soul
   blessed, and never should cease from coveting, if he did well, to get
   what he might get. For he that most coveteth, most shall have; and
   surely if he do thus, he shall profit and grow in grace greatly.

   Another cause of such fewness of souls reformed in feeling is this:
   Some men that are reformed in Faith, in the beginning of their turning
   to God, set themselves in a certain manner of working, whether it be
   spiritual or corporal, and think ever to hold on in that manner of
   working, and not to change it for any other that cometh through grace,
   though it were better, imagining the first course to be best for them
   to hold on in, and therefore they rest therein, and through custom so
   bind themselves thereto that when they have fulfilled it they find
   themselves wonderfully well satisfied, for they imagine they have done
   a great good thing therein for God. And if it chance that they be at
   any time hindered from their said custom, though it be by a just
   occasion, they are sad and troubled in conscience, as if they had done
   a great deadly sin.

   These men hinder themselves somewhat from feeling of more grace, for
   they set their perfection in a corporal work, and so they make an end
   in the midst of the way, where no end is. For those corporal or
   sensible customs, which men use in their beginnings, are good, but they
   are but means and ways to lead a soul forward to perfection.

   And therefore he that setteth his perfection in any bodily or spiritual
   exercise, which he feeleth in the beginning of his turning to God, and
   will seek no further, but ever rest therein, he hindereth himself
   greatly. For it is but a silly way of trading, wherein an apprentice is
   ever in the same degree of skill, and can do as much in it on the first
   day as he can thirty years after. Or else, if the trade be good and
   subtle, he is but of a dull wit, or an evil will that profiteth not
   therein.

   Now it is certain, that of all crafts the service of God is most
   sovereign and most subtle, and the highest and hardest to come to
   perfection in it, and also the most profitable and gainful to them that
   faithfully prosecute it; and therefore it seemeth that the apprentices
   to it that are ever alike in learning are either dull witted or evil
   willed.

   I do not reprove those customs that men use in their beginnings,
   whether they be corporal or spiritual, but say that they be full good
   and profitable [183] for them to use. But I would that they should hold
   them only as a way and an entry towards spiritual feeling, and that
   they use them as convenient means till better come; and that while they
   use them they covet after better. And then if better come that are more
   spiritual, and more drawing in of the thoughts from fleshliness and
   sensuality, and vain imaginations, if that same better thing should be
   hindered by cleaving still to their former customs, that then they
   leave such their custom (when it may be left without scandal or harm
   [184] to others) and follow that which they feel. But if neither hinder
   the other, that then they use both if they may. I mean not of leaving
   customs necessary through bond of law, or of rule, or of penance, but
   of others voluntarily undertaken. Thus saith the Prophet in the Psalms:
   Surely the lawgiver will give His blessing, they shall go from strength
   to strength, and the God of Gods shall be seen in Sion. [185] That is,
   our Saviour will give His grace to chosen souls, calling them from sin
   and making them righteous through good works to His likeness; through
   which grace they shall profit and grow from virtue to virtue till they
   come to Sion, that is, till they come to contemplation in which they
   shall see the God of gods, that is they shall see well that there is
   but one God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [183] Speedful.

   [184] Disease.

   [185] Ps. 83.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION II: How that without great Corporal and Spiritual Industry, and
      without much Grace and Humility, Souls cannot come to reforming in Feeling
      nor keep themselves therein after they come thereto

   BUT now thou wilt say, since it is so, that reforming in Faith only is
   so low, and so perilous to rest in, for fear of falling again; and
   reforming in Feeling is so high, and so secure for them that can arrive
   thereto, therefore covetest thou to know what kind of exercises and
   industries were most convenient to be used for it, by the which thou
   mayest profit and come thereto; or whether there be any one certain
   exercise or special work by which a man may come to that grace and that
   reforming in feeling.

   To this I answer thus: Thou knowest well that what man or woman that
   will dispose himself to come to cleanness of heart and to feeling of
   grace, it behoveth him to use much industry and great striving both in
   will and in deeds continually against the wicked stirrings of all chief
   sins. Not only against pride or envy, but against all other, with all
   the kinds that come out of them, as I have said before in the First
   Book. For why? Passions and fleshly desires hinder the cleanness of
   heart and peace of conscience. And it behoveth him also to labour to
   get all virtues, not only chastity and temperance, but also patience
   and mildness, charity and humility, and all the other. And this cannot
   be done by one manner of work, but by divers works, according to the
   divers and sundry dispositions of men, as now praying, now meditating,
   now working some good works, now proving and exercising themselves in
   divers ways, in hunger, in thirst, in cold, in suffering of shame and
   despite, if need be, and bodily pains and labours, for the love of
   virtue and justice. This thou knowest full well, for this thou readest
   in every book that treateth of good life; thus saith every man that
   would stir up men's souls to the love of God. And so it appeareth that
   there is no one special exercise, no certain work by which only a soul
   can come to that grace, but principally through the grace of our Lord
   Jesus, and by many and great deeds, in all that he is able to do, and
   yet all is little enough.

   And one reason why there must be such painstaking is this: That since
   our Lord Jesus Himself is the special master and teacher of this art,
   and the special Physician of spiritual sicknesses; for without Him all
   is nought; it is therefore reasonable, that as He teacheth and
   stirreth, so a man should follow and work. But he is a simple master
   that cannot teach his scholar whilst he is learning but only one
   lesson, and he is an unskilful physician, that by one medicine would
   heal all sores. Therefore our Lord Jesus, that is so wise and so good,
   to show His wisdom and goodness teacheth divers lessons to His
   scholars, after that they profit in their learning, and giveth to
   divers souls divers and several medicines according to the nature of
   their sickness.

   Another reason also is this: If there were one certain work by which a
   soul might come to the perfect love of God, then might a man fancy that
   he might come thereto by his own endeavours, and through his own
   travail only; as a merchant cometh to his riches only by his own
   industry and travail. But it is not so in this spiritual business,
   concerning the love of God, for he that will serve God wisely and come
   to the perfect love of God, he will covet to have none other reward but
   Him only. But then for to have him may no creature deserve by his own
   travail or industry; for though a man could labour both corporally and
   spiritually as much as could all the creatures that ever have been, yet
   could he not, for all that, only by his own working deserve to have God
   for his reward; for He is the sovereign bliss and endless goodness, and
   surpasseth without comparison all men's deserts; and therefore He
   cannot be gotten by any man's special working, as a temporal reward
   may, for He is free and giveth to whom He will, and when He will,
   neither for this, nor for that, nor in this time, nor after that time.
   For though a soul work all that he can and may all his lifetime, yet
   shall he never have the perfect love of Jesus till our Lord will freely
   give it.

   Nevertheless, on the other side, I say that God useth not to give such
   grace unless a man do work and travail all that he can and may; yea,
   till it seem to him that he can work no more, or else be in full will
   and desire to do more if he could. And so it seemeth, that neither
   grace only, without the full working of the soul so far as it can, nor
   the man's working alone, without grace, bringeth the soul to the
   reforming in feeling (the which reforming consisteth in perfect love
   and charity). But that both joined together, that is grace joined to
   working, bringeth into a soul the blessed feeling of perfect love. The
   which grace cannot rest fully, but only on humble souls that be full of
   the fear of God.

   Therefore I may affirm that he that hath not humility, nor doth use his
   industry and labour, cannot come to this reforming in feeling. And he
   hath not full humility, that understandeth and perceiveth not himself
   truly as he is. As thus: He that doth all the good deeds that he can,
   as fasting, watching, wearing hair-cloth, and all other sufferings of
   bodily penance, or doth all the outward works of mercy to his
   neighbour, or else internal works, as praying, weeping, sighing,
   meditating, if he always rest in them, and lean so much on them, and so
   greatly regardeth them in his own sight and esteem that he presumeth on
   his own deserts, and thinketh himself ever rich and good, holy and
   virtuous, verily as long as he feeleth himself thus, he is not humble
   enough. No; though he say or think that all that he doth is of God's
   gift, and not of himself, he is not yet humble enough; for he doth not
   as yet make himself naked of all his good deeds, nor truly poor in
   spirit, nor feels himself to be nothing, as indeed he is. And verily,
   till a soul through grace is come sensibly to annihilate herself and
   strip herself of all the good deeds that she doth, through the sight
   and beholding of the truth of Jesus, she is not perfectly humble; for
   what is humility but truth? Verily nothing else. And therefore he that
   through grace can see Jesus, how that He doth all, and himself doth
   just nothing, but suffereth Jesus to work in him what He pleaseth, he
   is humble. But this is very hard, and as it were impossible, and
   unreasonable (to a man that worketh all by human reason, and seeth no
   further) for to do many good deeds, and then to attribute all to Jesus
   and set himself at nought. But whoso can have a spiritual sight of the
   truth, he shall think it full true and full reasonable to do so. And
   verily he that hath this sight shall do never the less, but shall be
   stirred up to travail corporally and spiritually, much the more, and
   with a better will. And this may be one cause why some men peradventure
   labour and travail, [186] and pine their wretched bodies with
   outrageous penance all their lifetime, and are ever saying prayers and
   psalms and many beads, and yet cannot come to the spiritual feeling of
   the love of God, as it seems some do in short time, with less pains,
   for they have not that humility I spake of.

   Also on the other side I say: He that useth not his industry, but
   thinketh thus with himself, to what end should I take pains? Why should
   I pray, or meditate, or watch, or fast, or do any other bodily penance
   to attain to such grace, seeing it cannot be gotten or had but only by
   the free gift of Jesus? Therefore I will continue in my sensuality as I
   am, and do even nothing of any such corporal or spiritual works; but
   expect till He give it, for if He be pleased to give it, He asketh no
   working of me, how much soever or how little I do, I shall have it, and
   if He be pleased not to give it, labour I never so hard, I shall get it
   never the sooner. He that saith thus shall never come to this
   reforming, for he draweth himself wilfully to idleness of the flesh,
   and disenableth himself for the receiving of the gift of grace,
   inasmuch as he layeth aside and putteth from him both inward working,
   which consisteth in a lasting desire and longing after Jesus, and
   outward working, by exercising his body in outward deeds, so that he
   shall never receive the said grace.

   Therefore I say that he that hath not true humility, nor is very
   serious and diligent, either only in internal exercises and continual
   desire towards God by prayer, and devout affections and thoughts of
   Him, or else both inward and outward, he cannot come to this spiritual
   forming of His image.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [186] Swink and sweat.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER III: An Entry or good Beginning of a Spiritual Journey, showing how
    a Soul should behave herself in intending and working that will come to this
    Reforming, by example of a Pilgrim going to Jerusalem

   NEVERTHELESS, for that thou covetest to know some manner of working by
   which thou mayest the sooner attain to this reforming, I shall show
   thee, as well as I can, the shortest and readiest help that I know in
   this working. And how that may be I shall tell thee by an example of a
   good pilgrim in this wise. There was a man that would go to Jerusalem
   and because he knew not the way he came to another man, who he believed
   knew the way thither better, and asked him whether he might come to
   that city, who answered that he could not come thither without great
   pains and travail, for the way is long and perilous, and full of great
   thieves and robbers and many other hindrances there be that befall a
   man in his going, and also there be many several ways as it seemeth
   leading thitherward. And many men travelling thitherward are oftentimes
   killed or robbed, and so may not come to that place which they desire.
   Nevertheless, there is one way, the which whosoever taketh and holdeth
   to it, I will undertake (saith he) he shall come to that city of
   Jerusalem, and shall never lose his life, nor be slain, nor die by
   default, though he should oft be robbed and well beaten, and suffer
   much pain in the going, yet his life shall be safe. Then said the
   pilgrim, so I may have my life saved, and come to the place that I
   covet, I care not what mischief I suffer in going. And therefore, tell
   and advise me what you think necessary, and I promise you on a
   certainty that I will follow your counsel. That other man answered and
   said thus: Lo, I set thee in the right way; this is the way, and see
   that thou bear in mind that which I tell thee. Whatsoever thou seest,
   hearest, or feelest, that would stay or hinder thee in the way, stick
   not at it, willingly consent not to it, abide not with it, behold it
   not, like it not, fear it not, but still go forward holding on thy way,
   and ever think and say with thyself that thou fain wouldst be at
   Jerusalem for that thou covetest and that thou desirest; and nought
   else but that, and if men rob thee and spoil thee, beat thee, scorn
   thee, despise thee, do not thou strive against such their doings, if
   thou mean to have thy life safe, but be content with the harm thou
   receivest, and hold on thy way, as if all that were nothing, lest thou
   receive more harm. Also if men would seek to stay thee by telling
   tales, and feed thee with lies or conceits to draw thee to merriment,
   or to forsake or prolong thy pilgrimage, give them a deaf ear and
   answer them not again, and say naught else but that thou wouldst fain
   be at Jerusalem. And if men proffer thee gifts, and would make thee
   rich with worldly goods, listen not to them, but think ever on
   Jerusalem. And if thou wilt hold this course and do that which I have
   said, I will undertake for thy life, that thou shalt not be slain, but
   that thou shalt come to that place that thou desirest.

   Now to apply this spiritually to our purpose: Jerusalem is, as much as
   to say, a sight of peace; and betokeneth contemplation in perfect love
   of God; for contemplation is nothing else but a sight of God, which is
   very peace. Then if thou covet to come to this blessed sight of very
   peace, and be a true pilgrim towards Jerusalem, though it be so that I
   was never there, nevertheless, as far forth as I can, I shall set thee
   in the way towards it.

   The beginning of the high way, in which thou shalt go, is reforming in
   Faith, grounded humbly on the faith and on the laws of holy Church as I
   have said before, for trust assuredly, though you have sinned
   heretofore, if you be now reformed by the Sacrament of Penance, after
   the law of holy Church, that thou art in the right way. Now then, since
   thou art in the safe way, if thou wilt speed in thy going and make a
   good journey, it behoveth thee to hold these two things often in thy
   mind: humility and Love; and often say to thyself, I am nothing, I have
   nothing, I covet nothing, but one. Thou shalt have the meaning of these
   words in thine intent, and in the habit of thy soul perpetually, though
   thou have them not always expressly in thy thought (for that is not
   necessary). Humility saith, I am nothing, I have nothing; Love saith, I
   covet nothing, but one, and that is Jesus. These two stirrings well
   fastened, with the minding of Jesus, make good music in the harp of the
   soul, when they be cunningly struck upon with the finger of reason; for
   the lower thou smitest upon the one, the higher soundeth the other. The
   less thou feelest that thou art, or that thou hast of thyself, through
   Humility, the more thou covetest for to have of Jesus, through desire
   of love. I mean not only that Humility which a soul feeleth by the
   sight and sense of his own sin, for frailness and wretchedness of this
   life, or of the wretchedness of his neighbour; for though this kind of
   Humility be true and wholesome, nevertheless it is boisterous and
   fleshly in comparison of that other, not so clean, nor soft, nor
   lovely. I mean that Humility which a soul feeleth through grace, in the
   sight and beholding of the endless being, and the wonderful goodness of
   Jesus, and if thou canst not see it with thy spiritual eye, yet that
   thou believe it; for through this sight of his being, either in full
   faith or in feeling, thou shalt esteem thyself not only the most
   wretched creature that is, but also as nothing in the substance of thy
   soul, though thou hadst never done any sin. And this is lovely
   Humility; for in respect of Jesus (who is truly all) thou art just
   nothing, and so must thou think that thou hast just nothing, but art as
   a vessel that standeth ever empty, and as if nothing were therein, as
   of itself; for do thou never so many good deeds outward or inward,
   until thou have and feel that thou hast the love of Jesus, thou hast
   just nothing. For with that precious liquor only may thy soul be
   filled, and with none other. And forasmuch as that thing alone is so
   precious and noble, therefore whatever else thou hast, or what thou
   dost, hold and esteem it as nothing as to rest in, without the sight
   and the love of Jesus. Cast it all behind thee, and forget it, that
   thou mayest have this, which is the best of all. Just as a true
   pilgrim, going towards Jerusalem, leaveth behind him house and land,
   wife and children, and maketh himself poor and bare from all things
   that he hath, that he may go lightly without letting. Right so, if thou
   wilt be a spiritual pilgrim, thou shalt strip thyself naked of all that
   thou hast, that are either good deeds or bad, and cast them all behind
   thee, that thou be so poor in thy own feeling that there be nothing of
   thy own working that thou wilt restingly lean on; but ever desiring
   more grace and love, and ever seeking the spiritual presence of Jesus.
   And if thou dost thus, then shalt thou resolve in thy heart fully and
   wholly that thou wilt be at Jerusalem, and at no other place but there;
   that is, thou shalt purpose in thy heart wholly and fully that thou
   wilt nothing have but the love of Jesus and the spiritual sight of Him
   in such manner as He shall please to show Himself; for to that end only
   art thou made and redeemed, and He it is that is thy beginning and thy
   end, thy joy and thy bliss. And therefore whatsoever thou hast, be thou
   never so rich in other deeds spiritual or corporal (unless thou have
   this love that I speak of, and know and feel that thou hast it) hold
   and esteem that thou hast right nothing. Imprint this well in the
   desire of thy soul, and cleave fast thereto, and it shall save thee
   from all perils in thy going, that thou shalt never perish, and it
   shall save thee from the thieves and robbers which I call unclean
   spirits, that though they spoil thee and beat thee by divers
   temptations, thy life shall ever be safe; and in brief, if thou keep
   it, as I have said, thou shalt escape all perils and mischiefs, and
   come to the city of Jerusalem in a short time.

   Now then, since thou art in the way, and knowest the name of the place,
   and whither thou tendest, begin therefore to go thy journey. Thy
   setting forth is naught else but spiritual working, and bodily also,
   when there is need, which thou shalt use according to discretion in
   this wise. What work soever it is that thou shalt do (according to thy
   degree, and the estate thou art in), corporally or spiritually, if it
   help and further this gracious desire that thou hast to love Jesus, and
   make it more whole, more easy, and more mighty to all virtues and to
   all goodness, that work I hold the best, be it preaching, be it
   meditating, reading, or working; and as long as that work strengtheneth
   most thy heart and thy will to the love of Jesus, and draweth thy
   affections and thy thoughts farthest off from worldly vanities, it is
   good to use it; and if so be that through use the savour or good taste
   thereof groweth less, and thou thinkest of some other work that
   savoureth more, and thou feelest more grace in that other, take the
   other, and leave that. For though thy desire and the yearning of thy
   heart to Jesus ought ever to be unchangeable, nevertheless thy
   spiritual works that thou art to use, in praying or thinking, for the
   feeding and nourishing thy desire, may be divers, and may well be
   changed, after that thou feelest thyself disposed through grace
   severally to apply thy heart to them; for it fareth with works and this
   desire as it doth with sticks and a fire, for the more sticks are laid
   to the fire, the greater is the fire. Right so, the more several
   spiritual works that a man hath in his design, to keep entire this
   desires the mightier and more burning shall his desire be to God.

   And therefore consider wisely what work thou canst best do, and which
   most helpeth to keep whole this desire of Jesus (if so be thou be free,
   and not bound by any obligation), and that do. Bind not thyself to
   voluntary customs unchangeably, which may hinder the liberty of thy
   heart to correspond or answer the motion or invitation of Jesus, if His
   grace at any time should specially visit thee. And I shall tell thee
   what customs are ever good and necessary to be kept, that is, such as
   consist in the getting of virtues, and in hindering or resisting of
   sin, such customs should never be left; for thou shouldst ever be
   humble, patient, sober and chaste, if thou do as thou shouldst. But the
   customs of other things, if they hinder a better good, are good to be
   laid aside, giving place to that which would be better for us. As thus,
   if a man have a custom to say so many beads or prayers, or to meditate
   of such or such a subject, for so long a time, or to watch, or kneel
   thus long, or any other such bodily deed, these customs are to be left
   sometimes when reasonable cause requireth, or when more grace cometh
   otherwise, or in some other exercise.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IV: Of certain Temptations and Lettings which Souls feel from their
    Spiritual Enemies, in their Spiritual knowing and going towards Jerusalem,
    and the Remedies against them

   NOW that thou art in the way, and knowest how thou shouldst go, beware
   of thy enemies, that will be busy to let thee if they can. For their
   intent is to put out of thy heart that desire, and that longing that
   thou hast to the love of Jesus, and to drive thee home again to the
   love of worldly vanities; for that nothing grieveth them so much as
   this desire. These enemies are principally fleshly desires, and vain
   fears, which rise out of thy heart, through the corruption of thy
   fleshly nature, and would hinder thy desire of the love of God, that
   they may fully and peaceably possess thy heart; these are thy nearest
   enemies. Also other enemies there are, as unclean spirits, which are
   busy with slights and wiles to deceive thee. But one remedy hast thou,
   which I mentioned before, and that is, that whatsoever they say,
   believe them not; but hold on thy way, and only desire the love of
   Jesus. Answer them ever on this wise: I am nothing, I have nothing, I
   covet nothing only the love of our Lord Jesus.

   If thy enemies, by suggestions in thy soul, say unto thee that thou
   hast not made thy Confession aright, or that there is some old former
   sin hid in thy heart that thou knowest not, nor never madest thy
   Confession aright of it, and therefore thou must turn home again, and
   leave off thy desire, and go confess thyself better; believe not this
   saying, for it is false, for thou art rightly confessed, and so do thou
   surely hope and trust; and that thou art in the right way, and that
   thou needest no further to ransack thy soul for confession of that
   which is past, hold on thy way, and think only on Jerusalem.

   Also, if they say that thou art not worthy to have the love of God, and
   therefore why shouldst thou covet that which thou wilt not be able to
   attain, nor art not worthy of; believe them not but go on, and say
   thus: Not because I am worthy, but because I am unworthy, therefore
   would I love God; for if I had His love, that would make me worthy; and
   since I was created to that end, though I should never have it, yet
   will I covet it, and therefore will I pray and think that I may get it.
   And then if thy enemies see that thou beginnest to wax bold, and
   well-willed to thy work, they will begin to be afraid of thee, yet will
   they not cease to seek to stay and hinder thee as much as they can, as
   long as thou art going in the ways what with affrighting and
   threatening thee on one side, and what with flattering and vain
   pleasing thee on the other side, to make thee break thy purpose and
   turn home again. And they will say thus: If thou hold on thus thy
   desire to Jesus, travailing so fervently as thou now beginnest, thou
   wilt fall into bodily sickness, or thou wilt craze thy head and fall
   into fancies or melancholy, as thou seest some do; or thou wilt fall
   into poverty, or bodily mischief, and none will be able to help thee,
   or thou wilt fall into secret temptations and illusions of the devil,
   that thou shalt not be able to help thyself; for it is very dangerous
   for any man to give himself over to the love of God, and leave all the
   world, and covet nothing but only the love of Him. For that many perils
   may fall out that a man knows nothing of, and therefore turn home
   again, and leave off this desire, for thou shalt never bring it to
   pass, and do as other worldly men do.

   Thus will thy enemies say, but believe them not, but hold on thy
   desire, and say naught else; but that thou wouldst have Jesus, and be
   Jerusalem; and if they perceive that thy will is so strong, that thou
   wilt not give over, neither for fear of sin, nor of sickness, for
   fancies nor for frenzies, for doubts nor for dreads of spiritual
   temptations, for mischiefs nor for poverty, for life nor for death, but
   ever seekest and longest after one thing, and nothing else but that one
   thing, and turnest a deaf ear to them, as though thou heardest them
   not, and holdest thee on stiffly and constantly in thy course of
   prayer, and in thy other spiritual exercises without stinting, but yet
   with discretion, after the counsel and directions of thy Superior, or
   of thy ghostly Father, then begin they to be wroth, and to come a
   little nearer to thee. Then they begin to rob thee and beat thee, and
   do thee all the shame that they can, and that is, when they make that
   all the deeds that thou doest, be they never so well done, are judged
   by others to be evil, and turned into the worse part. And whatsoever
   thou wouldst do, or have done for the help or comfort of thy body or
   soul, it shall be letted or hindered by other men, so that thou shalt
   be put from thy will in everything which thou reasonably desirest. And
   all this they do, that thou mayest be stirred up to anger, or
   melancholy, or evil will against thy neighbour. But against all these
   diseases, and all other that thou mayest feel, use this remedy. Take
   Jesus into thy mind, and trouble not thyself with them, nor be angry;
   tarry not with them, but think on thy lesson: That thou art nothing,
   that thou hast nothing, that thou canst nothing lose of earthly goods,
   that thou covetest nothing but the love of Jesus; and hold on thy way,
   with thy exercises, to Jerusalem. And though thou be sometimes tarried
   and letted in thy way, through thy frailty, with such inconveniences as
   befall thy bodily life, through evil will of man, or malice of the
   enemy; as soon as thou canst, come again to thyself, leave off the
   thinking of thy inconveniences, and go on with thy exercise. Abide not
   long upon the thinking of those thy defects for fear of thy enemies.

   And after this, when they see that thou art so well willed, that thou
   art not angry, nor heavy, nor wroth, nor much moved against any
   creature for aught that they can do or say against thee, but settest
   thy heart fully to suffer all that may fall, ease or unease, praise or
   dispraise, and that thou dost esteem or regard nothing so that thou
   mayest keep thy thought and thy desire whole to the love of God, then
   are they much abashed. But then will they set upon thee with flattery
   and vain pleasing, and that is when they set before thee all thy good
   deeds and virtues, and tell thee that all men praise thee and speak
   well of thy holiness, and how all men love thee and worship thee for
   thy holy living. Thus will thy enemies do, that thou mayest believe
   them, and take delight in this vain joy, and rest therein. But if thou
   do well thou shalt esteem all such janglings and suggestions to be
   false flatterings of thy enemy, that proffereth thee to drink venom
   tempered with honey, and therefore refuse it, and say thou wilt have
   none of it, but thou wouldst be at Jerusalem.

   Such lettings shalt thou feel, or the like, what from thy flesh, and
   what from the world, and what of the fiend, more than I can rehearse.
   Now for as long as a man suffereth his thoughts willingly to run about
   the world in beholding of sundry things, he perceiveth few lettings.
   But as soon as he draweth all his thoughts and his yearnings to one
   thing only, to have it, to know it, and to love it, which is Jesus;
   then shall he feel many painful lettings; for whatsoever thing he
   feeleth which is not that which he coveteth, that same thing is a
   letting to him. Therefore I have set down some of them for examples in
   particular. And moreover in general, I shall now tell thee that
   whatsoever stirring thou feelest of the flesh, or of the fiend, either
   pleasant or painful, bitter or sweet, lovely or dreadful, gladsome or
   sorrowful, that would draw down thy thoughts or thy desires from the
   love of Jesus to worldly vanities, and would hinder or cool thy
   spiritual covetousness that thou hast to the love of Him, and would
   have thy heart to be occupied with that stirring and rest upon it, set
   it at naught, entertain it not willingly, tarry not therewith too long.
   But if it be any worldly thing that is necessary to be done, for
   thyself or thy neighbour, dispatch it, and quit thee soon of it, and
   bring it to an end that it hang not on thy heart. But if it be another
   thing that may be spared and is not very needful, or else concerns thee
   not, heed it not, jangle or dally not therewith, nor trouble or vex
   thyself about it, fear it not, like it not, but cast it out of thy
   heart speedily, and say thus: I am nothing, I have nothing, I seek nor
   covet nothing but the love of Jesus. Fasten thy thoughts to this desire
   and strengthen it, and maintain it by prayer and other spiritual
   exercises that thou forget it not, and it shall lead thee in the right
   way, and save thee from all dangers; that though thou feel them thou
   shalt not perish, and I hope that it shall bring thee to the perfect
   love of our Lord Jesus.

   Nevertheless on the other side, I say also, what work or what stirring
   it is that may help or strengthen or nourish thy desire, and draw thy
   thoughts farthest from lust and the minding of the world, more entire
   and more burning to the love of God, whether it be praying, meditating,
   reading or hearing, solitariness or being in company, silence or
   talking, going or sitting, hold to it for the time, and exercise
   thyself therein as long as any savour or relish therein lasteth, if it
   be so that thou take therewith meat, and drink, and sleep, as a pilgrim
   doth, and use discretion in thy exercises, after the advice and
   directions of thy superior. For a pilgrim, though he be in never so
   great haste in his journey, yet will he eat and drink and sleep. Do
   thou likewise; and though it hinder and stay thee at one time, it shall
   further thee at another time.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER V: Of an evil Day and a good Night, and what they mean, and how the
    Love of the World is likened to an evil Day, and the love of God to a good
    Night

   IF thou wouldst know then what this desire is, verily it is Jesus, for
   He worketh this desire in thee, and giveth it thee; and He it is that
   desireth in thee, and He it is that is desired; He is all, and He doth
   all, if thou couldst see Him. Thou dost nothing, but sufferest Him to
   work in thy soul, and assentest to Him with great gladness of heart,
   that He will vouchsafe to do so in thee. Thou art nothing else but a
   reasonable instrument by which and in which He worketh; and therefore
   when thou feelest thy thoughts, through the touching of grace, taken up
   with the desire of Jesus, with a mighty devout will for to please Him
   and love Him, then think that thou hast Jesus, for He it is that thou
   desirest. Behold Him well, for He goeth before thee, not in bodily
   shape, but insensibly, by secret presence of His power. Therefore see
   Him spiritually if thou canst, and fasten all thy thoughts and
   affections to Him, and follow Him wheresoever He goeth; for He will
   lead thee the right way to Jerusalem, that is to the sight of peace and
   contemplation. Thus prayed the Prophet to the Father of Heaven, saying:
   Send out Thy light and Thy truth (that is Thy Son Jesus), and He shall
   lead me (by desire in me) to Thy holy hill and to Thy tabernacles.
   [187] That is, to the feeling of perfect love and height of
   Contemplation.

   Of this desire the Prophet Isaias speaketh thus: Memoriale tuum, &c.
   Lord Jesus, the remembrance of Thee is imprinted in the desire of my
   soul, for my soul hath desired Thee in the night, and my spirit hath
   coveted Thee in all its thoughts. [188] The Prophet saith he desired
   God all in the night, being a space betwixt two days; for when one day
   is ended another day beginneth not presently, but first cometh night
   which parteth the days, being sometimes long and sometimes short, and
   then after that cometh another day. The Prophet meaneth not only of
   this manner of night, but he meaneth a spiritual night. Thou shalt
   understand that there be two days or two lights. The first is a false
   light, the second a true light. The false light is the love of this
   worlds which a man hath in himself through the corruption of nature.
   The true light is the perfect love of Jesus felt through grace in a
   man's soul. The love of this world is a false light, for it passeth
   away and lasteth not, and so it performeth not that which it promiseth.
   This light did the enemy promise to Adam when he stirred him to sin,
   and said thus: Your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods. And
   therein he said truth. For when Adam had sinned, forthwith his inner
   eye was shut, and spiritual light withdrawn, and his outward eye was
   opened, and he felt and saw a new light of fleshly liking and worldly
   love which he saw not before. And so saw he a new day, but this was an
   evil day, for this was it that Job cursed, when he said thus: Let the
   day perish wherein I was born. [189] He cursed not the day running on
   in the year which God made, but he cursed this day which man made, that
   is the concupiscence and the love of this world in the which he was
   born, though he felt it not. That day and that light he asked of God
   that it might perish and last no longer. But the everlasting love of
   Jesus is a true day and a blessed light; for God is both love and
   light, and He is everlasting, as St John saith: He that loveth God
   dwelleth in the light. [190] And now, what man perceiveth and seeth the
   love of this world to be false and failing, and therefore will forsake
   it and seek the love of Jesus, yet may he not for all that presently
   feel the love of Him, but he must abide awhile in the night, for he
   cannot suddenly come from that one light to that other, that is from
   the love of the world to perfect love of God. This night is nought else
   but a forbearing and a withdrawing of the thought and of the soul from
   earthly things by great desire and yearning for to love and see and
   feel Jesus and spiritual things. This is the night; for even as the
   night is dark, and doth hide all bodily things, and a time of ceasing
   from all bodily works; even so a man that setteth himself fully to
   think on Jesus, and to desire only the love of Him, is careful to hide
   his thoughts from vain beholding and perceiving, and his affections
   from fleshly liking and loving of all bodily creatures, whereby his
   thoughts may become free and not be subject, nor his affections bound
   or pinned to, or troubled with anything lower or worse than himself.
   And if he come to this pass then is it night with him, for then he is
   in darkness. But this is a good night and a light darkness, for it is a
   stopping out of the false love of this world, and it is an approaching
   of the true day. And verily the darker that this night is the nearer is
   the true day of the love of Jesus; for the more that a soul can,
   through longing after God, be hid from the noise [191] and stirrings of
   fleshly affections and unclean thoughts, the nearer is she to feel the
   light of the love of Him, for it is even at her. Thus seemeth the
   Prophet to mean, when he saith: When I sit in darkness our Lord is my
   light. That is, when my soul is hid from all stirrings of sin as it
   were in sleep, then is our Lord my light, for then approacheth He by
   His grace to show me His light, nevertheless this night is sometime
   painful. As first, when a man is very foul, and is not used through
   grace to be often in this darkness, but would fain have it, and be in
   it, and therefore he setteth his thoughts and his desires to Godward as
   much as he can, he would not feel nor think but only of Him, and
   because he cannot easily have it, therefore it is painful for the
   custom and familiarity [192] that he hath formerly had with the sins of
   the world, and of fleshly affections and earthly things; and his daily
   fleshly deeds press so upon him, and continually strike in, and through
   force draw down the soul to them, that he cannot well be hid from them
   so soon as he would. Therefore this darkness is painful to him, and
   especially when grace toucheth him not abundantly, instilling some
   extraordinary devotion into him. Nevertheless if it be so with thee, be
   not too sad or heavy for it, nor strive much as though thou wouldst by
   force drive them out of thy thoughts, for thou canst not do so; but do
   thou rather expect grace, suffer quietly, and force not thyself too
   much. But slyly (if thou canst) draw thy desire and spiritual eye to
   Jesus, as if thou didst not care for them. For be thou assured, when
   thou wouldest desire Jesus, and think only of Him, and thou art not
   able freely to do so, for the pressing in of such worldly thoughts,
   thou art certainly coming out of the false day and art entering into
   this darkness. But thy darkness is not restful, not quiet to thee by
   reason of thy uncleanness and unacquaintedness with it, and therefore
   use it often, and in process of time through feeling of grace it will
   be more easy and more restful to thee, and that is when thy soul
   through grace is made so free, and so able and so good and so gathered
   into itself that it listeth to think on just nothing, then is it in a
   good darkness. This nothing I mean thus: that a soul may through grace
   be gathered into itself freely and wholly, and not be driven against
   its will, nor drawn down by force for to think, or like, or love with
   cleaving of affection to any sin, or any earthly thing vainly, then
   thinketh the soul just nought, for then it thinketh of no earthly thing
   cleavingly. This is a rich nought, and this nought and this night is a
   great ease to the soul that desireth the love of Jesus, it is in ease
   as to the thoughts of any earthly thing, nevertheless it is full busy
   to think on Him.

   What thing then maketh this darkness? Verily nought else but a gracious
   desire to have the love of Jesus, for that desire and that longing that
   it hath at that time to the love of God, for to see Him and have Him,
   driveth out of the heart all worldly vanities and fleshly affections,
   and gathereth the soul into itself, and busieth it only in thinking how
   it may come to the love of Him. And at that time she may freely and
   devoutedly behold Jesus, whether she would pray or meditate, and so it
   bringeth her to this right nothing; and verily it is not altogether
   dark nor nothing when it thinketh thus; for though it be dark from
   false light, it is not altogether dark from the true light. For Jesus,
   that is both love and light, is in this darkness, whether it be painful
   or restful. If it be painful, then is Jesus in the soul, as travelling
   in the desire and longing after light, but He is not yet as resting in
   love, nor as showering His light. And therefore it is called night and
   darkness, inasmuch as the soul is hid from the false light of the
   world, and hath not yet a full feeling of true light, but is in
   expecting of that blessed love of God which it desireth.

   Therefore if thou wouldst know when thou art in this secure darkness,
   and when not, thou mayest try it thus, and seek no further. When thou
   feelest thy intent and thy will fully set for to desire God, and think
   only on Him, thou mayest, as it were, at first ask thyself in thy own
   thoughts whether thou covetest to have anything of this life for love
   of the thing itself, or for to have the using of any of thy bodily
   senses in any creature. And then if the eye answer then thus: I would
   see just nothing, and thy mouth: I would savour just nothing, and thine
   ear: I would hear just nothing; and thy body: I would feel just
   nothing; and after that, thy heart say: I would think just nothing of
   earthly things, nor of bodily deeds, nor would have my affections
   fastened fleshly to any creature but only in God and to Godwards, if I
   could; and when they all answer thus to thee, and do it full readily
   being touched by grace, then art thou entered somewhat into this
   darkness. For though withal thou feel and perceive within thee the
   presentations and profferings of vain thoughts, and pressing in of
   fleshly affections; nevertheless thou art in this profitable darkness,
   if it be so that thy thoughts be not fixed to them; for such vain
   imaginations that fall into the heart unadvisedly, they trouble indeed
   this darkness, and somewhat molest the soul because it would be hid
   from them, but cannot; but they do not take away the profit of this
   darkness, for the soul shall by this means in time come to restful
   darkness. And then is this darkness restful when the soul is hid for a
   time from the painful feeling of all such vain thoughts, and is rested
   only in the desire and longing after Jesus, with a spiritual beholding
   of Him, as it shall be said hereafter; but this lasteth whole and
   entire but a short time, yet though it be but for a short time, yet it
   is full profitable.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [187] Ps. 42.

   [188] Is. 26.

   [189] Job 3.

   [190] St John 1.

   [191] Din.

   [192] Homeliness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VI: How that the Desire of Jesus felt in this lightsome Darkness
    slayeth all Motions of Sin, and enableth the Soul to perceive spiritual
    Lightnings from the heavenly Jerusalem, that is, Jesus

   SEEING then this darkness and this night consisting only in the desire
   and longing after the love of Jesus with a blind thinking on Him, is so
   good and so restful, though it be but short, how good then, and how
   blessed it is to feel His love, and to be illuminated with His blessed
   invisible light thereby to see the truth, the which light a soul
   receiveth when the night passeth, and the day springeth.

   This I conceive was the night that the Prophet meant when he said: My
   soul hath desired Thee in the night, as I have said before. It is much
   better to be hid in this dark night from beholding of the world, [193]
   though it were painful, than to be out in false liking of this world,
   which seemeth so shining, and so comfortable to them that are blind in
   the knowledge of spiritual light; for when thou art in this darkness,
   thou art much nearer Jerusalem than when thou art in the midst of the
   false light. Therefore apply thy heart fully to the stirrings of grace,
   and use thy self to dwell in this darkness, and by often essaying to be
   acquainted therewith, and it shall soon be made restful to thee, and
   the true light of spiritual knowing shall spring up to thee, not all at
   once, but secretly by little and little, as the Prophet saith: To them
   that dwell in the country of the shadow of death light is sprung up.
   [194] That is, light of grace springeth, and shall spring to all them
   that can dwell in the shadow of death; that is in this darkness which
   is like to death; for as death slayeth a living body and all its
   fleshly senses, right so the desire of the love of Jesus felt in this
   darkness slayeth all sins, all fleshly affections, and all unclean
   thoughts for the time, and then dost thou hasten to draw near to
   Jerusalem. Thou art not there yet, but by some small sudden lightnings
   that glide out of small caves from that city, shalt thou be able to see
   it afar off ere thou come to it, for know thou well, though that thy
   soul be in this restful darkness without the trouble of worldly
   vanities, it is not yet clothed all in light, nor turned all into the
   fire of love. But it perceiveth full well that there is somewhat above
   itself that it knoweth not, nor hath not yet, but would have it, and
   burningly yearneth after it, and that is nought else but the sight of
   Jerusalem outwardly, which is like to a city which the Prophet Ezechiel
   saw in his visions. [195] He saith that he saw a city upon a hill
   towards the south, that to his sight when it was measured was no more
   in length and breadth than a reed, that is six cubits and a palm of
   length. But as soon as he was brought into the city, and looked about
   him, then he saw that it was wondrous great, for he saw many halls, and
   chambers both open and secret; he saw gates and porches without and
   within, and many more buildings than I now speak of, and it was in
   length and breadth many hundred cubits, that it seemed a wonder to him
   that this city was so long and so large within, that seemed so little
   to his sight when he was without.

   This city betokeneth the perfect love of God set upon the hill of
   Contemplation, which to the sight of a soul that without the feeling of
   it travelleth in desire towards it seemeth somewhat, but it seemeth but
   a little thing, no more than a rood, that is, six cubits and a palm of
   length. By six cubits are understood the perfection of man's work; and
   by the palm, a little touch of Contemplation. He seeth well that there
   is such a thing that passeth the deservings of all the workings of man,
   like as a palm is surpassed by six cubits, but he seeth not within what
   it is, yet if he can come within the city of Contemplation, then seeth
   he much more than he saw at first.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [193] Claude fenestras ut luceat domus.

   [194] Isa. 9.

   [195] Ezec. 40.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VII: How a Man shall know false Illuminations that are feigned by
    the Enemy, from the true Light of knowing that cometh out of Jesus, and by
    what tokens

   BUT now beware of the midday fiend that feigneth light as if it came
   out of Jerusalem, and is not so; for the fiend seeth that our Lord
   Jesus showeth light to His lovers of truth; therefore for the deceiving
   of them that are unwise, he showeth a light that is not true under
   colour of a true light, and cozeneth them. Nevertheless, how a soul may
   know the true light when it shineth from God, and when it is feigned by
   the enemy shall I declare (as methinketh) by an example of the
   firmament.

   Sometime the firmament showeth a light from the sun, which seemeth to
   be the sun and is not; and sometimes showeth the true sun truly. To
   know the one from the other is thus: the feigned sun showeth himself
   only betwixt two black rainy clouds; and then because the sun is near,
   there shineth out from the clouds a light as if it were a sun, but is
   not. But the true sun showeth itself when the firmament is clear, or
   much cleared from black clouds. Now to our purpose. Some men, as it
   seems, forsake the love of the world and would come to the love of God,
   and to the light of understanding Him, but they would not come through
   that darkness which I spake of before. They will not know themselves
   truly and humbly what they have been heretofore, or what they are yet
   through sin, nor how naught they are in their nature against God. They
   are not busy to enter into themselves, all other outward things being
   left and flee all wicked stirrings that rise in their hearts of Pride,
   Envy, Anger, or other sins through a lasting desire to Jesus in praying
   and meditating, in silence, and in weeping, and in other corporal and
   spiritual exercises as devout and holy men have done. But as soon as
   they have forsaken the world, as it were outwardly in appearance, or
   else soon after, they imagine that they are holy and able to have the
   spiritual understanding of the Gospel and of holy Writ, and, namely, if
   they can literally fulfil the commandments of God and keep themselves
   from corporal sins, then they imagine that they love God perfectly. And
   therefore they will presently preach and teach all other men, as if
   they had received grace of understanding in perfection of charity
   through special gift of the Holy Ghost. And also they are much more
   stirred, forasmuch as they feel sometimes much knowledge as it were
   suddenly given to them without great study before had, and also much
   fervour of love as it seemeth for to preach truth and righteousness to
   their neighbour. Therefore they hold it as a grace of God that visiteth
   them with His blessed light above other souls. Nevertheless, if they
   will look well about them, they shall find that this light of knowledge
   and that fervour which they feel cometh not from the true Sun, which is
   our Lord Jesus, but cometh from the midday fiend that feigneth light,
   and likeneth him to the Sun, and therefore shall he be known by the
   foresaid example.

   Light of knowledge, that is feigned by the fiend to a dark soul, is
   showed betwixt two black rainy clouds. Whereof the upper cloud is
   presumption and exalting of himself, and the lower cloud is the
   down-putting and disdaining of his neighbour. Then whatsoever light of
   knowing or feeling of fervour it be that shineth to a soul with
   presumption and exalting of itself, and disdain of his neighbour felt
   at the same time, it is not the light of grace given of the Holy Ghost;
   although the knowledge in itself be true, but it is either from the
   fiend, if it come suddenly, or else from a man's own wit if it come by
   study, and so it may easily be known that this feigned light of knowing
   is not the light of the true Sun.

   Therefore, they that have this knowing on this manner are full of
   spiritual pride, and see it not; they are so blind with this feigned
   light that they hold the exalting of their own heart and their
   disobedience to the laws of holy Church as it were perfect humility to
   the Gospel and to the laws of God; and imagine that the following of
   their own will to be freedom of spirit. And thereupon they begin to
   rain, like black clouds, waters of errors and heresies; for the words
   that they utter in preaching tend all to backbiting, and to strife and
   discord, reproving of States and of Persons; and yet they say that all
   this is charity and zeal of the truth. But it is not so; for St James
   the Apostle saith thus: Ubi zelus est et contentio, &c.--Where envy is
   and contention, there is unstableness and every evil work. [196] And
   therefore that knowledge that bringeth forth such sins cometh not from
   the Father of lights, that is God, but is earthly, beastly and
   devilish. And so by these tokens, namely, pride, presumption,
   disobedience, indignation, backbiting and other such sins (for these
   follow after) may the feigned light be known from the true. For the
   true Sun shineth not nor breaketh forth by special visitation to give
   light of understanding or perfect charity to a soul, unless the
   firmament be first made bright and clear from clouds; that is, unless
   the conscience be made clean through the fire of burning desire to
   Jesus in this darkness which wasteth and burneth up all wicked
   stirrings of pride, vain-glory, wrath, envy and all other sins in the
   soul. As the Prophet saith: Ignis ante ipsum procedet, &c.--A fire
   shall go before him; that is, desire of love shall go before Jesus in
   man's soul, and it shall burn all his enemies; [197] that is, it shall
   waste all sins. For except a soul be first smitten down from the height
   of itself by fear and humility, and be well tried and burnt in this
   fire of desire, and as it were purified from all spiritual filth,
   through long time in devout prayers and other spiritual exercises, it
   is not able to bear the shinings of spiritual light nor to receive the
   precious liquor of perfect love of Jesus. But when it is purified and
   made subtle through this fire, then may it receive the gracious light
   of spiritual knowing and the perfection of love, which is the true Sun.

   Thus saith holy Writ: Vobis qui timetis Deum, &c.--The true Sun of
   Righteousness, that is, our Lord Jesus, shall spring to you that fear
   Him; [198] that is, to humble souls that humble themselves to their
   neighbour, through knowing of their own wretchedness, and cast
   themselves down under God by annihilating themselves in their own
   substance through reverent fear and spiritual beholding of Him
   lastingly, for that is perfect humility. Unto these souls the true Sun
   shall spring, and enlighten their reason to the knowing of Truth, and
   kindle their affections in the fervour of love, and then shall they
   both burn and shine, namely, burn in perfect love through the virtue of
   this heavenly Sun, and shine in the knowledge of God and spiritual
   things, for then be they reformed in feeling.

   Therefore, he that would not be deceived, I think it is good for him to
   draw down himself and hide himself in this darkness. First, from
   intermeddling with other men, as I have said, and forget all the world
   if he can; and follow Jesus with constant desire offered up in prayers
   and meditating on Him. And then I believe the light that cometh after
   this darkness is secure and true, and that it shineth out of the city
   of Jerusalem from the true Sun to a soul that travelleth in darkness,
   and crieth after light for to show her the right way and comfort her in
   travel. For I believe that after true darkness going before feigned
   light never cometh. That is, if a man truly and fully set himself to
   forsake the love of the world, and can through grace come to the
   feeling and knowing of himself, and hold himself humbly in that
   feeling, he shall not be deceived with any errors nor heresies nor
   fancies; for all these come in by the gate of pride. If then pride can
   be stopped out, there shall no such sin rest in a soul, and though they
   come and proffer themselves, they shall not enter; for grace which the
   soul feeleth in this humble darkness shall teach the soul truth, and
   show it that all such proffering are from the enemy.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [196] St James 3.

   [197] Ps. 96.

   [198] Mal. 4.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VIII: How great profit it is to the Soul to be brought through Grace
    into lightsome Darkness, and how a Man shall dispose himself if he will come
    thereto

   THERE be many devout souls that through grace come into this darkness
   and feel the knowledge of themselves, and yet know they not fully what
   it is, and that ignorance is partly a hindrance to them. They feel well
   often their thoughts and their affections drawn out and separated from
   the minding of earthly things, and brought into great rest of a
   delectable softness, without painful troubling of vain thoughts or of
   their bodily senses, and they feel that time so great a freedom of
   spirit that they can think on Jesus peaceably and offer up their Psalms
   and Prayers mightily, savourly and sweetly to Him, as long as frailty
   of bodily nature will suffer them. They understand well that this
   feeling is good, but they know not what it is. Therefore unto all such
   souls I say, as methinketh, that this manner of feeling, though it be
   but short and but seldom, it is really this darkness that I speak of.
   For it is a feeling of themselves first, and a rising above themselves
   through burning desire to the sight of Jesus; or else, if I shall say
   more truly, this gracious feeling is a spiritual sight of Jesus. And if
   they can keep themselves in that rest, or bring it through grace into a
   custom, so that they can lightly and freely have it when they list, and
   hold themselves in it, they shall never be overcome by temptation of
   the fiend, nor of the flesh, nor by errors or heresies; for they are
   set in the gate of Contemplation, able and ready to receive the perfect
   love of Jesus. Therefore he that hath it, it is good that he know it
   humbly, keep it tenderly, and pursue it fervently that no creature let
   [199] him utterly from it, but that he follow it when he may. And that
   he forget and set at nought all things that may put him from this, if
   so be, he be at his own liberty, and may do what he will without
   scandal or offence to his neighbour. For I think that he cannot come to
   this rest lightly, unless he hath great plenty of grace and set himself
   to follow the motions of grace, and that ought he to do; for grace
   would ever be free, namely from sin and worldly business, and all other
   things that let the working of it, though they are not sins.

   Nevertheless, another soul that hath not yet received this plenty of
   grace, if he desire to come to this spiritual knowing of Jesus, he
   must, as much as in him lieth, enable himself to it, and put away all
   lettings that obstruct grace as much as he can. He must truly learn to
   die to the world, and truly forsake the love of it. First, pride, both
   spiritual and corporal, that he desire no worship, worldly knowledge,
   nor worldly craft, profits, nor riches, nor precious clothing, nor
   worldly array, nor anything by which he may be honoured above other
   men; he shall covet none of all these. But if they be put upon him take
   them with fear, so that he be poor both outwardly and inwardly, or at
   least fully inwardly in his heart. And that he covet to be forgotten of
   the world, and men regard him no more, though he be never so rich or so
   wise, than the poorest man living. Also that he suffereth not his heart
   to rest in the beholding of his own deeds, or in his virtues, imagining
   that he doth better than another, in that he forsaketh the world, which
   others do not, and therefore he setteth well by himself. Also he must
   leave all risings of heart, and evil will of anger and envy against his
   neighbour. And that he offend no man, nor anger him indiscreetly by
   word or deed; nor give any man occasion whereby he may reasonably be
   angered, or moved, so that he may be free from every man. And also that
   he forsake covetousness, that he covet right naught of earthly goods,
   but only crave his bodily sustenance which he needeth, and hold himself
   well apaid, when God stirreth up other men to give it him. And that he
   put no manner of trust in the possession of any worldly goods, nor in
   the help or favour of any worldly friends, but principally and fully in
   God; for if he doth otherwise, he bindeth himself to the world, so that
   he cannot be free to think on Jesus. And also gluttony, and lechery,
   and all other fleshly uncleanness must he utterly leave, that his
   affections be bound to no woman by fleshly familiarity; for it is no
   doubt but that such blind love as is sometime betwixt a man and a
   woman, and seemeth good and honest, forasmuch as they would not sin in
   act, is in the sight of God full unclean and very great sin. For it is
   a great sin for a man to suffer his affections, which should be
   fastened to Jesus and to all His virtues, and to all spiritual
   cleanness, to be bound by any fleshly love willingly to any creature,
   especially if it be so much that it beareth down his thoughts, and
   maketh them unrestful that he cannot have favour in God. And this I
   hold to be done willingly, when a man doth it, though he confess it to
   be a sin, or else when he is so blinded with it that he will not see
   it. And also that a man covet not delights of meats and drinks only for
   lust of his flesh, but be contented with such as he can easily have
   without great trouble; namely, if he be in health with what meat will
   put away hunger, and keep his body in ordinary strength for the service
   of God. And that he grudge not, nor strive not, nor vex himself for his
   meat, though sometime he be served not as his flesh desires. All these
   sins and all other must he forsake utterly in his will, and in deed
   when he can; and all other things that hinder him, so that he may
   dispose himself to think freely on Jesus. For as long as these lettings
   and such other hang upon him, he cannot die to the world, nor come into
   this darkness of knowing of himself. And therefore that he may come
   thereto, he must do all these things, as St Paul did, saying thus: This
   world is slain and crucified to me, and I to the world. [200] That is,
   he that hath forsaken the love of the world in honours and riches and
   in all other worldly things abovesaid, for the love of God, and loveth
   it not, nor pursueth it, but is well satisfied that he hath right
   nought of it, nor verily would have though he might, verily to him the
   world is dead, for he hath no favour nor delight therein. And if the
   world set him at nought, and hath no regard to him, nor favour, nor
   worship, and set no price by him, but forgetteth him as a dead man,
   then is he dead to the world. And in this plight was St. Paul set
   perfectly, and so must every other man in part that would come to the
   perfect love of God; for he cannot live to God fully, unless he die
   first to the world. This dying to the world is this darkness, and it is
   the gate to Contemplation, and to reforming in feeling, and none other
   than this. There may be many sundry ways, and several works letting and
   leading sundry souls to Contemplation; for according to divers
   disposings of men, and after divers states as are religious and
   seculars, according as they are in, are there divers exercises in
   working. Nevertheless there is but one gate; for whatsoever exercise a
   soul useth, unless thereby he come to this knowing, and to an humble
   feeling of himself, and that is, that he be mortified and dead to the
   world, as to his love of it, and that he may feel himself sometime in
   this restful darkness, by the which he may be hid from the vanities of
   the world, as to the love of them, and that he may feel himself what he
   is indeed, he is not yet come to the reforming in feeling, nor hath he
   Contemplation fully. He is full far from it, and if he will come to it
   by any other gate, he is but a thief and a breaker of the wall, and
   therefore shall be cast out as unworthy.

   But he that can bring himself first to nought by the grace of humility,
   and die on this manner, he is in the gate; for he is dead to the world,
   and he liveth to God. Of the which St Paul speaketh thus: Ye are dead.
   [201] That is, ye that for the love of God forsake all the love of the
   world, are dead to the world, and Your life is hid with Christ in God.
   That is, ye live spiritually in the love of Jesus. But your life is hid
   from worldly men, as Christ liveth, and is hid in His Godhead from the
   love and the sight of fleshly lovers.

   This gate our Lord Himself showed in the Gospel, when He said thus:
   Every man that forsaketh for My love Father or Mother, Sister or
   Brother, or any earthly good, he shall have an hundredfold in this
   life, and afterward the bliss of Heaven. [202] This hundredfold which a
   soul shall have, if he forsake the world, is nought but the profit of
   this lightsome darkness, which I call the gate of Contemplation. For he
   that is in this darkness, and is hid through grace from worldly vanity,
   he coveteth nothing of worldly goods, he seeketh it not, he is not
   hindered therewith, he looketh not after it, he loveth it not, and
   therefore hath he an hundredfold more than the King, or than he that
   coveteth most of worldly goods, for he that coveteth nought but Jesus
   hath an hundredfold, for he hath more rest, more peace in heart, more
   true love and delight in soul in one day, than he that most coveteth of
   this world, and hath all the wealth of it in his full possession, hath
   all his life-time.

   This is, then, a good darkness, and a rich nought, that bringeth a soul
   to so much spiritual ease, and so quiet softness. I suppose David meant
   of this night, or this nought, when he said thus: Ad nihilum redactus
   sum, et nescivi--I was brought to nought, and I knew it not. [203] That
   is, the grace of our Lord Jesus sent into my heart hath slain in me,
   and brought to nought all the love of the world, and I knew not how,
   for not through any working of my own, nor by my own wit had I it, but
   by the grace of our Lord Jesus. And therefore methinketh that he that
   would have the light of grace, and sweetly feel the love of Jesus in
   his soul, he must forsake all the false light or worldly love, and
   abide in this darkness. And, nevertheless, if he be fearful, at first
   to continue therein, he must not turn again to the love of the world,
   but suffer awhile, and put all his hope and his trust in Jesus, and he
   shall not be long without some spiritual light. Thus the Prophet
   commandeth: Qui ambulat in tenebris, &c.--He that walketh in darkness
   and hath no light, let him hope in our Lord, and let him rely upon his
   God. [204] That is, whoso would hide himself from the love of the
   world, and cannot readily feel the light of spiritual love, let him not
   despair, nor turn again to the world, but hope in our Lord, and rely
   upon Him; that is, trust in God, and cleave to Him by desire, and abide
   awhile, and he shall have light. For it falleth out therein as it doth
   when a man hath been a great while in the sun, and after that cometh
   suddenly into a dark house where no sun shineth, he will be as it were
   blind, and see just nought. But if he will abide awhile, he shall be
   able presently to see about him; first great things, and then small
   things, and afterwards all that is ever in the house. Just so is it
   spiritually: he that forsaketh the love of the world, and cometh to
   himself into his own conscience, at first it is somewhat dark and blind
   to his sight; but if he stand still, and hold out by serious praying,
   and often meditating in the same will to the love of Jesus, he shall be
   able afterwards to see both great and small things which he knew not
   before. This it seemeth the Prophet promiseth when he saith thus:
   Orietur in tenebris lux tua, &c.--In darkness shall thy light spring
   up, and thy darkness shall be as noon-day, and thy Lord God shall give
   thee rest, and shall fill thy soul with lights. [205] That is, thou
   that truly forsaketh the light of all worldly love, and hidest thy
   thought in this darkness, light of blessed love and spiritual knowing
   of God shall spring up to thee, and thy darkness shall be as midday;
   that is, thy darkness of painful desire, and thy blind trust in God,
   that thou hast at first, shall turn into clear knowledge, and into
   security of love, and thy Lord God shall give rest to thee; that is,
   thy fleshly desires, and thy painful fears and doubts, and wicked
   spirits that have before time vexed thee, all these shall grow weak,
   and lose much of their might, and thou shalt be made so strong that
   they shall not trouble thee, for thou shalt be hid in rest from them.
   And then shall our Lord fulfil thy soul with shinings; that is, when
   thou art brought into this spiritual rest, then shalt thou more easily
   attend to God, and do nought else but love Him, and then shall He fill
   all the powers of thy soul with beams of spiritual light. Wonder not
   that I call the forsaking of worldly love a darkness, for the Prophet
   calleth it so, saying thus to a soul:--Intra in tenebras tuas filia
   Chaldaeorum--Go into thy darkness, thou daughter of Chaldee. [206] That
   is, thou soul that art as a daughter of Chaldee through love of this
   world, forsake it, and go into thy darkness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [199] Hinder.

   [200] Gal. 6.

   [201] Colos. 3.

   [202] St Matt. 19.

   [203] Ps. 72.

   [204] Is. 9.

   [205] Isa. 58.

   [206] Is. 47.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IX: That the Working of our Lord Jesus in the Reforming of a Soul,
    is divided into four times, which are: Calling, Justifying, Magnifying and
    Glorifying

   LO, I have told thee a little, how, if thou covet to be reformed in
   feeling, thou shalt dispose thyself towards thy forthgoing.
   Nevertheless I do not say that thou canst do thus of thyself; for I
   know well that it is our Lord Jesus that bringeth all this to the end
   where He pleaseth. For He only, through His grace, stirreth up a soul,
   and bringeth it first into this darkness and then into light, as the
   Prophet saith: Sicut tenebrae ejus ita et lumen ejus. [207] That is,
   just as the light of knowing and the feeling of spiritual love is from
   Jesus, just so the darkness, that is, the forsaking of worldly love, is
   from Him, for He doth all. He formeth and reformeth. He formeth only by
   Himself, but He reformeth us with us; for grace given, and the applying
   our will to grace doth work all this. And in what manner this is done,
   St Paul rehearses thus: Quos Deus praescivit, &c.--Those whom God
   foreknew should be made conformable to the Image of His Son, those He
   called; and whom He called those He justified; and whom He justified
   those He glorified. [208] Though these words may be understood of all
   chosen souls in the lowest degree of charity, who are reformed only in
   faith; nevertheless they may be understood more especially of those
   souls that are reformed in feeling, to whom our Lord God showeth great
   plenty of grace, and is much more busy about them; for they are in a
   special manner His own children, who bear the full shape and the
   likeness of His Son Jesus. In these words St Paul divideth the working
   of our Lord into four times.

   The first is the time of calling of a soul from worldly vanity, and
   that time is often easy and comfortable; for in the beginning of
   turning such a man that is disposed to much grace, is so quickly and so
   feelingly inspired, and feeleth often so great sweetness of devotion,
   and hath so many tears in compunction that he thinketh sometimes that
   he is half in Heaven; but this ease passeth away after for a time. And
   then cometh the second time, namely, the time of justifying, which is
   laborious. For when he beginneth to go forth mightily in the way of
   righteousness, and setteth his will fully against all sin outward and
   inward, and stretcheth out his desires to virtues and to the love of
   Jesus, then feeleth he much letting both within himself from the
   frowardness and hardness of his own will, and from without through the
   temptation of his enemy, that he is oft in full great torment, and that
   is no wonder: for he hath so long been crooked towards the false love
   of the world, that he cannot be made straight, as a crooked staff
   cannot be made even, unless it be cast and wrought by the fire.
   Therefore our Lord Jesus, knowing what is fit for a froward soul,
   suffereth it to be tormented and letted by sundry temptations, and to
   be tried soundly by spiritual tribulations that all the rust of
   uncleanness may be burnt out of it. And this shall be done both
   inwardly with fears and doubts and perplexities that it shall almost
   fall into despair, and shall seem as it were forsaken of God, and
   wholly left in the hands of the fiend (saving only a little secret
   trust that it shall have in the goodness and mercy of God, for that
   secret trust our Lord leaveth in such a soul, though he go never so far
   from it, by the which the soul is borne up from despair, and saved from
   spiritual mischief), and outwardly also it shall be mortified and
   pained in the sensuality, either by divers sicknesses, or by feeble
   tormentings of the enemy; or else by a secret working of God the silly
   soul through feeling and bearing of the wretched body shall be so
   pained that it shall despair almost of suffering or continuing in the
   body, unless our Lord Himself keep it therein. And yet,
   notwithstanding, the soul had rather be in all this pain than to be
   blinded with the false love of the world, for that would be hell to
   such a soul; but the suffering of this manner of pain is only
   Purgatory, and therefore he suffereth it gladly. And he would not put
   it away though he might, because it is so profitable. All this doth our
   Lord in great profit to a soul to drive it out of its sensuality, that
   it may receive spiritual light; for after this, when a soul is thus
   mortified, and brought from worldly love into this darkness, that it
   hath no more savour nor delight of worldly liking than of a straw, but
   thinketh it bitter as wormwood, then cometh the third time of
   Magnifying: and that is, when a soul is reformed in feeling in part,
   and receiveth the gift of perfection, and the grace of Contemplation,
   and that is a time of great rest; for then is Jesus more familiar with
   a soul.

   And after this cometh a fourth time of Glorifying; that is, when a soul
   shall be fully reformed in the bliss of heaven. For these souls that
   are thus called from sin, and thus Justified, or else on any other
   manner by divers trials both through fire and water, and afterwards are
   thus magnified, they shall be glorified. For our Lord shall then give
   them fully what they coveted here; and more than they could covet; for
   He shall raise them above all other chosen souls, to be equal with
   cherubim and seraphim, seeing they passed all other in knowing and
   loving of God here in this life.

   Therefore he that will come to this magnifying must not be afraid of
   this justifying, for that is the way; for our Lord saith by His Prophet
   a word of great comfort to all such souls that are tried with the fire
   of tribulation thus: Puer meus noli timere, &c.--My child, if thou pass
   through fire fear not, for the flame shall not hurt thee. [209] It
   shall cleanse thee from all fleshly filth, and make thee able to
   receive spiritual fire of the love of God, and this must first be done;
   for as I said before it cannot otherwise be reformed in feeling.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [207] Ps. 138.

   [208] Rom. 8.

   [209] Isa. 43.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER X: How it falleth out sometimes that Souls that are but beginning or
    profiting in Grace seem to have more Love, as to outward tokens thereof,
    than some have that be perfect, and yet it is not really so in their
    Interior

   BUT now thou wilt say, how can this be true? For there be many souls
   newly turned to God that have many spiritual feelings; some have great
   compunction for their sins, and some have great devotions and fervours
   in their prayers, and often have sundry teachings of spiritual light in
   understanding, and some men have other kind of feelings of comfortable
   heat and great sweetness; and yet these souls never come fully into
   this restful darkness, which I speak of, with fervent desire and
   lasting love and thought on God. And hereupon thou askest whether these
   souls be reformed in feeling or no. And it seemeth yes, inasmuch as
   they have such great spiritual feelings, which other men who stand only
   in faith feel not.

   Unto this I answer, as methinketh, that these spiritual feelings,
   whether they stand in compunction or devotion, or in spiritual
   imagination, are not the feelings which a soul shall have and feel in
   the grace of Contemplation. I say not but that they are true and
   graciously given of God. But these souls that feel such are not yet
   reformed in feeling, nor have as yet the gift of perfection nor the
   spiritual burning love of Jesus as they may arrive to. And
   nevertheless, it often seemeth otherwise that such souls feel more of
   the love of God than others that have the gift of perfection, inasmuch
   as the feeling showeth more outwardly by great fervour of bodily tokens
   in weeping, praying, kneeling and speaking, and other bodily stirrings,
   so far forth that it seemeth to another man that they were even
   ravished in love. Though I, for my part, do not think them so, for I
   will understand that these kind of feelings and fervours of devotion
   and compunction that these men feel are gracious gifts of God sent into
   chosen souls to draw them out of worldly love and fleshly lust, which
   hath long time been rooted in their hearts, from the which love they
   would not be drawn out but by such feeble motions of great fervours.

   And the reason why this fervour is so much in outward showing is not
   only from the greatness of that love which they have, but from the
   littleness and weakness of their soul, that cannot bear a little
   touching of God; for it is yet, as it were, fleshly, fastened to the
   flesh, and never was yet parted from it by spiritual mortification; and
   therefore the least touching of love, and the least sparkle of
   spiritual light sent from Heaven into such a soul is so much and so
   comfortable and so delectable above all the likings that ever it felt
   before in fleshly love of earthly things, that she is, as it were,
   overcome with it. And also it is so new and so sudden and so
   unaccustomed to her that she is not able to bear it, but bursteth and
   breaketh out into weeping, sobbing and other bodily stirrings. Just as
   a barrel that is old, when it receiveth new wine that is fresh and
   strong, the barrel swelleth out and is ready to cleave and burst until
   the wine hath boiled and purged out all uncleanness; but as soon as the
   wine is fined and cleared, then it standeth still and the barrel whole;
   just so a soul that is old through sin, when it receiveth a little of
   the love of God, which is so fresh and strong that the body is in point
   to cleave and to break were it not that God keepeth it whole. But yet
   it bursteth out at the eyes by weeping, and at the mouth by speaking,
   which is more for weakness and feebleness of the soul than through
   greatness of love. For afterward, when love hath boiled all uncleanness
   out of the soul by such great fervours, then is the love clear and
   standeth still. And then is both the body and the soul much more in
   peace. And yet hath the soul much more love than it had before, though
   it show less outwardly; for it is now all whole in rest within, and but
   little in outward showing of fervour. And therefore I say that these
   souls that feel such great bodily fervours, though they be in much
   grace, are not yet reformed in feeling, but they are greatly disposed
   towards it. For I trow that such a man, namely, that hath been greatly
   defiled in sin, shall not be reformed in feeling, unless he be first
   burnt and purified with such great compunctions going before.

   Another soul that never was much defiled with the love of the world,
   but hath ever been kept from great sins in innocency, may lightlier and
   more privily, without great fervour showed outwardly, come to this
   reforming. Then is this true, as I hope, that such comforts and
   fervours that a soul feeleth in a state of its beginning, or of its
   profiting, are, as it were, his spiritual food sent from Heaven for to
   strengthen him in his journey. Even as a Pilgrim travelleth all day
   meatless and drinkless, and is near-at-hand overcome with weariness,
   falleth at last to a good inn, and there hath he meat and drink, and is
   well refreshed for the time, right so is it spiritually. A devout soul,
   that will forsake the love of the world, and would fain love God and
   setteth all her business thereto, prayeth and exerciseth all day bodily
   and spiritually, and sometimes feeleth no comfort nor savour in
   devotion; then our Lord, having pity on all His creatures, that they
   should not perish for want, nor fall into heaviness or grudging,
   sendeth to it, among other things, His spiritual food, and comforteth
   it in devotion as He pleaseth. And when the soul feeleth any comfort,
   then doth she hold herself well paid for all her travail and all the
   suffering it had on the day, when it fareth well at night by feeling of
   any grace.

   Also in the same manner falleth it out with other souls that are
   profiting and proceeding well forward in grace. These feel oftentimes
   gracious touchings of the Holy Ghost in their soul, both in
   understanding and sight of spiritual things and in affection of love.
   But yet be they not reformed in feeling, nor are they yet perfect, for
   why? All such feelings come to them in that state as it were unawares,
   for they come to them ere they think of them, and go from them before
   they think; and they cannot come by such things again, nor wot they
   where they may find them; for they have not as yet any familiarity with
   them, of thought and lasting desire in Jesus. Nor is the eye of their
   soul opened to the beholding of spiritual things, but they draw well
   toward it; and therefore they are not yet reformed in feeling nor have
   yet the full gift of Contemplation.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XI: After what manner a Man shall come to know his own Soul, and how
    a Man should set his Love in Jesus, God and Man in one Person

   A SOUL that would know spiritual things needs first to have the
   knowledge of itself; for she cannot have the knowledge of a thing that
   is above herself, unless she have first the knowledge of herself. And
   that is when the soul is so gathered into herself, and separated from
   beholding of all earthly things and from the use of her bodily senses,
   that she feeleth herself as she is in her own kind, which is without a
   body. Then, if thou covet for to know and see thy soul what it is, thou
   shalt not turn thy thought with imagination into thy body, to seek it
   and feel it as it were hid within thy heart, as thy heart is hid and
   holden within thy body. If thou seek in that manner, thou shalt never
   find it in itself. The more thou seekest for to find and feel it as
   thou wouldst feel a bodily thing, the farther thou art from it. For thy
   soul is no bodily thing, but a life invisible, not hid and holden
   within thy body, as a less thing is hidden and holden within a greater;
   but it holdeth and quickeneth thy body, and is much greater in might
   and virtue than is thy body. If then thou wilt find it, withdraw thy
   thoughts from all bodily things outward, and from minding of thy own
   body, also from all thy five senses, as much as thou canst, and think
   on the nature of a reasonable soul spiritually, as thou wouldst think
   for to know any virtue, as justice, humility or any other. Right so
   think that a soul is a life immortal, invisible, and hath in itself a
   power to know the sovereign verity, and for to love the sovereign
   goodness, which is God; when thou seest this, then feelest thou
   somewhat of thyself. Seek thyself in none other place, but the more
   fully, the more clearly that thou thinkest of the nature and the
   worthiness of a reasonable soul, what it is and what is the kindly
   working of it, the better seest thou thyself.

   It is full hard for a soul that is rude and much in the flesh for to
   have sight and knowledge of itself or of an angel or of God. It falleth
   presently to the imagining of a bodily shape, and it weeneth thereby to
   have the sight of itself, and in like manner of God, and of spiritual
   things. And that may not be, for all spiritual things are seen and
   known by the understanding of the soul, not by the imagination. Right
   as a soul seeth by her understanding, that the virtue of righteousness
   is to give to everything that which he ought to have; right so, and on
   such a manner may the soul see itself by the understanding.

   Nevertheless, I say not that thy soul should rest still in this
   knowing, but it shall by this seek a higher knowledge above itself, and
   that is the nature of God, for the soul is but a glass, [210] in the
   which thou shouldst see God spiritually. And therefore thou shalt first
   find thy glass and keep it bright and clean from fleshly filth and
   worldly vanity, and hold it well up from the earth, that thou mayest
   see it and our Lord therein also. For to this end do all chosen souls
   travail in this life, in their meaning and in their intent, though they
   have not the special feeling of this. And therefore it is said before
   that many souls beginning and profiting have many great fervours, and
   much sweet devotion, and as it seemeth are all burning in love, and yet
   have they not love perfectly nor spiritual knowledge of God. For be
   thou well assured that though a soul feel never so much fervour, even
   so much that he thinketh his body cannot bear it; or though he melt all
   into weeping, as long as his thinking and his beholding of God is for
   the most part or all in imagination and not in the understanding, he is
   not yet come to perfect love nor to Contemplation.

   For thou shalt understand that the love of God is in three manner of
   ways; all of which are good, but each one is better than the other. The
   first cometh only through Faith, without gracious imagination or
   spiritual knowing of God. This love is in the least soul that is
   reformed in Faith, in the lowest degree of charity; and it is good, for
   it sufficeth to salvation. The second is that which a soul feeleth
   through faith and imagination of Jesus in His Manhood. This love is
   better than the first, when the imagination is stirred by grace, for
   then the spiritual eye is opened in beholding of our Lord's humanity.
   The third love that a soul feeleth through spiritual sight of the
   Godhead in the humanity, as it may be seen here, is the best and most
   worthy, and that is perfect love. This love a soul feeleth not, until
   it be reformed in feeling. Souls beginning and profiting have not this
   love, for they cannot think on Jesus nor love Him spiritually, but, as
   it were, all manly and fleshly after the conditions and likeness of a
   man; and accordingly they frame all their working in their thoughts and
   in their affections. They fear Him as a man, and worship Him and love
   Him principally by the imagination of His humanity, and go no further.

   As thus: If they have done amiss and trespassed against God, they think
   then that God is angry with them, as a man would be if they had
   trespassed against him; and therefore they fall down, as it were, at
   the feet of our Lord with sorrow of heart, and cry Him mercy. And when
   they have done thus, they have a good trust that our Lord of His mercy
   will forgive them their trespass. This manner of doing is right good,
   but it is not spiritual as it might be. Also when they would worship
   God, they present themselves in their thoughts, as if they were before
   our Lord's face in a bodily likeness, and imagine a wonderful light
   there where our Lord Jesus is, and then they reverence Him, and worship
   Him, and fear Him, and fully put them into His mercy for to do with
   them what He will. Also when they would love God, they behold Him,
   worship Him, and dread Him as a man (not yet as God in the humanity),
   either in His Passion, or in some other thing in His humanity, and in
   that beholding they feel their hearts much stirred to the love of God.

   This manner of working is good and gracious, but it is much less and
   lower than is the working of the understanding; that is, when the soul
   graciously beholdeth God in man, for in our Lord Jesus are two natures,
   the Humanity and the Divinity. And as the Divinity is more sovereign
   and more worthy than the Humanity, right so the spiritual beholding of
   the Divinity in Jesus Man is more worthy, and more spiritual, and more
   meritorious than the beholding of the Humanity alone, whether he behold
   the Humanity as mortal or as glorified. And right so by the same reason
   the love which a soul feeleth in thinking and beholding of the Divinity
   in the Manhood, when it is graciously showed, is more worthy, more
   spiritual, and more meritorious than the fervour of devotion, that the
   soul feeleth by the imagination only of the humanity, show it never so
   much outwardly; for in regard of that of the Divinity, this of the
   Humanity is but a human thing. For our Lord showeth not Himself in the
   imagination as He is, nor that He is, for the soul cannot at that time
   for frailty of the flesh suffer it so.

   Nevertheless unto such souls that cannot meditate on the Divinity
   spiritually, that they may not err in their devotion, but that they
   should be comforted and strengthened by some manner of inward beholding
   of Jesus to forsake sin and the love of the world, wherefore our Lord
   Jesus tempereth this invisible light of His Godhead, and clotheth it
   under bodily likeness of His Manhood, and showeth it unto the inner eye
   of the soul, and feedeth it with the love of His precious flesh
   spiritually. The which love is of so great might, that it slayeth all
   wicked love in the soul, and strengthens it for to suffer bodily
   penance and other bodily difficulties in the time of need for the love
   of Jesus. And this is the shadowing of our Lord Jesus over a chosen
   soul, in which shadowing the soul is kept from the burning of worldly
   love; for as a shadow is made of a light and of a body, even so this
   spiritual shadow is made of the blessed invisible light of the Godhead,
   and of the Manhood united thereto, showed to a devout soul. Of the
   which shadow the Prophet saith thus: Spiritus ante faciem nostram,
   &c.--Our Lord Christ before our face as a Spirit, under His shadow we
   shall live among folks. [211] That is, our Lord Jesus in His Godhead is
   a spirit, that cannot be seen of us living in the flesh as He is in His
   blessed light, therefore we shall live under the shadow of His Manhood
   as long as we are here.

   But though that this be true that this love in imagination is good;
   nevertheless a soul should desire to have spiritual love in
   understanding of the Godhead; for that is the end and the full bliss of
   the soul, and all bodily beholdings are but means leading a soul to it.
   I say not that we should refuse the Manhood of Jesus, and separate God
   from man; but thou shalt in Jesus Man, behold, fear, admire and love
   spiritually the Godhead, and so shalt thou, without separating them,
   love God in man, and both God and man spiritually and fleshly. Thus our
   Lord taught Mary Magdalen to do like a Contemplative, when He said
   thus: Noli me tangere, &c.--Touch me not: I am not yet ascended to My
   Father. The meaning is this: Mary Magdalen loved our Lord Jesus well
   before the time of His Passion, but her love was much bodily and little
   spiritual. She understood well that He was God, but she loved Him but
   little as God; for she could not then, and therefore she suffered all
   her affection and all her thoughts to fall on Him as He was in form of
   man. And our Lord blamed her not then, but praised it much. But after
   when He was risen from death, and appeared to her, she would have
   worshipped Him with the same manner of love as she did before, and then
   our Lord forbade her, and said thus: Touch Me not. That is, set not thy
   rest nor the love of thy heart on that form of man which thou seest
   with thy fleshly eye, for to rest therein only, for in that form I am
   not ascended up to My Father; that is, I am not equal to the Father,
   that is, the form of the Godhead; and love Me, know Me and worship Me
   as God and Man, godly, not as a man, manly, so shalt thou touch Me. For
   since I am both God and Man, and all the reason why I am to be beloved
   and worshipped is, for that I am God, and for that I took the nature of
   man; and therefore make Me a God in thy heart and in thy love, and
   worship Me in thine understanding as Jesus, God and Man, the sovereign
   verity and the sovereign goodness, and blessed life; for I am so. And
   thus our Lord taught her, as I understand, and also all other souls
   that are disposed to Contemplation, and enabled thereto that they
   should do so. Nevertheless other souls are not so skilful, [212] nor
   are yet made spiritual through grace, it is good for them that they
   keep on their own working in imagination, with affections towards our
   Saviour's Humanity, until more grace come freely to them. It is not
   safe for a man to leave any good thing utterly, until he see and feel a
   better.

   In like manner may it be said of other kind of feelings that are like
   to bodily, as hearing of delectable songs, or feeling of comfortable
   heat in the body, seeing of light, or sweetness of bodily savour. These
   are not spiritual feelings; for spiritual feelings are felt in the
   powers of the soul, principally in the understanding, and in love, and
   little in the imagination. But these feelings are felt in the powers of
   the body in the imagination, and therefore are not spiritual feelings.
   But when they are even at best, and most true, yet are they but outward
   tokens of the inward grace which is felt in the powers of the soul.
   This may be plainly proved out of Holy Writ, saying thus: Apparuerunt
   Apostolis, &c.--The Holy Ghost appeared to the Apostles on the day of
   Pentecost in the likeness of burning tongues, and inflamed their
   hearts, and sat upon each of them. [213] Now it is true that the Holy
   Ghost, which is God in Himself invisible, was not that fire nor those
   tongues that were seen, nor that burning which was felt bodily, but He
   was invisibly felt in the powers of their souls, for He enlightened
   their reason and enkindled their affections through His blessed
   presence so clearly and so burningly, that they had suddenly the
   spiritual knowledge of truth, and the perfection of love, as our Lord
   promised them, saying thus: Spiritus Sanctus docebit vos, &c.--The Holy
   Spirit shall teach you all truth. That fire and that burning then was
   nought else but a bodily token showed outwardly in witnessing of that
   grace which was felt inwardly. And as it was in them, so is it in other
   souls that are visited and lightened within of the Holy Ghost, and have
   withal such outward feelings for comforting them and witnessing of
   their inward grace. But yet I do not think that such grace is in all
   souls that are perfect, but only where our Lord pleaseth.

   Other imperfect souls that have such feelings outwardly, and have not
   yet received inward grace, it is not good for them to rest in such
   outward feelings, but only inasmuch as they help the soul to more love,
   and to more stableness of thought in God; for some may be true and some
   may be feigned, as I have said before.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [210] Mirror.

   [211] Lam. 4.

   [212] Subtle in kind.

   [213] Acts 2.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART III
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER I: In what Sense this Manner of Speaking of Reforming of a Soul in
    Feeling is to be understood; and in what Manner it is reformed, and how it
    is found in St Paul's Writings

   I HAVE heretofore told thee somewhat of reforming in Faith, and also I
   have touched concerning thy proceeding from that reforming to a higher
   reforming which is in feeling. Not that I would by these discourses
   limit God's working by the law of my speaking, as to say that God
   worketh thus in a soul and no other wise. No, I mean not so, but I
   speak after my simple feeling that our Lord worketh thus in some
   creatures as I conceive. And I hope well, also, that He worketh
   otherwise, which passeth my wit and my feeling. Nevertheless, whether
   He worketh thus or otherwise by several ways, in longer time or
   shorter, with much travail or little, if all come to one end, that is,
   the perfect love of Him, then is it good enough. For if He will give
   one soul on one day the full grace of Contemplation, and without any
   travail, as He well may; as good is that to that soul as if he had been
   tried, pained, [214] mortified and purified twenty years. And therefore
   in this manner take my sayings as I have said, and namely as I meant to
   say them. For now by the grace of our Lord Jesus shall I speak a little
   as methinketh more plainly of reforming in feeling, what it is, and how
   it is made, and what are spiritual feelings which a soul receiveth. Yet
   in the first place, that I may not be understood to make this manner of
   speaking of reforming of a soul in feeling as a fiction or fancy of my
   own, I shall ground it on St Paul's words, where he saith thus: Nolite
   conformari huic saeculo, &c. That is, ye that are through grace
   reformed in Faith, conform not yourselves henceforward to the manner of
   the world, in pride, in covetousness and in other sins, but be ye
   reformed in newness of feeling. [215] Lo, here thou mayest see that St
   Paul speaketh of reforming in feeling; and what that newness of feeling
   is he expoundeth in another place thus: Ut impleamini in agnitione, &c.
   That is: We pray God that ye may be fulfilled in knowing of God's will
   in all understanding and in all manner of spiritual wisdom. [216] This
   is reforming in feeling; for thou must understand that the soul hath
   two manners of feelings, one without by the five bodily senses; another
   within of the spiritual senses, which are properly the faculties of the
   soul--memory, understanding and will. When these faculties are through
   grace fulfilled in all understanding of the will of God and spiritual
   wisdom, then hath the soul new gracious feelings. That this is so he
   showeth in another place, thus: Renovamini spiritu mentis vestri,
   &c.--Be ye renewed in the spirit of your soul. [217] That is, ye shall
   be reformed, not in bodily feeling nor in imagination, but in the upper
   part of your reason. And be clothed with the new man, that is shapen
   after God in righteousness, holiness and truth. That is, your reason,
   which is properly the image of God, through grace of the Holy Ghost,
   shall be clothed in a new light of truth, holiness and righteousness,
   and then is it reformed in feeling. For when the soul hath perfect
   knowledge of God, then is it reformed. Thus saith St Paul: Expoliantes
   veterem hominem, &c.--Spoil yourself of the old man with all his deeds.
   [218] That is, cast from you the love of the world with all worldly
   manners, and clothe you with the new man. That is, you shall be renewed
   in the knowing of God, after the likeness of Him that made you.

   By these words thou mayest understand that St Paul would have men's
   souls reformed in perfect knowledge of God, for that is the new feeling
   which he speaketh of generally. And therefore upon his words I shall
   speak more plainly of this reforming as God shall give me grace. For
   there be two manners of knowing of God.

   One is had principally in imagination, and little in understanding.
   This knowing is in chosen souls beginning and profiting in grace, who
   know God, and love Him humanly (not spiritually) with human affections,
   and with a corporal image of His Humanity, as I have spoken before.

   This knowing is good, and is likened to milk, by which they are
   tenderly nourished as children until they be able to come to the
   Father's table, and take from His hand substantial bread.

   Another knowing is principally felt in the understanding, and little in
   imagination; for the understanding is the lady, and the imagination is
   the maid, serving the understanding when need is. This knowing is solid
   bread meet for perfect souls, and is reforming in feeling.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [214] Pyned.

   [215] In novitate sensus. Rom. 12.

   [216] Col. 1.

   [217] Eph. 4.

   [218] Col. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER II: How God openeth the inward Eye of the Soul to see Him, not all
    at once, but by divers times, and of three Manners of reforming of a Soul
    explained by a familiar Example

   A SOUL that is called from the love of the world, and after that is
   righted, tried and mortified and purified, as I have said before, our
   Lord Jesus of His merciful goodness reformeth it in feeling when He
   pleaseth. He openeth the inner eye of the soul, when He enlighteneth
   her reason through the touching and shining of His blessed light for to
   see Him and know Him, not all fully at once, but by little and little,
   by divers times, as the soul is able to bear it. He seeth Him not what
   He is, for that can no creature do in Heaven nor in earth. Nor seeth he
   Him as He is, for that sight is only in the bliss of Heaven. But he
   seeth Him that He is an unchangeable being, a supreme power, a
   sovereign truth, supreme goodness, a blessed life, an endless bliss.
   This seeth a soul, and much more that cometh withal not blindly and
   nakedly and unsavourly, as doth a learned man, that knoweth and seeth
   Him only by his learning, through might of his naked reason; but he
   seeth Him in understanding, that is, comforted and lighted by the gift
   of the Holy Ghost, with a wonderful reverence, and a secret burning
   love, and with a spiritual savour and heavenly delight, more clearly
   and more fully than can be written or spoken.

   This sight, though it be but short and little, is so worthy and so
   mighty that it draweth and ravisheth all the affections of the soul
   from be holding and minding of all earthly things to itself, for to
   rest therein evermore if it could. And upon this kind of sight and
   knowing the soul groundeth all its working inward in all the
   affections; for then she worshippeth God in the humanity, as verity;
   wondereth at Him, as power and might; loveth Him, as goodness. This
   sight and this goodness, and this knowing of Jesus, with the blessed
   love that cometh out of it, may be called reforming of a soul in
   feeling and in faith, which I have spoken of. It is in faith, for it is
   dark yet in comparison of that full knowing of Jesus, with the blessed
   love that cometh out of it, that shall be in Heaven. For then shall we
   see Him, not only that He is, but as He is, as St John saith: Tunc
   videbimus eum sicut est--Then shall we see Him as He is. [219]
   Nevertheless it is in feeling also, as in regard of that blind knowing
   that a soul hath standing only in faith, for this soul knoweth somewhat
   of the very nature of Jesus as God through this gracious sight, which
   that other in faith knoweth not, but only believeth it to be truth.

   Nevertheless, that thou mayest the better conceive what I mean, I shall
   show these three manners of reforming of a soul by example of three men
   standing in the light of the sun. Of the which one is blind, another
   can see, but hath his eyes stopped, the third looketh forth with full
   sight. The blind man hath no manner of knowledge that he is in the sun,
   but he believeth it if an honest man tell him so; and he betokeneth a
   soul that is only reformed in Faith, that believeth in God as holy
   Church teacheth, and understandeth not what. This sufficeth as to
   salvation. That other man seeth a light of the sun, but he seeth it not
   clearly what it is, for his eyelid letteth him that he cannot see; but
   he seeth through the lids of his eyes a glimmering of great light. And
   this man betokeneth a soul that is reformed in Faith and in feeling,
   and so he is Contemplative, for he seeth somewhat of the Godhead of
   Jesus through grace, not clearly nor fully; for the lid, that is, his
   bodily nature, is yet a wall betwixt his nature and the nature of Jesus
   God, and letteth him from the clear sight. But he seeth through this
   wall, after that grace toucheth him more or less, that Jesus is God,
   and that Jesus is sovereign goodness, and sovereign being, and a
   blessed life, and that all other goodness cometh from Him. Thus seeth
   the soul by grace, notwithstanding its bodily nature, and the more
   clean and subtle that the soul is made, and the more it is separated
   from sensuality, the sharper sight it hath and the greater love of the
   Divinity of Jesus. This sight is so mighty that though no other man
   living should believe in Jesus, nor love Him, yet would he never
   believe the less, nor love Him the less, for he seeth it so certainly
   that he cannot but believe it.

   The third man that hath full sight of the sun, he believeth it not, for
   he seeth it fully. And he betokeneth a full blessed soul, that without
   any wall of his body or of sin, seeth openly the face of Jesus in the
   bliss of Heaven. There is no faith, and therefore he is fully reformed
   in feeling. There is no state above the second reforming that a soul
   can come to here in this life, for this is the state of perfection and
   the way to heavenward. Nevertheless, all the souls that are in this
   state are not all alike in degrees; for some have it little, short and
   seldom; and some longer, clearer and oftener; and some have it best of
   all, clearest and longest, according to the abounding of grace, and yet
   all these have the gift of Contemplation. For the soul hath not perfect
   sight of Jesus all at once, but at first a little and a little, and
   after that it profiteth and cometh to more feeling; and as long as it
   is in this life it groweth more in knowing, and in this love of Jesus.
   And verily I know not what can be more desirable to such a soul that
   hath felt a little of it, than utterly to leave it and set at nought
   all other things, for to hold only thereto, to have a clearer sight and
   clearer love of Jesus, in whom is all the Blessed Trinity.

   This manner of knowing of Jesus, as I understand, is the opening of
   Heaven to the eye of a clean soul, of which holy men speak in their
   writings. Not as some imagine, that the opening of Heaven is as if a
   soul could see by imagination through the skies above the Firmament,
   how our Lord Jesus sitteth in His Majesty, in a bodily light, as much
   as an hundred suns. No, it is not so; no, though he see never so high
   on this manner, verily he seeth not the spiritual Heaven. The higher he
   soareth up above the sun for to see Jesus God, thus by such imagination
   the lower he falleth beneath the sun. Nevertheless, this kind of sight
   is tolerable in simple souls that can seek no better for Him that is
   invisible.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [219] St John 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER III: How Jesus is Heaven to the Soul, and why He is called Fire

   WHAT then is Heaven to a reasonable soul? Verily nought else but Jesus
   God. For if that be Heaven only that is above all things, then is God
   only Heaven to man's soul, for He alone is above the nature of a soul.
   Then if a soul can through grace have knowledge of that blessed nature
   of Jesus, verily he seeth Heaven, for he seeth God. Therefore there be
   many men that err in understanding of some words that are spoken of
   God, for that they understand them not spiritually.

   Holy Writ saith, that a soul that will find God must lift her inward
   eye upward, and seek God above itself. Then some men that would do
   after this saying, understand this word above themselves to signify the
   placing or setting of a thing in place and worthiness above another, as
   one element or planet is above another in situation and worthiness of a
   bodily place. But it is not so taken spiritually; for a soul is above
   each bodily thing, not in place, or sight, but in purity and worthiness
   of nature. Right so in the same manner God is above all bodily and
   spiritual creatures, not in place and sight, but in purity and
   worthiness of His unchangeable blessed nature.

   And therefore he that will wisely seek God, and find Him, he must not
   run out with his thoughts as if he would climb above the sun, and part
   the firmament, and imagine the Majesty like to a hundred suns. But he
   must rather draw down the sun, and all the firmament, and forget it,
   and cast it beneath him where he is, and set all this and all bodily
   things also at nought; and then, if he can, think spiritually both of
   himself and of God also. And if he do thus, then seeth the soul above
   itself, then seeth it into Heaven.

   Upon this same manner shall this word within be understood. It is
   commonly said that a soul should see our Lord within all things and
   within itself. True it is, that our Lord is within all creatures, but
   not on that manner that a kernel is hid within the shell of a nut; or
   as a little bodily thing is contained within a greater. But He is
   within all creatures, as holding and preserving them in their being,
   through the subtlety and power of His own blessed nature, and purity
   invisible. For even as a thing that is most precious and most clean is
   laid innermost, right so by the same likeness it is said that the
   nature of God, which is most precious, most clean, most goodly, most
   remote from bodily substance, is hid within all things. And therefore
   he that will seek God within, he must first forget all bodily things,
   for all such things are without; and also his own body; and he must
   forget thinking of his own soul, and think on the uncreated nature;
   that is, Jesus, who made him, quickeneth him, holdeth him, and giveth
   him reason, memory and love, the which is within him through His power
   and sovereign subtlety.

   Upon this manner must the soul do, when grace toucheth it, or else it
   will but little avail to seek Jesus, and to find Him within itself, and
   within all creatures as methinketh.

   Also it is said in Holy Writ, that God is light. So sayeth St John: God
   is light. [220] This light we must not take for a bodily light; but it
   must be understood thus: God is light; that is, God is truth and verity
   itself, for verity is spiritual light. He then that most graciously
   knoweth verity, best seeth God. And nevertheless it is likened to
   corporal light, for this reason: Right as the sun showeth to the bodily
   eye both itself and all bodily things thereby; even so verity, that is,
   God, showeth to the reason of the soul itself first, and by itself all
   other spiritual things that are needful to the knowing of a soul. Thus
   saith the Prophet: Domine in lumine tuo videbimus lumen.--Lord, we
   shall see Thy light by Thy light. [221] That is, we shall see Thee, who
   art verity, by Thyself.

   In like manner, it is said that God is fire. Our God is wasting fire.
   [222] That is to say, God is not elementary fire, that heateth and
   burneth a body, but God is love and charity. For as fire wasteth all
   bodily things, that can be wasted, even so the love of God burneth and
   wasteth all sin out of the soul and maketh it clean, as fire cleanseth
   all manner of metals. These words and all other that are spoken of our
   Lord in Holy Writ by bodily similitude, must needs be understood
   spiritually, else there is no savour in them. And the reason why such
   words are said of our Lord in Holy Writ is this, for that we are so
   carnal, that we cannot speak of God nor understand anything of Him,
   unless we be first entered by such words. But when the inner eye is
   open through grace to have a little sight of Jesus, then will the soul
   easily enough turn all such words of bodily things into spiritual
   understanding. This spiritual opening of the inner eye into knowing of
   the Divinity, I call reforming in faith and feeling. For then the soul
   feeleth somewhat in understanding of that thing that it had before, in
   naked believing, and that is the beginning of Contemplation. Of the
   which St Paul saith thus: Non Contemplantibus nobis quae videntur,
   &c.--Our Contemplation is not on things that are seen, but on things
   unseen. For things that are seen are passing, but things unseen are
   everlasting. [223] To which sight every soul should desire to come.
   both here in part, and in the bliss of Heaven fully. For in that sight,
   and in that knowing of Jesus fully, consisteth the bliss of a
   reasonable soul and endless life. Thus saith our Lord: Haec est autem
   vita aeterna, &c. [224] --This is eternal life, that they know Thee the
   true God, and Thy Son whom Thou hast sent.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [220] 1 St John 1.

   [221] Ps. 35.

   [222] Heb. 12.

   [223] 2 Cor. 4.

   [224] St John 17.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IV: Of two manner of Loves, created and uncreated, and how we are
    bound to love Jesus much for our Creation; but more for our Redemption; and
    most of all for our Salvation, through the gifts of His Love

   BUT now perhaps thou wonderest why, since this knowing of God is the
   bliss and end of a Soul, why I have said heretofore that a soul should
   covet nought else but only the love of God, and speak nothing of this
   sight that a soul should covet it.

   Unto this I may answer, that the sight of Jesus is the full bliss of a
   soul; but not only for the sight, but also for the blessed love that
   cometh out of that sight. And because that love cometh out of knowing,
   and not knowing out of love; therefore it is said, that in knowing, and
   in sight principally of God with love is the bliss of a soul; and the
   more He is known, the better He is loved. But forasmuch as a soul
   cannot arrive to this knowing, and the love that cometh out of it,
   without love, therefore I say that thou must covet love; for love is a
   cause why a soul cometh to this knowing, and to the love that cometh
   out of it. And in what manner that is, I shall tell thee more plainly.

   Holy writers say, and true it is, that there be two sorts of spiritual
   love: One is called Created, and the other Uncreated. Love uncreated is
   God Himself, the Third Person in the Trinity, that is the Holy Ghost.
   He is love uncreated, and unmade; as St John saith: God is love. [225]
   That is, the Holy Ghost. Love created is the affection of the soul
   produced by the Holy Ghost out of the sight and the knowing of Verity;
   that is, God stirred up, and set upon him. This love is called created,
   for it is made by the Holy Ghost. This love is not God in Himself, for
   it is made: but it is the love of the soul felt by the sight of Jesus,
   and stirred up towards Him only. Now may you see that created love is
   not the cause why a soul cometh to the spiritual sight of Jesus. And
   some men think that they could love God so fervently, as it were by
   their own strength, that they might be worthy to have the spiritual
   knowing of Him. No, it is not so; but love uncreated, that is, God
   Himself, is cause of all this knowing. For a blind wretched soul is so
   far from the clear knowing, and the blessed feeling of His love,
   through sin and frailty of its corporal nature, that it could never
   come to it, if it were not for the endless greatness of the love of
   God. But because He loveth us so much, therefore giveth He us His love,
   that is the Holy Ghost. He is both the giver and the gift, and maketh
   us then by that gift for to know and love Him.

   Lo, this is the love that I spake of, that thou shouldst only covet and
   desire this uncreated love, that is, the Holy Ghost; for verily a less
   thing or a less gift than He is cannot avail us, to bring us to the
   blessed sight of Jesus. And therefore ought we fully to desire and ask
   of Jesus only this gift of love, that He would for the greatness of His
   so blessed love touch our hearts with His invisible light to the
   knowledge of Himself, and make us partakers of His love; that as He
   loveth us, so we might love Him again. Thus saith St John: Nos
   diligamus Deum, &c.--Let us love God now, for He loved us first. [226]
   He loved us much when He made us after His likeness; but He loved us
   more when He bought us with His precious Blood, by voluntary
   undertaking of death in His Humanity from the power of the enemy and
   the pains of Hell; but He loveth us most when He giveth us the gift of
   the Holy Ghost, that is, love, by the which we know Him and love Him,
   and are made secure that we are His sons chosen to salvation. For this
   love are we more bound to Him than for any other love that ever He
   showed to us, either in our making or redeeming. For though He had made
   us and bought us, if He did not save us withal, what would our making
   or redeeming profit us? Verily right nought.

   Therefore the greatest token of love showed to us, as methinketh, is
   this: That He giveth Himself in His Godhead to our souls. He gave
   Himself, first, in His manhood to us for our ransom, when He offered
   Himself to the Father of Heaven upon the altar of the Cross.

   This was a right fair gift, and a right great token of love. But when
   He giveth Himself in His Godhead spiritually to our souls for our
   salvation, and maketh us to know Him and to love Him, then loveth He us
   fully; for then giveth He Himself to us, and more cannot He give us,
   nor could less suffice us. And for this cause it is said that the
   justifying of a sinful soul through forgiveness of sins is attributed
   [227] and appropriated principally to the working of the Holy Ghost;
   for the Holy Ghost is love. And in the justifying of a sinner, our Lord
   Jesus showeth to a soul most of His love, for He putteth away all sin,
   and uniteth it to Him and that is the best thing that He can do to a
   soul; and therefore it is attributed to the Holy Ghost. The making of
   the soul is attributed to the Father, as to the sovereign might and
   power that He showeth in making of it. The redeeming of it is
   attributed to the Son, as to the sovereign skill and wisdom that He
   showed in His Manhood; for He overcame the enemy principally through
   wisdom, and not through strength. But the justifying and full saving of
   a soul through forgiveness of sins is appropriated to the Third Person,
   that is, the Holy Ghost, for therein showeth Jesus most love unto man's
   soul, and for that thing should He be most loved of us again. His
   making is common to us and all unreasonable creatures; for as He made
   us of nought, so made He them, and therefore this is a work of greatest
   might, but not of greatest love. Also the Redemption is common to us
   and all reasonable souls, as to Jews and Saracens, and to false
   Christian men; for He died for all souls alike, and bought them if they
   would have the perfect love of it. And also it is sufficient for the
   restoring of all, though it be so that all have it not. And this work
   had most of wisdom, not most of love. But the justifying and
   sanctifying of our souls through the gift of the Holy Ghost, that is
   only the work of love, and is not common, but a special gift only to
   chosen souls. And verily that is most the working of love to us that
   are His chosen children.

   This is the love of God that I spake of, which thou shouldst covet and
   desire; for this love is God Himself and the Holy Ghost. This love
   uncreated, when it is given to us, it worketh in our souls all that
   good is, and all that belongeth to goodness. This love loveth us before
   we love Him, for it cleanseth us first from our sins, it maketh us to
   love Him, and maketh our wills strong to withstand all sins, and
   stirreth us up to exercise ourselves through divers exercises both
   bodily and ghostly in all virtues. It stirreth us up also to forsake
   sin and carnal affections and worldly fears. It keepeth us from
   malicious temptations of the enemy, and driveth us out from business
   and vanities of the world, and from the conversation of worldly lovers.
   All this doth the uncreated love of God, when He giveth Himself to us;
   we do right nought but suffer Him and assent to Him; for that is the
   most that we do to assent willingly to His gracious working in us. And
   yet is not that will from and of ourselves but of His making, so that
   methinketh He doth in us all that is well done, and yet we see it not.

   And He not only doth all thus, but afterwards this love doth more; for
   He openeth the eye of the soul, and showeth to the soul the sight of
   Jesus wonderfully, and the knowledge of Him as well as the soul can
   suffer it by little and little; and by that sight He ravisheth all the
   affections of the soul to Him, and then beginneth the soul to know Him
   spiritually and to love Him burningly. Then seeth the soul somewhat of
   the nature of the blessed Divinity of Jesus, how that He is all, and
   that He worketh all, and that all good deeds that are done and good
   thoughts are only of Him; for He is all-sovereign might and
   all-sovereign verity and all-sovereign goodness. And therefore every
   good deed is done of Him and by Him. And He alone shall have the
   worship and the thanks for all good deeds, and nothing else but He; for
   though wretched men steal His worship here for a while, yet at the last
   end shall verity show full well that Jesus did all, and man did right
   nought of himself. And then shall the thieves of God's goods that are
   not reconciled to Him here in this life be judged to death for their
   sins. And Jesus shall be fully worshipped and thanked of all blessed
   creatures for His working. This love is nothing else but Jesus Himself,
   that for love worketh all this in man's soul and reformeth it in
   feeling to His likeness, as I have said before, and somewhat more shall
   say. This love bringeth into the soul the perfection of all virtues,
   and maketh it all clean and true, soft and easy, and turneth it all
   into love and into liking. And in what manner He doth that I shall tell
   thee a little hereafter. This love draweth the soul from vain beholding
   of worldly things into Contemplation of spiritual creatures and of the
   secrets of God, from sensuality into spirituality, from earthly feeling
   into heavenly savour.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [225] 1 St John 4.

   [226] 1 St. John 4.

   [227] Arrected.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER V: How that some Souls love Jesus by bodily Fervours, and by their
    own human Affections that are moved by Grace and by Reason. And how some
    love Him more quietly [228] by spiritual Affections only moved inwardly
    through spiritual Grace of the Holy Ghost

   THEREFORE I may truly say, that he that hath most of this love here in
   this life, most pleaseth God, and shall have most clear sight of Him,
   and most fully love Him in the bliss of Heaven, for that he hath the
   greatest gift of love here in earth. This love cannot be had by a man's
   own travail, as some imagine. It is freely had by the gracious gift of
   Jesus after much bodily and spiritual pains going before. For there are
   some lovers of God that make themselves to love God as it were by their
   own might; for they strain themselves through great violence, and pant
   so strongly, that they burst into bodily fervours, as if they would
   draw God down from Heaven to them. And they say in their hearts and
   with their mouth: Ah, Lord! I love Thee, and I will love Thee, and I
   will suffer death for the love of Thee. And in this manner of working
   they feel great fervour and much grace. And true it is, I think, this
   working good and meritorious, [229] if it be well tempered with
   humility and discretion. But yet these men love not, nor have the gift
   of love on that manner that I speak of, neither do they ask it so. For
   a soul that hath the gift of love through gracious beholding of Jesus,
   as I mean, or that soul that hath it not yet, but would have it, she is
   not busy to strain herself above her strength, as it were by bodily
   might, for to have it by bodily fervours, and so far to feel the love
   of God, but thinketh herself to be right nought, and that she can do
   right nought of herself; but as it were a dead thing, only depending
   and borne up by the mercy of God. She seeth well that Jesus is all, and
   doth all, and, therefore, asketh she nought else but the gift of love;
   for since the soul seeth that her own love is nought, therefore she
   desireth His love, for that is enough. Therefore she prayeth and
   desireth that the love of God should touch her with His blessed light,
   that she may see a little of Him by His gracious presence, for then
   should she love Him; and so by this way cometh the gift of love, which
   is God, into a soul. The more that a soul noughteth itself through
   grace by sight of this verity, sometime without any fervour showed
   outwardly, and the less that it thinketh that it loveth or seeth God,
   the nearer it approacheth [230] for to perceive the gift of this
   blessed love; for then is love master, and worketh in the soul, and
   maketh it forget itself, and for to see and look on only how love
   worketh; and then is the soul more suffering than doing, and that is
   pure love. Thus St Paul meant when he said thus: Quicumque spiritu Dei
   aguntur, &c.--They that are wrought by the spirit of God are God's
   sons. [231] That is, souls that are made so humble, and so pliable
   [232] to God, that they work not of themselves, but suffer the Holy
   Ghost to stir and work in them the feelings of love with a sweet chord
   to His stirrings. These are in a special manner God's sons most like
   unto Him.

   Other souls that cannot love thus, but travail themselves by their own
   afflictions, and stir themselves through their own thinking of God and
   bodily exercise, for to draw out of themselves, by mastery, the feeling
   of love, by fervours and other bodily signs, these love not
   spiritually. They do well and meritoriously, if so be they understand
   humbly that this their working is not the kindly gracious feeling of
   love, but is a human acting of the soul at the bidding of reason. And,
   nevertheless, through the goodness of God, because the soul doth as
   much as in it is, these human affections of the soul stirred into God
   by man's working are turned into spiritual affections, and are
   meritorious, as if they had been done spiritually in the first
   beginning. And this is a great courtesy of our Lord showed to humble
   souls, which turneth all these human affections of natural love into
   the affection and into the reward [233] of His own love, as if He had
   wrought them all fully by Himself. And so these human affections thus
   turned may be called affections of spiritual love through purchase, not
   through kindly bringing forth of the Holy Ghost. I say not that a soul
   can work such human affections only of itself without grace; for I wot
   well that St Paul saith that we can do just nought, nor think anything
   that is good of ourselves without grace. Non enim quod sumus
   sufficientes, &c.--Not as if we were sufficient of ourselves to think
   anything as of ourselves, but all our sufficiency is of God. [234] For
   God worketh in all both good work and good will, as St Paul saith: It
   as God that worketh in us both to will and to do, according to His good
   pleasure. [235] But I say that such affections are good, being made by
   the will and endeavours of a soul according to the general grace that
   He giveth to all chosen souls, not of special grace made spiritually by
   the touching of His gracious presence, as He worketh in His perfect
   love, as I said before; for in unperfect lovers love worketh at a
   distance by human affections; but in perfect lovers love worketh nearly
   by her own spiritual affections, and killeth in a soul, for the time,
   all other affections, both carnal, natural and human; and that is
   properly the working of love by itself. Thus love may be had in some
   measure, [236] in part, here in a pure soul through the spiritual sight
   of Jesus; but in the bliss of Heaven it is fulfilled by clear sight in
   His Godhead; for there shall no affections be felt in a soul but such
   as are divine and spiritual.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [228] Restfully.

   [229] Medeful.

   [230] Nigheth.

   [231] Rom. 8.

   [232] Buxom.

   [233] Mede.

   [234] 1 Cor. 3.

   [235] Phil. 2.

   [236] In little.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VI: That the Gift of Love, amongst all other Gifts of Jesus, is most
    worthy and most profitable. And how Jesus doth all that is well done in His
    lovers, only for Love. And how Love maketh the exercise of all virtues and
    all good Deeds light and easy

   ASK, then, of God nothing but this gift of love, which is the Holy
   Ghost. For among all the gifts that our Lord giveth there is none so
   good, nor so profitable, so worthy nor so excellent as this is. For
   there is no gift of God that is both the giver and the gift, but this
   gift of love; and, therefore, it is the best and the worthiest. The
   gift of prophecy, the gift of working miracles, the gift of great
   knowledge and counsel, and the gift of great fasting, or of great
   penance doing, or any other such, are great gifts of the Holy Ghost,
   but they are not the Holy Ghost, for a reprobate and damnable soul may
   have all these gifts as well as an elect soul. And, therefore, all
   these kinds of gifts are not greatly to be desired or cared for much.
   But the gift of love is the Holy Ghost, God Himself, and Him can no
   soul have and withal be damned; for that gift alone saveth from
   damnation, and maketh it God's son, and a receiver [237] of the
   heavenly heritage. And that love, as I have said before, is not the
   affection of love that is created in a soul, but it is the Holy Ghost
   Himself, that is, love uncreated, that saveth a soul. For He first
   giveth Himself to that soul before the soul loveth Him, and He formeth
   the affection in the soul, and maketh the soul to love Him only for
   Himself. And not only so, but also by this gift the soul loveth itself,
   and her neighbour as herself only for God. And this is the gift of love
   that maketh the distinction betwixt chosen and reprobate souls. And
   this gift maketh perfect peace betwixt God and a soul, and uniteth all
   blessed creatures wholly in God; for it maketh Jesus for to love us,
   and us Him also, and each of us to love one another in Him.

   Covet this gift of love principally, as I have said; for if He please
   out of His grace to give it thee on that manner, it shall open and
   enlighten the reason of thy soul, to see verity, that is God, and
   spiritual things. And it shall stir up thy affections wholly and fully
   for to love Him. And it shall work in thy soul only as He will, and
   thou shalt behold Jesus reverently, with softness of love, and see how
   He worketh. Thus commanded He by His Prophet that we should do, saying
   thus: Vaacaate et videte quoniam ego sum Deus.--Cease ye, and see that
   I am God. [238] That is, ye that are reformed in feeling, and have your
   inner eye opened into sight of spiritual things, cease ye sometime from
   outward working, and see that I am God. That is, see only how I, Jesus,
   God and Man, do; behold ye Me, for I do all, I am love, and for love I
   do all that I do, and ye do nought. And that this is truth, I shall
   show you, for there is no good deed done by you, nor good thought felt
   in you, but what is done by Me. That is, through power and wisdom and
   love mightily, wisely and lovely, else it is no good deed. But now it
   is true that I, Jesus, am both power and wisdom and blessed love, and
   ye are naught, for I am God. Therefore may you easily see that I do all
   your good deeds, and all your good thoughts, and all your good loves in
   you, and ye do right nought. And yet, nevertheless, be all these good
   deeds called yours. Not because ye work them principally, but for that
   I give them unto you for love that I bear to you. And, therefore, since
   I am Jesus, and for love do all this, cease then ye from beholding of
   yourselves, and set yourselves at nought, and look on Me, and see that
   I am God, for I do all this. This is somewhat of the meaning of that
   verse of David before said.

   See then and behold what love worketh in a chosen soul, which he
   reformeth in feeling to his likeness, when the reason is enlightened to
   the spiritual knowing of Jesus, and to the feeling of His love. Then
   bringeth love into the soul the perfection of virtues, and turneth them
   all into quietness, [239] and into liking, as it were, without working
   of the soul; for the soul striveth not much for the getting of them, as
   it did before; but it hath them easily, and feeleth them restfully,
   only through the gift of love, that is, the Holy Ghost. And that is a
   very great comfort, and gladness unspeakable, when she feeleth suddenly
   in herself (and scarce knows how) the virtues of humility and patience,
   sobriety and staidness, [240] chastity and purity and love to her
   neighbour. And all other virtues which were sometimes travaillous,
   [241] painful and hard for to keep, are now turned into easiness, [242]
   and liking, and into wonderful lightness, insomuch that she thinketh it
   no mastery nor difficulty to keep every virtue, but it is most pleasing
   to him to keep it, and all this is made by love.

   Other men that stand in the way of common charity, and are not yet got
   so far in grace, but work under the command of reason, they strive and
   fight all day against sins for the procuring of virtues; and sometimes
   they be above, and sometimes beneath as wrestlers are.

   These men do full well, they have virtues in reason, and will, not in
   savour, nor in love. For they fight with themselves as it were by their
   own might for them; therefore cannot they fully have rest, nor
   perfectly the higher hand. Nevertheless they shall have great reward,
   [243] but they are not yet humble enough. They have not yet put
   themselves altogether into God's hand, for they see Him not yet. But a
   soul that hath spiritual sight of Jesus taketh no great care of
   striving for virtues for that time. He is not busy about them
   particularly, but he maketh it all his business to keep that sight, and
   that beholding of Jesus which it hath for to hold the mind stably
   thereto, and bind his love only to it, that it fall not from it, but
   forget all other things as much as it can. And when it doth thus, then
   is Jesus verily Master against all sins, and overshadoweth it with His
   blessed presence, and getteth it all virtues. And the soul is so
   comforted and so borne up with the restful [244] feeling of love that
   it hath of the sight of Jesus, that it feeleth no great disease
   outwardly. And thus doth love generally slay all sins in a soul, and
   reformeth it in the new feelings of virtues.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [237] Perceiver.

   [238] Ps. 45.

   [239] Softness.

   [240] Sadness.

   [241] Laboursome.

   [242] Softness.

   [243] Full mede.

   [244] Soft.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VII: How Love through gracious Beholding of Jesus slayeth all
    stirrings of Pride; and maketh the Soul to lose the savour and delight in
    all earthly Honours [245]

   NEVERTHELESS I shall tell thee more particularly how love killeth sins
   in a soul, and reformeth virtues. And first of Pride, and the virtue
   contrary thereto, namely, Humility. Thou must understand that there be
   two kinds of Humility; one is had by working of reason; another is felt
   by the special gift of love. Both are of love, but the former love
   worketh by, and with the reason of the soul, and the latter love
   worketh by herself. The first is imperfect, the other is perfect. The
   first a man feeleth from the beholding of his own sins and
   wretchedness, through the which beholding he thinketh himself unworthy
   to have any gift of grace, or any reward of God, but thinketh it enough
   that He would of His great mercy, grant him forgiveness of his sins.
   And also he thinketh himself, because of his sins, to be worse than the
   greatest sinner that liveth, and that every man doth better than he.
   And by such beholding thrusteth he himself down in his thoughts under
   all men. And he is busy to withstand the stirrings of pride as much as
   he can, both bodily and spiritual pride, and despiseth himself so that
   he assenteth not to the feelings of pride. And if his heart be taken
   sometimes with it, that it be defiled with vain joy of worship and
   praise from others; or from the conceit of his wit, or of any other
   thing, as soon as he perceiveth it he is displeased with himself, and
   hath sorrow for it in heart, and asketh forgiveness for it of God, and
   showeth himself to his confessor, and accuseth himself humbly, and
   receiveth his penance. This is good humility, but it is not yet perfect
   humility; for it is of souls that are beginning and profiting in grace
   caused by the beholding of their sins. Love worketh this humility by
   reason.

   Perfect humility a soul feeleth from the sight and spiritual knowing of
   Jesus; for when the Holy Ghost lighteneth the reason into the sight of
   verity, how Jesus is all, and that He doth all, the soul hath so great
   love and so great joy in that spiritual sight (for it is really so
   indeed) that it forgetteth itself, fully leaneth to Jesus with all the
   love that it hath to behold Him. It taketh no heed [246] of any
   unworthiness of itself, nor of sins aforedone, but setteth at nought
   itself, with all the sins, and all the good deeds that ever it did, as
   if there were nothing but Jesus. Thus was David humble when he said
   thus: Et substantia mea tanquam nihilum ante Te.--And my substance is
   as nothing before Thee. [247] That is, Lord Jesus, the sight of why
   blessed uncreated substance and of Thine endless Being showeth well
   unto me that my substance and being of my soul is as nought in regard
   of Thee.

   Also, such a soul in respect to his neighbour hath no regard to him,
   nor judging of him, whether he be better or worse than himself; for he
   esteemeth himself and all other men to be all alike, and to be just
   nought of themselves in regard of God (and this is very so). For all
   the goodness that is wrought in himself, or in others, is only of God,
   whom he beholdeth as all in all. And therefore setteth he all other
   creatures at nought, as he doth himself. Thus humble was the Prophet
   when he said thus: Omnes gentes quasi non sint sic sunt coram eo,
   &c.--All nations are before our Lord as if they were not, and are
   reputed as nothing, [248] and as a vain thing. [249] That is, in
   comparison [250] of the endless Being, and the unchangeable nature of
   God, mankind is as nought; for of nought was it made, and to nought
   shall it return, unless He keep it in its being that made it of nought.
   This is truth, and this should make a soul humble, if by grace it could
   see this truth. Therefore when once love openeth the inner eye of the
   soul, for to see this truth, with other circumstances that attend it,
   then beginneth the soul to be really humble; for then through the sight
   of God it feeleth and seeth itself as it is; and then doth the soul
   forsake the beholding and leaning upon itself; and fully falleth to the
   beholding of Jesus. And when it doth so, then setteth the soul nought
   by all the joy and worship of the world, for the joy of worldly worship
   is so little, and so nought, in regard of that joy and of that love
   that it feeleth in the spiritual sight of Jesus and knowledge of the
   truth that, though it might have it without any sin, he would have
   nothing to do with it. No, though men would worship him, praise him,
   and favour him, or set him in great state, it would nothing at all
   please him. No, though he had great skill in all the seven liberal
   sciences, and of all skill under the sun, or had power to work all
   manner of miracles, yet would he take no more delight [251] in all
   this, nor no more savour than to gnaw on a dry stick. He had rather
   forget all this, and to be alone out of the sight of the world, than to
   think of them and be worshipped of all men; for the heart of a true
   lover of Jesus is made so much, and so large through a little sight of
   Him, and a little feeling of His spiritual love, that all the liking
   and all the joy of all the earth cannot suffice to fill a corner of it.
   And then appeareth it well that these wretched worldly lovers, that
   are, as it were, ravished with the love of their own worship, and
   pursue after it to have it with all the might and all the wit they
   have, they have no taste of this Humility, but are wondrous far from
   it. But the lover of Jesus hath this humility lastingly, and that not
   with heaviness and striving for it, but with liking and gladness. The
   which gladness he hath not therefore, because he forsaketh the worship
   of the world, for that were a proud humility belonging to an hypocrite;
   but because he hath a sight and a spiritual knowing of the verity and
   worthiness of Jesus through the gift of the Holy Ghost. That reverend
   sight, and that lovely beholding of Jesus comforteth his love so
   wonderfully, and beareth it up so mightily and so easily, [252] that
   verily it cannot like, nor fully rest in any earthly joy, nor would he
   if he could. He maketh no matter whether men praise him or dispraise
   [253] him, worship him or despise him, as to himself he sets it not to
   heart, neither to be well pleased [254] (for his greater humiliation)
   when men despise him, nor to be displeased when men worship him or
   praise him. He had rather forget both the one and the other, and only
   think on Jesus, and get humility by that way. And that is much the
   securer way whosoever can attain to it. Thus did David when he said:
   Oculi mei semper ad Dominum, &c.--My eyes are always to the Lord, for
   He shall pluck my feet out of the net. [255] For when he doth so, then
   forsaketh he utterly himself, and casteth himself wholly under Jesus,
   and then is he in a secure guard; for the shield of Truth which he
   holdeth keepeth him so well that he shall not be hurt through any
   stirring of pride, as long as he holdeth himself within the shield. As
   the Prophet saith: Scuto circumdabit te veritas ejus, &c.--Verity shall
   compass thee with a shield. [256] And that is, if thou, leaving all
   other things, only beholdest Him; for then shalt thou not dread for the
   night's dread; that is, thou shalt not fear the spirit of pride,
   whether he come by night or by day, as the next verse saith thus: A
   sagitta volante in die--From the arrow that flieth by day. Pride cometh
   by night to assail a soul when it is despised and contemned of other
   men, that thereby it should fall into heaviness and into sorrow. It
   cometh also as an arrow flying on the day, when a man is praised and
   worshipped of all men; whether it be for wordly doing or spiritual,
   that he should have vain joy in himself, and to rest therein, and false
   gladness in a thing that is passing. This is a sharp arrow and a
   perilous, it fleeth swiftly, and it striketh softly, but it woundeth
   deadly. But the lover of Jesus, that stably beholdeth by devout
   prayers, and busy thinking on him, is so encompassed with the safe
   shield of Truth that he dreadeth it not; for this arrow cannot enter
   into his soul. Nay, though it come it hurteth him not, but glanceth
   [257] away and passeth forth.

   And thus is the soul made humble, as I understand, by the working of
   the Holy Ghost, that is, the gift of love; for He openeth the eye of
   the soul to see and love Jesus, and He keepeth the soul in that sight
   restfully and securely; and He slayeth all the stirrings of pride
   wonderfully and privily and softly, and the soul knoweth [258] not how.
   And also He bringeth in by that way verily and lovely the virtue of
   humility. All this doth love, but not in all lovers alike fully; for
   some have this grace but short and little, as it were in the beginning
   of it, and a little assaying toward it; for the conscience is not yet
   cleansed fully through grace. And some have it more fully, for they
   have clearer sight of Jesus, and they feel more of this love. And some
   have it most fully, for they have the full gift of Contemplation.
   Nevertheless, he that hath the least on this manner that I have said, I
   hope verily he hath the gift of perfect humility, for he hath the gift
   of perfect love.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [245] Worship.

   [246] Keep.

   [247] Ps. 38.

   [248] Unnoteful.

   [249] Isa. 40.

   [250] Anentes.

   [251] Dainty.

   [252] Softly.

   [253] Lack.

   [254] Well paid.

   [255] Ps. 24.

   [256] Ps. 90:5.

   [257] Glenteth.

   [258] Wotteth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER VIII: How Love slayeth all stirrings of Wrath and Envy easily; [259]
    and reformeth in the Soul the virtues of Peace and Patience, and of perfect
    Charity to his Neighbour, as He did specially in the Apostles

   LOVE, where it worketh, worketh wisely and easily [260] in a soul; for
   he slayeth mightily anger and envy, and all passions of wrath and
   melancholy in it, and bringeth into the soul the virtues of patience
   and mildness, peaceableness and amity to his neighbour. It is full hard
   and a great mastery for a man that standeth only in working of his own
   reason to keep patience, holy rest and softness in heart and charity to
   his neighbour, when they use him hardly and do him wrong, that he do
   not through motion or rising of anger or bitterness [261] within him
   something against them, either by word or deed, or both. (And
   nevertheless though a man be stirred and troubled in himself, and made
   unrestful, if so be it passeth not too much the bounds of reason, and
   that he keep his hands and his tongue, and be ready to forgive the
   trespass when forgiveness is asked, yet this man hath the virtue of
   patience, though it be but weak and nakedly. Forasmuch as he desires to
   have it, and laboureth busily in restraining his unruly passions to the
   end that he may have it, and also is sorry that he hath it not as he
   should.) But to a true lover of Jesus it is no great mastery for to
   suffer all this; for why? Love fighteth for him, and slayeth wondrous
   easily such stirrings of wrath and of melancholy; and maketh his soul
   so easy and so peaceable, so suffering and so goodly, through the
   spiritual sight of Jesus, with the feeling of His blessed love, that
   though he be despised and contemned of other men, or suffer wrong or
   harm, shame or villainy, he heedeth [262] it not, he is not much
   stirred against them; he will not be angered nor stirred against them,
   for, if he were much stirred, he should forego the comfort which he
   feeleth within his soul, but that will he not. He can lightlier forget
   all the wrong that is done him than another man can forgive it, though
   forgiveness [263] was asked him; and so he had rather [264] forget it;
   for he thinketh it most easy to him. And love doth all this, for love
   openeth the eye of the soul to the sight of Jesus, and establisheth it
   with the pleasure [265] and content of love that it feeleth by that
   sight, and comforteth it so mightily that it taketh no heed [266]
   whatever men jangle or do against him; it resteth [267] nothing upon
   him; the greatest harm that he can suffer is a forbearing of the
   spiritual sight of Jesus; and therefore it is better [268] for him to
   suffer all harms than that alone. All this can the soul do well and
   easily without great disturbing of this spiritual sight, when the
   grievances fall outwardly and touch not the body, as do backbitings or
   scornings or spoiling of his goods. All these grieve him nought; but it
   goeth somewhat nearer when his flesh is touched, and he feeleth smart,
   then is it harder.

   Nevertheless, though it be hard and impossible to the frail nature of
   man to suffer bodily penance gladly and patiently, without bitter
   stirrings of ire, anger and melancholy, and yet it is not impossible to
   love, that is, the Holy Ghost for to work this in a soul, when He
   toucheth it with the blessed gift of love. But He giveth a soul that is
   in that plight mightily the feelings of love, and wonderfully fasteneth
   it to Jesus, and separateth it very far from sensuality through His
   secret might, and comforteth it so sweetly by His blessed presence that
   the soul feeleth little pain or else none at all in the sensual part;
   and this is a special grace given to the holy Martyrs.

   This grace had the Apostles, as holy Writ saith of them thus: Ibant
   Apostoli gaudentes, &c.--The Apostles went from the Council rejoicing,
   when they were beaten with scourges, and they were glad that they were
   accounted worthy to suffer any bodily pain for the love of Jesus. [269]
   They were not stirred to anger, nor to bitterness, [270] to be revenged
   on the Jews that beat them, as a worldly man would be when he suffered
   a little harm, were it never so little, from his neighbour. Nay, they
   were not stirred to any pride, nor highness of mind, nor to disdain or
   judge the Jews, as hypocrites and heretics are who will suffer much
   bodily pain, and are sometimes ready to suffer death with great
   gladness and with mighty will, as it were in the name of Jesus, for
   love of Him. Verily, that love and that gladness that they have in
   suffering of bodily mischief is not of the Holy Ghost, it cometh not
   from the fire that burneth on the High Altar of Heaven, but it is
   feigned by the enemy, inflamed of hell; for it is fully mingled with
   the height of pride, and of presumption of themselves, of despite and
   judging and disdaining of those that thus punish them. They imagine
   that all this is charity, and that they suffer all that for the love of
   God, but they are beguiled by the mid-day fiend.

   A true lover of Jesus, when he suffereth harm from his neighbour, is so
   strengthened through grace of the Holy Ghost, and is made so humble, so
   patient, so peaceable, and that so really, that what harm or wrong
   soever he suffereth from his neighbour, he still preserveth his
   humility, he despiseth him not, he judgeth him not, but he prayeth for
   him in his heart, and hath pity and compassion on him much more
   tenderly than of another man that never did him harm; and verily loveth
   him better, and more fervently desireth the salvation of his soul,
   because he seeth that we shall have so much spiritual profit out of
   that evil deed of that man though it be against his will. But this love
   and this meekness is wrought only by the Holy Ghost above the nature of
   man in them whom He maketh true lovers of Jesus.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [259] Softly.

   [260] Softly.

   [261] Melancholy.

   [262] Chargeth.

   [263] Merch.

   [264] Well lever.

   [265] Liking.

   [266] Kepe.

   [267] Hangeth.

   [268] Lever.

   [269] Acts 5.

   [270] Felness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER IX: How Love slayeth Covetousness, Lechery and Gluttony, and the
    fleshly delight and savour in all the five Bodily Senses, softly and easily,
    through a gracious beholding of Jesus

   COVETOUSNESS also is slain in a soul by the working of love, for it
   maketh the soul so covetous of spiritual good and so inflamed to
   heavenly riches that it setteth right nought by all earthly things. It
   hath no more joy in the having of a precious stone than a chalk-stone;
   no more love hath he in an hundred pounds than in a pound of lead. It
   setteth all things that must perish at one price; he heedeth no more
   the one than the other, as to his love; for he knows well that all
   these earthly things which worldly men set so great price by and love
   so dearly must pass away and turn to nothing, both the thing itself and
   the love of it. And therefore he worketh his thoughts betimes into that
   judgement and esteem of them which they must come to hereafter, and so
   accounteth them as nought. And when worldly lovers strive and fight and
   plead for earthly goods, who may first have them; the lover of Jesus
   striveth with no man, but keepeth himself in peace, and is well
   contented with that which he hath, and will strive for no more; for he
   thinketh that he needs no more of all the riches on earth than a scanty
   bodily sustenance for to sustain his bodily life withal, as long as it
   pleaseth God, and that he can easily have. And therefore would he have
   no more than he barely needeth for the time, that he may freely be
   discharged from the trouble of keeping and spending of it, and fully
   give his heart and his business about the seeking of Jesus for to find
   Him in cleanness of spirit; for that is all his covetousness; for
   why?--only the clean in heart shall see Him.

   Also, the fleshly love of father and mother and other worldly friends
   hangeth not upon him. It is even cut from his heart with the sword of
   spiritual love, so that he hath no more affection to father or mother,
   or to any worldly friend than he hath to another man, except he see or
   feel in them more grace or more virtue than in other men, or except
   that his father or mother hath the selfsame grace that some other men
   have. But if they be not so, then loveth he other men better than them,
   and that is charity. And thus doth God's love slay covetousness of the
   world, and bringeth into the soul poverty of spirit. And that doth
   love, not only in them that have right nought of worldly goods, but
   also in some creatures that are in great worldly state and have earthly
   riches to spend. Love slayeth in some of them covetousness so far forth
   that they have no more liking nor savour in having of them than of a
   straw. No, though it should so happen that they should lose them
   through default of those that should look after them, yet set they
   nought thereby. For why?--the heart of God's lover is, through the gift
   of the Holy Ghost, taken so fully with the sight of the love of another
   thing, which is Jesus, and that is so precious and so worthy that it
   will receive no other love to rest in it that is contrary thereto.

   And not only doth love this, but also it slayeth the liking of Lechery
   and all other bodily uncleanness, and bringeth into the soul true
   chastity, and turneth it into liking. For the soul feeleth so great
   delight in the sight of Jesus that it liketh for to be chaste, and it
   is no great difficulty to it to keep chastity, for therein is most ease
   and most rest.

   And in the same manner the gift of love slayeth the lusts of Gluttony,
   and maketh the soul sober and temperate, and beareth it up so mightily
   that it cannot rest in the liking of meat and drink. But it taketh such
   meat and drink, whatever it be, as least hindereth or chargeth the
   bodily complexion, if it can easily come by it; nor for the love of
   itself, but for the love of God. On this wise the lover of God seeth
   well that he needeth to sustain his bodily life with meat and drink, as
   long as God will suffer them to continue together. Here, then, will be
   the discretion of the lover of Jesus, as far as I understand that hath
   feeling and working in love, that in what manner he may best keep his
   grace whole, and be least letted from working in it through taking of
   bodily sustenance, so shall he do. That kind of meat, which least
   letteth and least troubleth the heart, and may keep the body in
   strength, be it flesh, be it fish, be it bread and ale, that I suppose
   the soul chooseth for to have, if it can come thereby. For the whole
   business of the soul is to think on Jesus with reverent love,
   constantly, without letting of anything, if that it might. And
   therefore since it must needs be letted somewhat and hindered the less
   it is letted and hindered by meat or drink or any other thing the
   better it is. It had rather use the best meat and most costly if it
   less hinder the keeping of his heart, than to take only bread and
   water, if that hinder him more; for he hath no regard for to get great
   merit by the pain of fasting, and be put thereby from softness and
   quietness of heart, but all his business is for to keep his heart as
   stably as he can in the sight of Jesus and in the feeling of His love.
   And surely I am of the opinion that he may with less lust and liking
   use the best meat, that is good in its kind, than another man that
   worketh all by reason without the special gift of love can use the
   worst. Ever excepting such meat as is dressed with art and curiosity
   only for lust, for such manner of meat cannot at all accord with him.
   And also on the other side, if little meat, as only bread and beer,
   most helpeth and quieteth his heart, and keepeth it most in peace, that
   is most acceptable to him for to use; and, namely, if he feel his
   bodily strength sustained thereby, and have the gift of love withal.

   And yet doth love more, for it slayeth sloth and fleshly idleness, and
   maketh the soul to be occupied in goodness, and, namely, inwardly in
   beholding of him, by virtue whereof the soul hath savour and spiritual
   delight in praying, in meditating, and in all manner of doing that
   belongeth to him to do according to the state he is in, without
   heaviness or painful bitterness, whether he be religious or secular.

   Also, it slayeth the vain likings of the five bodily senses. As first
   of the sight of the eyes, so that the soul hath no liking in the sight
   of any worldly thing, but feeleth rather pain and disease in beholding
   of it, be it never so fair, never so precious, never so wonderful. And,
   therefore, as worldly lovers run out sometimes for to see new things,
   for to wonder at them, and so for to feed their hearts with the vain
   sight of them; right so a lover of Jesus is busy for to run away, and
   withdraw himself from the sight of such manner of things, that the
   inner sight be not letted; for he spiritually seeth another manner of
   thing, which is fairer and more wonderful, and that would he not
   forbear.

   Right on the self-same wise is it of speaking and hearing. It is a pain
   to the soul of a lover of Jesus for to speak or hear anything that
   might let the freedom of his heart from thinking on Jesus, whatever
   song, or melody, or music [271] outward it be, if it hinder the thought
   that it cannot freely and restfully pray, or think on him, it liketh
   him right nought. And the more delectable it is to other men, the more
   unsavoury it is to him. And also to hear any manner of speaking of
   other men, unless it be somewhat touching the working of his soul into
   the love of Jesus, it liketh him right nought, he is right soon weary
   of it. He had rather be in peace, and hear right nought, nay speak
   right nought, than for to hear the speaking and the teaching of the
   greatest Clerk on earth, with all the reasons that he can say to him by
   human wit, except he can speak feelingly and stirringly of the love of
   Jesus; for there lies his skill [272] principally. And therefore would
   not he speak of anything else, nor hear, nor see anything, but what
   might help him, and further him into more knowledge, and to better
   feeling of Him.

   Of worldly speech it is no doubt that he hath no savour in speaking,
   nor in hearing of it, nor in worldly tales, nor tidings, nor in any
   such vain jangling that belongeth not to Him. And the same is of
   smelling and tasting. The more the thoughts are distracted and broken
   from spiritual rest by the use either of smelling, or tasting, or of
   any of the senses, the more he avoideth it. The less that he feeleth of
   them, the better [273] he is. And if he could live in the body without
   the feeling of any of them he would never feel them, for they trouble
   the heart oft-times, and put it from rest; but they cannot fully be
   eschewed. Nevertheless the love of Jesus is sometimes so mighty in a
   soul, that it overcometh and slayeth all that is contrary thereto for a
   time.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [271] Minstrelsy.

   [272] Craft.

   [273] Lever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER X: What virtues and Graces a Soul receiveth through opening of the
    inner eye into the gracious Beholding of Jesus, and how it cannot be gotten
    only by Man's Labour, but through special Grace and his own Labour also

   THUS worketh love in a soul, opening the ghostly eye into the beholding
   of Jesus by inspiration of special grace, and maketh it pure, subtle
   and able to the work of Contemplation. What this opening of the
   spiritual eye is the greatest scholar on earth cannot imagine by his
   wit nor show fully by his tongue; for it cannot be gotten by study, nor
   by man's industry alone, but principally by grace of the Holy Ghost,
   and with human industry. I am afraid to speak anything of it, for
   methinketh that I cannot, it passeth my attempt, [274] and my lips are
   unclean. Nevertheless, because it seems to me that love asketh, yea,
   love biddeth that I should, therefore shall I say a little more of it
   as I hope love teacheth. This opening of the spiritual eye is that
   lightsome darkness and rich nought that I spake of before, and it may
   be called purity of spirit and spiritual rest, inward stillness and
   peace of conscience, highness of thought and loneliness of soul, a
   lively feeling of grace and retiredness [275] of heart, the watchful
   sleep of the spouse and tasting of heavenly savour, burning in love and
   shining in light, the gate [276] of Contemplation and reforming in
   feeling. All these expressions are found in holy writings of divers
   men, for every one of them speaketh according to his feeling in grace.
   And though all these be divers in show of words, yet are they all one
   in meaning and verity; for that soul which through visiting of grace
   hath one of them hath all. For why? a soul sighing to see the Face of
   Jesus when it is touched through special grace of the Holy Ghost, it is
   suddenly changed, and turned from the state that it was in into another
   manner of feeling. It is wonderfully separated and drawn first into
   itself, from the love and the liking of all earthly things, so much
   that it hath lost the savour of the bodily life, and of all things save
   only Jesus. And then is it clean from all the filth of sin, so far
   forth that the minding of itself, and all other inordinate affections
   to any creature is suddenly washed and wiped away, so that there
   remains no middle thing or impediment betwixt Jesus and the soul, but
   only the bodily life, and then it is in spiritual rest. For why? all
   painful doubts and fears, and all other temptations of spiritual
   enemies are driven out of the heart, that they trouble not, nor sink
   not into it for the time. It is in rest from the annoyance of worldly
   business, and painful hindrances of wicked stirrings; but it is full
   busy in the free spiritual working of love. And the more it laboureth
   so, the more rest it feeleth.

   This restful labouring is full far from fleshly idleness and from blind
   security. It is full of spiritual working, but it is called rest, for
   that grace loseth the heavy yoke of fleshly love from the soul, and
   maketh it mighty and free through the gift of spiritual love for to
   work gladly, softly and delectably in all things to which grace
   stirreth it to work in. And therefore it is called an holy idleness and
   a rest most busy, and so it is in regard of stillness from the great
   crying of the beastly noise of fleshly desires and unclean thoughts.
   This stillness is made by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost through the
   beholding of Jesus. For why? His voice is so sweet and so mighty that
   it putteth to silence in a soul all the jangling of all other speakers;
   for it is a voice of power, [277] softly founded in a pure soul, of the
   which the Prophet saith thus: Vox Domini in virtute.--The voice of our
   Lord Jesus is with power. [278] This voice is a lively words and
   speedy, as the Apostle saith: Vivus est sermo Dei, &c.--The word of the
   Lord is lively and powerful, more piercing than any sword is. [279]
   Through speaking of this word is fleshly love slain, and the soul kept
   in silence from all wicked stirrings. Of this silence it is said in the
   Apocalypse thus: Factum est silentium in coelo, &c.--Silence was made
   in heaven as it were half an hour. [280] By Heaven is meant a pure soul
   lifted up through grace from earthly love to heavenly conversation, and
   so it is in silence. But forasmuch as that silence cannot last whole
   continually by reason of the corruption of the bodily nature; therefore
   it is compared to the time of half an hour, a very short time the soul
   thinketh it to be, though it be never so long; and therefore it is but
   half an hour.

   And then hath it peace in conscience. For why? Grace putteth out the
   gnawing, pricking, striving and fighting of sins, and bringeth in peace
   and concord, and maketh Jesus and a soul both one in full agreement of
   will. There is no upbraiding of sins, nor sharp reproving of faults
   made at that time in a soul, for they have kissed and are made friends,
   and all is forgiven that was done amiss.

   Thus feeleth the soul, then, with great humble security and great
   spiritual gladness, and conceiveth a full great [281] certainty of
   salvation by this accordmaking; for it heareth a secret witnessing of
   the Holy Ghost to the conscience, that he is a chosen son to a heavenly
   heritage. Thus St Paul saith: Ipse Spiritus testimonium perhibet
   spiritui nostro, &c.--The Holy Spirit beareth witness to our spirit
   that we are God's sons. [282]

   This witnessing of conscience verily felt through grace is the very joy
   of the soul, as the Apostle saith: Gloria mea est testimonium, &c.--My
   joy is the witness of my conscience: [283] and that is, when it
   witnesseth peace and accord, true love and friendship betwixt Jesus and
   a soul. And when it is in this peace, then is it in highness of
   thought.

   When the soul is bound with the love of the world, then is it beneath
   all creatures; for everything goeth over it, and beareth it down by
   mastery, that it cannot see Jesus nor love Him. For even as the love of
   the world is vain and fleshly, right so the beholding and thinking and
   using of all creatures is fleshly; and that is a thraldom of the soul.
   But then through opening of the spiritual eye into Jesus the love is
   turned, and the soul is raised up according to its own nature above all
   bodily creatures. And then the beholding and thinking, and the using of
   them is spiritual, for the love is spiritual. The soul hath then great
   disdain to be obedient [284] to the love of worldly things, for it is
   high set above them through grace. It setteth nought by all the world.
   For why? It will all pass away and perish. Unto this highness of heart,
   as long as the soul is kept therein, cometh no error nor deceit of the
   enemy; for Jesus is really in sight of the soul at that time, and all
   other things are beneath it. Of this the Prophet speaketh thus: Accedat
   homo ad cor altum et exaltabitur Deus.--Let a man come to a high heart,
   and God shall be exalted. [285] That is, a man that through grace
   cometh to the highness of thought shall see that Jesus is only exalted
   above all creatures, and he in Him.

   And then is the soul thus set aloft, estranged from the fellowship of
   worldly lovers, though his body be in the midst among them, full far is
   he parted from carnal affections of creatures. He careth not though he
   never see man, nor speak with him, nor have comfort from him, that he
   might for ever continue in that spiritual feeling. He feeleth so great
   familiarity [286] of the blessed presence of our Lord Jesus, and so
   much savour of Him, that he can easily for love of Him forget the
   fleshly affection and the fleshly mind of all creatures. I say not that
   he shall not love nor think of other creatures, that he shall think on
   them in fitting time, and see them and love them spiritually and
   freely, not fleshly and painfully as he did before. Of this loneliness
   speaketh the Prophet thus: Ducam eam in solitudinem, &c.--I will lead
   her into solitude, [287] and I will speak to her heart. [288] That is,
   the grace of Jesus leadeth the soul from troublesome [289] company of
   fleshly desires into loneliness of thought, and maketh it forget the
   liking of the world, and soundeth by sweetness of His inspiration words
   of love in the ears of the heart. A soul is thus lonely when it loveth
   Jesus, and attendeth fully to Him, and he hath lost the savour and the
   comfort of the world; and that it may better keep this loneliness, it
   fleeth the company of men as much as it can; and seeketh loneliness of
   body, which helpeth much to the loneliness of the soul, and to the free
   working of love, the less hindrance that it hath from without of vain
   janglings, or from within of vain thinking, the more free it is in
   spiritual beholding. And so it is in retiredness [290] of heart.

   A soul is all without, whilst it is overlaid and blinded with worldly
   love, it is as common as the highway, for every stirring which cometh
   from the flesh or from the fiend sinketh in or goeth through it. But
   then through grace it is drawn into the privy-chamber, into the sight
   of our Lord Jesus, and heareth His privy counsel, and is wonderfully
   comforted in the hearing. Of this speaketh the Prophet thus: Secretum
   meum mihi, secretum meum mihi.--My privity to me, my privity to me.
   [291] That is, the lover of Jesus, through inspiration of grace, taken
   up from outward feeling of worldly love, and ravished into the privity
   of spiritual love, yieldeth thanks to Him, saying thus: My privity to
   me. That is, my Lord Jesus, Thy privity is showed to me, and privily
   hid from all lovers of the world; for it is called hidden Manna, which
   may easier be asked than told what it is. And that our Lord Jesus
   promiseth to His lover, saying thus: Dabo sibi Manna absconditum,
   &c.--I will give her the hidden Manna which no man knoweth but he that
   taketh it. [292] This Manna is heavenly meat, and angels' food, as the
   Scripture saith; for angels are fully fed and filled with clear sight
   in burning love of our Lord Jesus, and that is Manna; for we may ask
   what it is, but cannot know what it is. But the lover of Jesus is not
   yet filled here, but is fed with a little taste of it, whilst he is
   bound in this bodily life.

   This tasting of this Manna is a lively feeling of grace had through the
   opening of the spiritual eye. And this grace is not another grace from
   that which a chosen soul feeleth in the beginning of his conversion;
   but it is the self-same grace, only it is otherwise felt and showed to
   a soul. For why? Grace groweth with a soul, and the soul groweth with
   grace. And the clearer that a soul is parted from the love of the
   world, the more mighty is its grace, the more inward and more spiritual
   is the showing of the presence of our Lord Jesus come to be. So that
   the same grace which at first turneth him from sin, and maketh him
   beginning and profiting by gifts of virtue and exercise of good works,
   maketh him also perfect. And that grace is called a lively feeling of
   grace; for he that hath it feeleth it well, and knoweth well by
   experience that he is in grace. It is full lively to him; for it
   quickeneth the soul wonderfully, and maketh it so whole that it feeleth
   no painful disease of the body, though it be feeble and sickly. For
   why? Then is the body most mighty, most whole and most restful, and the
   soul also. Without this grace the soul cannot live but in pain; for it
   thinketh that it can keep it for ever, and nothing can put it away; but
   it is not so, for it passeth away full easily. Nevertheless though the
   sovereign feeling passeth away, and is withdrawn, the virtue [293] of
   it stayeth still, and keepeth the soul in sobriety, [294] and maketh it
   to desire the coming again thereof.

   And this is the waking sleep of the Spouse, of the which the Scripture
   thus: Ego dormio, et cor meum vigilat.--I sleep, and my heart waketh.
   [295] That is, I sleep spiritually when through grace the love of the
   world is slain in me, and wicked stirrings of fleshly desires are dead,
   insomuch that I scarce feel them. I am not held by them, my heart is
   made free. And then it waketh, for it is quick and ready to love Jesus,
   and see Him. The more I sleep from outward things, the more am I awake
   in knowing of Jesus and of inward things. I cannot be awake to Jesus,
   except I sleep to the world. And therefore the grace of the Holy Ghost,
   shutting the fleshly eye, causeth the soul to sleep from worldly
   vanities, and opening the spiritual eye, keepeth it awake to the sight
   of God's majesty covered under the cloud of His precious Humanity. As
   the Gospel saith of the Apostles, when they were with our Lord Jesus in
   His transfiguration, first they slept: Et evigilantes viderunt
   majestatem.--They waking beheld His glory. [296] By sleep of the
   Apostles is understood the dying of worldly love through the
   inspiration of the Holy Ghost; by their awaking is understood their
   Contemplation of Jesus. Through this sleep the soul is brought into
   rest from the noise of fleshly lust, and through waking is raised up to
   the sight of Jesus and spiritual things. The more that the eyes are
   shut [297] in this manner of sleep from the appetite of earthly things,
   the sharper is the inner sight in lovely beholding of heavenly beauty.
   [298] This sleeping and this waking doth love work through the light of
   grace in the soul of the lover of our Lord Jesus.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [274] Assay.

   [275] Privity.

   [276] Entre.

   [277] Virtue.

   [278] Ps. 28.

   [279] Heb. 4.

   [280] Apoc. 8.

   [281] Boldness.

   [282] Rom. 8.

   [283] 2 Cor. 1.

   [284] Buxom.

   [285] Ps. 63.

   [286] Homeliness.

   [287] Oneliness.

   [288] Osee 2.

   [289] Noyous.

   [290] Privity.

   [291] Isa. 24.

   [292] Apoc. 2.

   [293] Relief.

   [294] Sadness.

   [295] Cant. 5.

   [296] Luke 9.

   [297] Spered.

   [298] Fairhead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XI: How such special Grace for the Beholding of our Lord Jesus is
    withdrawn sometimes from a Soul; and how a Soul is to behave herself in the
    Absence and in the Presence of Jesus, and how a Soul shall alway desire (as
    much as is in her) the gracious Presence of Jesus

   SHOW me then a soul that through inspiration of grace hath this opening
   of the spiritual sight into the beholding of Jesus that is separated
   and drawn out from the love of the world, so far forth that it hath
   purity and privity of spirit, spiritual rest, inward silence and peace
   of conscience, highness of thought, loneliness and privity of heart,
   the waking sleep of the Spouse, that hath lost the liking and joys of
   the world, taken with delight of heavenly savour, ever thirsting and
   softly hasting [299] after that blessed presence of Jesus; and I dare
   boldly [300] pronounce that this soul burneth all in love, and shineth
   in spiritual light, worthy to come to the name and to the worship of
   the Spouse; for it is reformed in feeling, made able and ready to
   Contemplation. These are the tokens of inspiration in opening of the
   spiritual eye. For when the eye is opened, the soul is in full feeling
   of all the aforesaid virtues for that time.

   Nevertheless it falleth out oftentimes that grace withdraweth in part
   by reason of the corruption of man's frailty, and suffereth then the
   soul to fall into itself in sensuality, [301] as it was before; and
   then is the soul in pain and in sorrow, for it is blind and unsavoury
   and can do no good. It is weak and impotent, encumbered with the body
   and all the bodily senses. It seeketh and desireth after the grace of
   Jesus again, and it cannot find it; for the Scripture saith thus of our
   Lord: Postquam vultum suum absconderit, &c.--When our Lord hath hid His
   face, there is none that can behold Him. [302] When He showeth His
   face, the soul cannot but see Him, for He is light; and when He hideth
   Himself, it cannot see Him, for the soul is dark.

   His hiding is but a subtle trying of the soul. His showing is a
   wonderful merciful goodness in comfort of the soul. Wonder not though
   the feelings of grace be sometimes withdrawn from a lover of Jesus; for
   holy Writ saith the same of the Spouse, that it fareth thus with her:
   Quaesivi et non inveni illum, &c.-- I sought Him, and I found Him not;
   I called, and He answered not. [303] That is, when I fall down to my
   frailty and sin, then grace withdraweth; for my falling is the cause
   thereof, and not His flying, but then feel I pain of my wretchedness in
   His absence. And, therefore, I sought Him by great desire of heart, and
   He gave to me not so much as a feeble answer. And then I cried with all
   my soul: Revertere, dilecte mi--Turn again, Thou my beloved. [304] And
   yet He seemed as if He heard me not. The painful feeling of myself, and
   the assailing of fleshly loves and fears in this time, and the wanting
   of my spiritual strength is a continual crying of my soul to Jesus. And
   nevertheless our Lord maketh strange, and cometh not, cry I never so
   fast; for He is sure enough of His lover, that he will not turn again
   to worldly loves quite; he can have no savour in them, and, therefore,
   stayeth He the longer.

   But at the last when He pleaseth, He cometh again full of grace and
   faithfulness, [305] and visiteth the soul that languisheth through
   desire, by sighings of love after His presence, and toucheth it, and
   anointeth it full gently [306] with the oil of gladness, and maketh it
   suddenly whole from all pain. And then crieth the soul to Jesus in a
   spiritual voice with a glad heart thus: Oleum effusum Nomen tuum.--Thy
   Name is as oil poured out. [307] Thy Name is Jesus, that is, health.
   Then as long as I feel my soul sore and sick by reason of sin, pained
   with the heavy burthen of my body, sorrowful and fearful for perils and
   wretchedness of this life, so long, Lord Jesus, Thy Name is oil shut
   up, not poured forth. But when I feel my soul suddenly touched with the
   light of Thy grace, healed and cured [308] from all the filth of sin,
   and comforted in love and in light with spiritual strength and gladness
   unspeakable, then can I say with lusty, loving and spiritual might to
   Thee: Thy Name, O Jesu, is to me oil poured forth. For by the effect of
   Thy gracious visitation I feel well the true exposition of Thy Name,
   that Thou art Jesus, health, for only Thy gracious presence healeth me
   from sorrow and from sin.

   Happy is that soul that is ever fed with feeling of love in His
   presence, or is borne up by desire to Him in His absence. A wise lover
   is he, and well taught, that soberly and reverently behaveth himself in
   His presence, and lovely beholdeth Him without dissolute lightness, and
   patiently and easily beareth His absence without venomous despair and
   over painful bitterness.

   This changeability of the absence and presence of Jesus, which a soul
   feeleth, is neither the perfection of the soul nor is it contrary to
   the grace of perfection or of Contemplation, but only a state of less
   perfection; for the more letting that a soul hath of itself from the
   constant feeling of grace, the less is the grace; and yet,
   nevertheless, is the grace in itself grace of Contemplation. This
   changeability of absence and presence falleth as well in the state of
   perfection as in the state of beginning, but after another manner; for
   even as there is diversity of feeling in the presence of grace betwixt
   these two states, right so is there in the absence of grace. And,
   therefore, he that knoweth not the absence of grace is apt to be
   deceived. And he that maketh [309] not much of the presence of grace is
   unthankful [310] to the visiting thereof, whether he be in the state of
   beginners or of the perfect. Nevertheless, the more stableness that
   there is in grace unhurt and unbroken, the lovelier is the soul, and
   more like unto Him in whom is no changeableness, [311] as the Apostle
   saith. And it is very meet that the Spouse should be like her
   Bridegroom Jesus in manners and in virtues, fully according to Him in
   stableness of perfect love. But that falleth out seldom here in Spouses
   of this life; for he that perceiveth no changeableness in the feeling
   of his grace, but is all alike, whole, stable, unbroken and unhurt, as
   he thinketh, he is either very perfect or very blind. He is perfect if
   he be sequestered from all carnal affections and inclinations [312] to
   creatures, and hath all hindrances [313] of corruption and of sin
   betwixt Jesus and his soul broken away, and is fully united [314] to
   Him with softness of love. But this is only from grace above man's
   nature. Or he is very blind if he imagineth himself to be in grace
   without spiritual feeling of God's inspiration, and setteth himself in
   a way of stableness, as if he were ever in feeling and in working of
   special grace, imagining all to be grace which he doth and feeleth,
   both inwardly and outwardly, thinking that whatsoever he doth or
   speaketh is grace, holding himself unchangeable in speciality of grace.
   If there be any such, as I hope there is none, he is full blind in
   feeling of grace.

   But thou mayest object: That we ought to live only by Faith, and not
   covet spiritual feelings, nor regard them if they come; for the Apostle
   saith: The just shall live by faith. [315]

   Unto this I answer that bodily feelings, be they never so comfortable,
   are not to be desired nor regarded much if they come; but spiritual
   feelings, such as I have spoken of, if they come in that manner as I
   have said, should ever be desired. I mean the killing of all worldly
   love, the opening of the spiritual eye, purity of spirit, peace of
   conscience and all other spoken of before. We should ever covet to feel
   the lively inspiration of grace made by the spiritual presence of Jesus
   in our souls, if we could. And for to have Him in our sight with
   reverence, and ever feel the sweetness of His love by a wonderful
   familiarity of His presence. This should be our life and our feeling in
   grace after the measure of His gift in whom all grace is, to some more
   and to some less; for His presence is felt in divers manners as He
   pleaseth. And in this we should live and work that which belongeth to
   us to work, for without this we should not be able to live spiritually.
   For as the soul is the life of the body, right so is Jesus the life of
   the soul by His gracious presence.

   And, nevertheless, this manner of feeling, though it be never so much,
   is but in faith in comparison of that which shall be of the selfsame
   Jesus in the bliss of Heaven. Lo, this feeling should we desire; for
   every reasonable soul ought to covet, with all its power, to approach
   to Jesus, and to be united to Him through feeling of His gracious
   invisible presence. How that presence is felt may better be known by
   experience than by any writing; for it is the life and the love, the
   might and the light, the joy and the rest of a chosen soul. And
   therefore, he that hath once truly felt it cannot forbear it without
   pain, neither can he choose but desire it, it is so good in itself and
   so comfortable. What is more comfortable here for a soul than to be
   drawn out through grace from the noisomeness of worldly business and
   filth of desires, and from vain affection of all creatures, into rest
   and softness of spiritual love, secretly perceiving the gracious
   presence of Jesus, and feelingly fed with the savour of His invisible
   blessed Face? Verily, I think nothing can make the soul of a lover full
   of mirth but the gracious presence of Jesus, as He can show Himself to
   a pure soul; such an one is never heavy, never sorry but when he is
   with himself in sensuality. He is never full glad, nor merry, but when
   he is out of himself as being with Jesus in spirit.

   And yet is that no full mirth, for there ever hangeth a heavy lump of
   bodily corruption on his soul, and beareth it down, and hindereth much
   the spiritual gladness, and this must ever be whilst it is here in this
   life. But whereas I have before spoken of the changeability of grace,
   how it cometh and goeth, that thou mistake me not; thou must understand
   that I mean not of common grace, that is had and felt in faith and in
   goodwill to God; without having and lusting of which, and continuing in
   it, none can be saved, for it is in the least chosen soul that liveth.
   But I mean of special grace felt by inspiration of the Holy Ghost in
   that manner as I have said before. Common grace, which is Charity,
   lasteth whole whatsoever a man doth, as long as his will and his intent
   is true to God, which will of his keepeth him from sinning deadly, and
   the deed that he wittingly doth is not forbidden under a mortal sin;
   for this grace is not lost but by mortal sins. And then is a sin mortal
   when his conscience witnesseth with deliberation that it is mortal sin,
   and yet nevertheless he doth it; or else his conscience is so blinded
   that he holdeth it no deadly sin, although he doth the deed wilfully,
   which is forbidden by God and holy Church as a deadly sin.

   Special grace felt through the invisible presence of Jesus, which
   maketh a soul a perfect lover, lasteth not ever alike whole in the
   height of feeling, but changeably cometh and goeth, as I have said
   before. Thus our Lord saith: Spiritus ubi vult spirat, &c.--The spirit
   bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest His voice, but thou knowest
   not whence He cometh, nor whither He goeth. [316] He cometh secretly
   sometimes when thou art least aware of Him, but thou shalt know Him
   full well ere He go; for He wonderfully stirreth and mightily turneth
   thy heart into the beholding of His goodness, and then doth thy heart
   melt delectably as wax against the fire into softness of His love, and
   this is the voice that He soundeth. But then He goeth ere thou
   perceivest, for He withdraweth Himself somewhat, not wholly altogether,
   but from excess into moderation. [317] The height of feeling passeth,
   but the substance and the effect of Grace dwelleth still. And that is
   as long as the soul of a lover keepeth himself pure, and falleth not
   wilfully into wretchedness or carelessness [318] in sensuality, nor to
   outward vanity, as sometimes it doth (though it have no delight
   therein) out of frailty. This is the changeability of grace which I
   meant and spake of.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [299] Highing.

   [300] Hardly.

   [301] Fleshly heed.

   [302] Job 34.

   [303] Cant. 3.

   [304] Cant. 4.

   [305] Sothfastness.

   [306] Softly.

   [307] Cant. 1.

   [308] Sorted.

   [309] Keeps not.

   [310] Unkind.

   [311] Jas. 1.

   [312] Commoning.

   [313] Meanes.

   [314] Oonyd.

   [315] Heb. 10.

   [316] St John 3.

   [317] Sobriety.

   [318] Dissolution.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XII: A Commendation of Prayer offered up to Jesus by a Contemplative
    Soul, and how stableness in Prayer is a secure work to stand in; and how
    every Feeling of Grace in a chosen Soul may be called Jesus. But the more
    clean the Soul is, the more worthy the Grace is

   THE soul of a man, whilst it is not touched with special grace, is
   blunt and gross for spiritual work, and can do nought therein. It
   skilleth not thereof by reason of its weakness. It is both old and dry,
   undevout and unsavoury in itself. But then cometh the light of grace,
   and through touching maketh it sharp and subtle, ready and able to
   spiritual work, and giveth it a great freedom and a perfect readiness
   in will to be pliable [319] to all the stirrings of grace, ready to
   work after that grace stirreth the soul. For by opening of the
   spiritual eye it is wholly applied to grace, ready to pray. And how the
   soul then prayeth I shall tell thee.

   The most special prayer that the soul useth and hath most comfort in, I
   suppose, is the Pater noster or else Psalms of the Psalter. The Pater
   noster for unlearned men; and Psalms and Hymns and other service of
   holy Church for the learned. The soul prayeth, therefore, not in that
   manner as it did before, after the common way of men by highness of
   voice, or by reasonable speaking out; but in full great stillness of
   voice and softness of heart. For why? His mind is not troubled nor
   hindered with outward things, but wholly gathered together into itself.
   And the soul is set, as it were, in the spiritual presence of Jesus,
   and, therefore, every word and every syllable is sounded savourly,
   sweetly and delectably, with full accord of mouth and of heart. For
   why? The soul is then turned all into the fire of love. And, therefore,
   every word that it secretly prayeth is like a spark rising out of a
   burning fire, which heateth [320] all the powers of the soul, and
   turneth them into love, and enlighteneth them so comfortably that the
   soul listeth ever to pray and to do nothing else. The more it prayeth
   the better it may, and the mightier it is. For grace helpeth the soul
   well, and maketh all things light and easy, that it delighteth to chant
   and sing the praises [321] of God with spiritual mirth in heavenly
   delight. This spiritual work is the food of the soul, and this prayer
   is of great virtue, for it wasteth and bringeth to nought all secret
   and open temptations of the enemy, and slayeth all the mind and all the
   liking of the world and of fleshly sins. It beareth up the body and the
   soul from painful feeling of the wretchedness of this life. It keepeth
   the soul in the feeling of grace and working of love, and nourisheth it
   ever alike hot, as sticks nourisheth the fire. It putteth away all
   irksomeness and heaviness of heart, and holdeth it in strength and
   spiritual gladness.

   Of this prayer speaketh David thus: Dirigatur oratio mea sicut incensum
   &c.--Let my prayer be dressed as incense in Thy sight. [322] For even
   as incense that is cast into the fire maketh a sweet smell by the smoke
   rising up to the air, right so a Psalm savourly and softly sung or said
   in a burning heart, giveth up a sweet smell to the face of our Lord
   Jesus, and to all the Court of Heaven. There dare no flesh-fly rest
   upon the pot's brink boiling on the fire. Even so can no fleshly
   delight rest upon a clean soul, that is all bilapped [323] and warmed
   in the fire of love, boiling and blowing up Psalms and prayers to
   Jesus. This prayer is always heard of Jesus. It yieldeth grace to
   Jesus, and receiveth grace again. It maketh a soul familiar, [324] and,
   as it were, hail-fellow with Jesus, and with all the Angels in Heaven,
   use it who so can. The work is good and gracious in itself. And though
   it be not altogether perfect Contemplation in itself, nor the working
   of love by itself, nevertheless it is in part Contemplation. For why?
   It cannot be exercised in this manner but by plenty of grace through
   opening of the spiritual eye. And, therefore, a soul that hath this
   freedom and this gracious feeling in praying with spiritual savour and
   heavenly delight hath the grace of Contemplation in the manner as it
   is.

   This prayer is a rich offering filled all with fatness of devotion,
   received by Angels and presented to the face of Jesus. The prayer of
   other men, who are busy in active works, is made of two words; for they
   oftentimes form in their hearts one word through thinking of worldly
   business, and speak with their mouth another word of the Psalm sung or
   said. Yet, nevertheless, if his intent be true his prayer is good and
   acceptable, though it lack savour and sweetness. But this prayer of a
   Contemplative man is made but of one word; for as it is formed in the
   heart, right so doth it wholly sound in the mouth, as it were nothing
   but one and the same thing, both which formeth it and which soundeth
   it. And verily no more it is, for the soul, through grace, is made
   whole in itself so far parted from sensuality, [325] that it is master
   of the body, and then is the body nothing else but as an instrument and
   a trumpet of the soul in the which the soul bloweth sweet notes of
   spiritual prayers to Jesus. This is the trumpet that David spake of
   thus: Buccinate in neomenia, &c.--Blow ye the trumpet in the new moon.
   [326] That is, ye souls that are reformed in spiritual life through
   opening of the inner eye, blow ye devoutly the sounding of Psalms with
   the trumpet of your bodily tongue. And, therefore, since this prayer is
   pleasant to Jesus, and so profitable to the soul, it is good for him
   who is new converted to God (and desires to please Him, and coveteth to
   have some quaint feeling of grace) to covet this feeling, that he may
   through grace come to this liberty of spirit and offer his prayers and
   his Psalms to Jesus continually and stably and devoutly, with whole
   mind and burning affection towards Him, so that he may be ready for it
   through custom when grace will stir him up thereto. This is a secure
   feeling, and a true one. If thou canst attain unto it and keep it, thou
   shalt not need to run about here and there and ask questions of every
   spiritual man what thou shouldst do, how thou shouldst love God, and
   how thou shouldst serve God, and speak of spiritual matters, that pass
   thy understanding, as perhaps some do: Such kind of doings are not
   profitable unless in case of necessity. Keep thee to thy prayers,
   quietly at first with thy own great industry, that thou mayest
   afterwards come to this restful feeling of spiritual prayer, and that
   shall teach thee wisdom enough in verity without feigning or fancy; and
   hold thee on in such prayer if thou hast gotten it and leave it not;
   but if grace come otherwise, and removeth it from thee for a time,
   causing thee to work on another manner, then mayest thou leave it for a
   time, and after return again thereto. And he that hath this grace in
   prayer asketh not whereupon he should set the point of his thought in
   his prayer, whether upon the words that he speaketh, or else on God, or
   on the Name of Jesus, as some ask, for this feeling of grace will teach
   him well enough. For why? The soul is turned into the eye, and sharply
   beholdeth the face of Jesus, and is ascertained that it is Jesus that
   it feeleth and seeth. I do not mean Jesus as He is in Himself, in
   fulness of His blessed Godhead; but I mean Jesus, as He is pleased to
   show Himself to a clean soul, yet in the body according to the
   cleanness that it hath. For thou must know that every feeling of grace
   is Jesus, and may be called Jesus. And according as the grace is more
   or less, so feeleth the soul more or less of Jesus. Yea, the first
   feeling of special grace in a beginner, which is called grace of
   compunction and contrition for his sins, is verily Jesus. For why? He
   causeth that contrition in a soul by His presence. But Jesus is then
   very grossly and rudely felt, very far from this spiritual subtlety;
   for the soul can nor may do no better by reason of its uncleanness.
   Nevertheless, afterward, if the soul profit and increase in virtues and
   in cleanness, the same Jesus, and none other, is seen and felt by the
   same soul when it is touched with grace; but that is more spiritually,
   and nearer to His Divinity. And verily that is the chiefest thing that
   Jesus loveth in a soul, that it may be made spiritual and divine in
   sight and in love, like to Him in grace, as He is by nature; for that
   shall be the end of all lovers.

   Then mayest thou be secure, that at what time thou feelest thy soul
   stirred by grace, specially in that manner as I have said before, by
   opening of thy spiritual eye that thou seest and feelest Jesus, hold
   Him fast whilst thou may, and keep thyself in grace, and let Him not
   easily go from thee. Look after none other Jesus but that same, by
   feeling of that self-same grace more divinely that it may increase in
   thee more and more. And be not afraid, though Jesus whom thou feelest
   be not Jesus as He is in His full Godhead, that thou therefore mayest
   be deceived if thou trust to that feeling. But trust thou well, if thou
   be a lover of Jesus, that thy feeling is true, and that Jesus is truly
   felt and seen of thee through His grace as thou canst see Him here. And
   therefore trust fully to thy feeling when it is gracious and spiritual,
   and keep it tenderly, and have great dainty, not of thyself, but of it,
   that thou mayest see and feel Jesus still better and better. For grace
   shall ever teach thee by itself, if thou wilt fall thereto, till thou
   come to the end.

   But perchance thou beginnest to wonder why I say one time that grace
   worketh all this, and another time that love worketh, or God worketh?

   Unto this I answer thus: That when I say that grace worketh, I mean
   both love, and Jesus, and God; for all is one, and nought but one;
   Jesus is love, [327] Jesus is grace, Jesus is God. And because He
   worketh all in us by His grace for love, as He is God, therefore may I
   use which of these four words I list after my stirring in this writing.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [319] Buxom.

   [320] Chaffeth.

   [321] Lovings.

   [322] Ps. 140.

   [323] Happed.

   [324] Homely.

   [325] Fleshly heed.

   [326] Ps. 130.

   [327] 1 John 4.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XIII: How a Soul through the opening of the spiritual Eye receiveth
    a gracious Love enabling to understand the Holy Scriptures, and how Jesus,
    that is hid in the Holy Scriptures, showeth Himself to His Lovers

   WHEN a soul thus feeleth Jesus in prayer, he thinketh that he shall
   never feel otherwise. Nevertheless it happeneth that sometimes grace
   putteth vocal prayer to silence, and stirreth the soul to see and to
   feel Jesus in another manner. And that manner is first to see Jesus in
   the holy Scriptures; for Jesus, who is all truth, is hid and covered
   therein, folded in a soft Syndon, under fair words, that He cannot be
   known nor felt but of a clean heart. For why? Truth will not show
   itself to enemies, but to friends, that love and desire it with an
   humble heart. For Truth and Humility are full true sisters, fastened
   together in love and charity, and there is no distance of counsel
   betwixt them two. Humility presumeth upon Truth, and not at all on
   itself; and Truth esteemeth well of Humility, so they accord well
   together. Then forasmuch as the soul of a lover is made humble through
   inspiration of grace by opening of the spiritual eye, and seeth that it
   is nought of itself, but only hangeth on the mercy and the goodness of
   Jesus perpetually, being borne up by the favour and help of Him only,
   and truly desiring His presence, therefore seeth it Jesus; for it seeth
   the truth of holy Scriptures wonderfully showed and opened above study
   and industry and reason of man's natural wit. And that may well be
   called the feeling and the perceiving of Jesus. For Jesus is the
   fountain of Wisdom, and by pouring down of His Wisdom into a clean
   soul, by little and little, He maketh the soul wise enough for to
   understand all holy Scripture; not all at once in special beholding,
   but through that grace the soul receiveth a new ability and a gracious
   habit to understand it, particularly when it cometh to mind. This
   opening and this cleanness of understanding is made by the spiritual
   presence of Jesus: for right as the Gospel saith of the two Disciples
   going to Emmaus, burning in desire and speaking of our Lord Jesus, our
   Lord appeared to them presently as a pilgrim, and taught them the
   prophecies of Himself. And as the Gospel saith: Aperuit illis sensum,
   &c.--He opened their wits that they might understand the Scriptures.
   [328] Right so the spiritual presence of Jesus openeth the wit of His
   lover, that it burneth in desire to Him and bringeth to His mind by
   ministration of Angels, the words and sentences of holy Writ unsought
   and unconsidered one after another and expoundeth them readily, be they
   never so hard nor so secret. The harder they be, and farther from man's
   understanding by reason, the more delectable is the true showing of
   them. When Jesus is the teacher, it is expounded and declared
   literally, morally, mystically, and heavenly, if the matter will bear
   it. By the literal (which is the easiest and plainest) corporal nature
   is comforted. By the moral, the soul is informed concerning vices and
   virtues, to be able wisely to distinguish the one from the other. By
   the mystical it is enlightened to see the works of Jesus in holy
   Church, readily to apply the words of holy Writ to Christ our head, and
   to holy Church, which is His mystical body. The fourth, which is
   heavenly, belongeth only to the working of love, and that is, when all
   truth in holy Writ is applied to love. And because this is most like to
   heavenly feeling, therefore I call it heavenly.

   The lover of Jesus is His friend, not for that he deserveth it, but
   because Jesus of His merciful goodness maketh him His friend by true
   accord. And therefore to him He showeth His secrets, as to a true
   friend that pleaseth Him by love, not serveth Him through fear in
   slavery. Thus He saith Himself to His Apostles: Jam vos dixi amicos
   quia quaecumque audivi a Patre meo nota feci vobis.--Now have I called
   you friends, for I have made known unto you all that I have heard of
   the Father. [329] To a clean soul whose palate is purified from filth
   of fleshly love, holy Writ is lively food and sustenance delectable, It
   savoureth wonderful sweetly when it is well chewed by spiritual
   understanding. For why? The spirit of life is hid therein, that
   quickeneth all the powers of the soul, and filleth them full of
   sweetness of heavenly savour and spiritual delight. But verily he must
   have white teeth, and sharp, and well picked, that can bite of this
   spiritual bread; for fleshly lovers and heretics may not touch the
   inward flour of it. Their teeth are bloody, and full of filth,
   therefore must they be fasting from feeling of this bread. By teeth I
   understand the inward senses of the soul, which in fleshly lovers and
   heretics are bloody, full of sin and worldly vanities. They would, but
   they cannot come through curiosity to the truth in knowing of holy
   Writ; for their senses are corrupted by original and actual sin, and
   are not yet healed through grace. And therefore they do but gnaw upon
   the outward bark, speak they never so much thereof. The inner savour
   within they taste not of. They be not humble, they be not pure for to
   see it. They be not friends to Jesus, and therefore He showeth them not
   His counsel. The mystery of holy Writ is closed under a key, and sealed
   with a signet of Jesus' finger, which is the Holy Ghost, and therefore
   without His love and His leave may none come in. He alone hath the key
   of skill [330] in His keeping, as holy Writ saith, [331] and He Himself
   is the key: and He letteth in whom He will by inspiration of His grace,
   and breaketh not the seal.

   And this doth Jesus to His lovers, but not to all alike, but to them
   that are specially inspired for to seek Truth in holy Writ, with great
   devotion in praying, and with much business in studying going before.
   These may come to the finding of it, when our Lord will be pleased to
   show it. See now, then, how grace openeth the spiritual eye, and
   Heareth the senses of the soul wonderfully above the frailty of corrupt
   nature. It giveth the soul a new ability whether it will read holy
   Writ, or hear it, or meditate in it, for to understand truly and
   savourly the truth of it in the manner aforesaid; and also for to turn
   readily all reasons and words that are literally spoken in spiritual
   understanding. And that is no great wonder, for the same Spirit that
   made the Scriptures, expoundeth it and declareth it to a clean soul for
   its comfort--namely, the Holy Ghost.

   And this grace may be, and is, as well in laymen as in the learned, as
   to the substance and true feeling of the verity and spiritual savour of
   it in general, though they see not so many reasons in special; for that
   needeth not. And when the soul is thus enabled, and enlightened through
   grace, then he chooseth to be alone sometimes, out of the letting and
   meddling with all creatures, that he may freely exercise his
   instrument, which I call his reason of beholding of verity which is
   contained in holy Scriptures. And then will there fall into his mind
   words and reasons and senses enough to busy him, and that full orderly
   and full seriously. And what comfort and spiritual delight, what savour
   and sweetness a soul can then feel in that spiritual exercise through
   divers illuminations, inward perceivings, secret knowings and sudden
   touchings of the Holy Ghost, a soul can only know by experience, and
   not otherwise. And I hope that he shall not err, if so be his teeth,
   that is his inward senses, be kept white and clean from spiritual
   pride, and from curiosity of his natural wit. I believe David felt full
   great delight in this manner of working, when he said thus: Quam dulci
   faucibus meis eloquia Tua, &c.--How sweet are Thy words unto my taste!
   sweeter than honey to my mouth. [332] That is, Lord Jesus, Thy holy
   words endited in holy Writ, brought to my mind by grace, are sweeter to
   my taste, that is the affections of my soul, than honey is to my mouth.
   Verily this is a fair work without painful travail for to see Jesus
   thus. This is one manner of sight of Jesus, as I said before; not as He
   is, but clothed under the likeness of works and of words, per speculum,
   in aenigmate.--In a glass, and by a likeness, [333] as the Apostle
   saith. Jesus is endless might, wisdom and goodness, righteousness,
   truth, holiness and mercy. And what this Jesus is in Himself can no
   soul see nor hear; but by the effects of His working may be seen
   through the light of grace. As thus, His might is seen by making of all
   creatures of nothing; His wisdom in orderly disposing of them; His
   goodness in saving of them; His mercy in forgiveness of sins; His
   holiness in gifts of grace; His righteousness in severely punishing of
   sin; His gentleness in true rewarding of good works. And all this is
   expressed in holy Writ, and this a soul seeth there with all other
   attributes that pertain thereto. And be thou well assured, that such
   gracious knowings in holy Writ, or in other writings, which are made by
   the assistance of God's grace, are nought else but sweet letters sent
   and made betwixt a loving soul and Jesus the beloved. Or else, that I
   may speak trulier, betwixt Jesus the true lover and the souls beloved
   of Him. He hath full great tenderness of love to all his chosen
   children, that are here closed in clay of this bodily life. And
   therefore, though He be absent from them, high, hid above in the bosom
   of the Father, filled with the delights of the Blessed Godhead, yet
   notwithstanding He thinketh upon them, and visiteth them full oft
   through His gracious spiritual presence, and comforteth them by His
   letters of holy Writ, and driveth out of their hearts heaviness and
   wearisomeness, doubts and fears, and maketh them truly glad and merry
   in Him, believing in all His promises, and humbly continuing fulfilling
   His will.

   St Paul saith thus: Quaecumque scripta sunt, &c.--Whatsoever things are
   written, are written for our instruction, that we might have hope
   through the comfort of the Scriptures. And this is another work of
   Contemplation, to see Jesus in the Scriptures after the opening of the
   spiritual eye. The cleaner the sight is in beholding, the more
   comforted is the affection in tasting. A full little savour felt in a
   clean soul of holy Writ in this manner abovesaid, should make the soul
   set little price by knowing of all the seven liberal arts, or of all
   the world, or all worldly wisdom; for the end of this knowing is the
   salvation of a man's soul in everlasting life; and the end of that
   other knowledge, as to himself, is but vanity and a fading delight,
   unless by grace it be turned to this end.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [328] St Luke 24.

   [329] St John 15.

   [330] Cunning.

   [331] Is. 22.

   [332] Ps. 118.

   [333] 1 Cor. 13.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XIV: Of the secret Voice of Jesus sounding in a Soul, and how it may
    be known. And how all the gracious Illuminations made in a Soul be called
    the Speakings of Jesus

   LO, these are fair new feelings in a clean soul; and if a soul were
   filled with such, it might be said, and that truly, that it were
   reformed somewhat in feeling, but not yet fully; for why? Yet Jesus
   showeth more, and leadeth the soul inward, and beginneth to speak more
   familiarly and more lovely to a soul, and maketh it more ready to
   follow the stirrings of grace. For the Prophet saith: Quocumque ibat
   spiritus, illuc gradiebantur et rotae sequentes eum.-- Whithersoever
   the spirit went, thither went the wheels following him. [334] By wheels
   are understood the true lovers of Jesus, for they are round in virtue,
   without angle of frowardness; and lightly whirling through readiness of
   will after the stirrings of grace; for according as grace stirreth and
   teacheth, so they follow and work, as the Prophet saith.

   But first, they have a full secure experience, and a true knowing of
   the voice of grace, ere they do so; that they be not deceived by their
   own feigning, or by the mid-day fiend. Our Lord Jesus saith thus of His
   lovers: Oves meae vocem meam audiunt, &c.--My sheep hear My voice, and
   I know them, and they know Me. [335] The privy voice of Jesus is full
   true, and it maketh a soul true; there is no feigning in it, nor on
   fancy, nor pride, nor hyprocrisy; but gentleness, humility, peace, love
   and charity. And it is full of life, love and grace. And therefore when
   it soundeth in a soul, it is of so great power sometimes, that the soul
   suddenly layeth aside all that was in hand, as praying, speaking,
   reading or thinking; in the manner abovesaid, and all manner of bodily
   work, and listeneth thereto fully, hearing and perceiving in rest and
   in love the sweet sound of this spiritual voice, as it were ravished
   from the mind of all earthly things, and then in this quiet, Jesus
   sometimes showeth Himself as an awful [336] master, and sometimes as a
   reverend Father, and sometimes as a lovely Spouse. And it keepeth a
   soul in a wonderful reverence, and in a lovely beholding of Him, that
   the soul liketh well then, and never so well as then; for it feeleth so
   great security, and so great rest in Jesus, and so much savour of His
   goodness, that it would ever be so, and never do other work. It
   thinketh that it toucheth Jesus, and through virtue of that unspeakable
   touching, it is made whole and stable in itself, reverently beholding
   Jesus only, as if there were nothing but Jesus, one thing, and himself
   another, borne up only by the savour and the wonderful goodness of Him;
   that is that thing which he feeleth and seeth. And this feeling is
   ofttimes without special beholding of holy Writ, and with but few words
   formed in the mind; only there falls in among sweet words, according to
   the feeling either of loving, or worshipping, or admiring, or otherwise
   sounding, as the heart liketh. The soul is very much separated from
   love or liking of the world, through virtue of this gracious feeling,
   and also very much from minding of the world in that time. It taketh no
   heed thereof, for it hath no time thereto. But then sometimes anon,
   together with this, falleth into a soul divers illuminations through
   grace, which I call the speakings of Jesus, and the sight of spiritual
   things; for be thou assured, that all the business that Jesus maketh
   about a soul, is for to make it a true perfect spouse to Him in the
   height and the fulness of love, and that cannot be done suddenly.
   Therefore Jesus, who is love, and of all lovers the wisest, proveth by
   many ways, and by many wonderful means, ere this can come about. And
   therefore that it may come to the effect of true espousing, He hath
   such gracious speakings of a wooer to a chosen soul. He sheweth His
   privy jewels; many things He giveth, and more He promiseth; and showeth
   courteous dalliance. He often visiteth her with much grace and
   spiritual comfort, as I have said before; but how He doth this in
   particular, I cannot fully tell thee, for it needeth not. Nevertheless
   somewhat shall I say, according as grace enableth me.

   The drawing of a soul fully to perfect love, is, first by the showing
   of spiritual things to a clean soul, when the spiritual eye is opened;
   not that a soul should rest therein, and make an end there, but should
   by that search Him and love Him who is highest of all, without any
   beholding of any other thing than He.

   But thou wilt ask, what are these spiritual things, because I speak so
   oft of spiritual things?

   To this I say that spiritual things may be said all the truth of holy
   Scripture. And therefore a soul that through light of grace can see the
   truth of Scripture, seeth spiritual things, as I have said before.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [334] Ezec. 1.

   [335] St John 10.

   [336] Haughtful.
     __________________________________________________________________

    CHAPTER XV
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION I: How through gracious Opening of the Spiritual Eye a Soul is
      made Wise, humbly and truly to see the Diversities of Degrees in Holy
      Church, as Militant, and for to see the nature of Angels; and first of the
      Reprobate

   NEVERTHELESS, other spiritual things there be also, which through light
   of grace are showed to the soul, and are these: the nature of all
   reasonable souls, and the gracious workings of our Lord Jesus in them;
   the nature of angels, both good and bad, and their workings, and the
   knowledge of the Blessed Trinity, according as grace teacheth. Holy
   Writ saith of the Spouse thus in the Canticles: Surgam et circuibo
   civitatem, &c.--I will arise, and go about the city, and will seek Him
   whom my soul loveth. [337] That is, I will rise into highness of
   thought, and go about the city. By this city is understood the
   University of all creatures, corporal and spiritual, ordered and ruled
   under God by laws of nature, of reason and of grace. I go about this
   city when I behold the natures and causes of bodily creatures, the
   gifts of grace, and the blisses of spiritual creatures. And in all
   these I seek Him whom my soul loveth. It is pleasant looking with the
   inner eye on Jesus in bodily creatures, to see His power, His wisdom
   and His goodness in ordering of their natures; but it is much more
   beautiful to look on Jesus in spiritual creatures: First in reasonable
   souls, both elect and reprobate, to see the merciful calling of them to
   election, how He turneth them from sin by the light of His grace, how
   He helpeth them, teacheth them, chasteneth them, comforteth them; He
   sanctifieth, cleanseth and feedeth them; how He maketh them burning in
   love and in light through plenty of His grace. And thus doth He, not to
   one soul only, but to all His chosen according to the measure of His
   grace.

   Also concerning the reprobate, he seeth how justly he forsaketh them,
   and leaveth them in their sins, and doth them no wrong. How He
   rewardeth them in this world, suffering them to have the fulfilling of
   their own will, and after to punish them endlessly. Lo, this is a
   little beholding of holy Church, whilst it is militant in this life, by
   seeing how black and how foul it seemeth in souls that are reprobate;
   and how fair and how lovely it is in chosen souls.

   And all this spiritual sight is nought else but the sight of Jesus, not
   in Himself but in His merciful secret works, and in His righteous
   judgements every day showed, remembered and renewed to reasonable
   souls. Moreover, to see with the spiritual eye the pains of the
   reprobate and the joy and bliss of chosen souls is full comfortable.
   For truth cannot be seen in a clean soul without great delight and
   wonderful content of blessed burning love.

   Also the sight of the nature of Angels, first of the damned, then of
   the blessed; as it is a full pleasant contemplation concerning the
   devil in a clean soul. When grace bringeth the fiend into the sight of
   the soul, as a clumsy caitiff bound by the power of Jesus that he
   cannot hurt; then the soul beholdeth him not bodily, but spiritually,
   seeing his nature and his malice, and turneth him upside down and
   spoileth him and rendeth him all to nought, scorneth him and despiseth
   him, and setteth nought by his malice. Thus biddeth holy Writ, when it
   saith thus: Verte impium, et not erit.--Turn the wicked, that is, the
   fiend, upside down, and he shall be as nought. [338] Much wonder hath
   the soul that the fiend hath so much malice and so little might. There
   is no creature so weak as he is; and therefore it is great cowardice
   that men fear him so much. He can do nothing without leave of our Lord
   Jesus, not so much as enter into a swine, as the Gospel saith [339] ,
   much less can he do then to annoy any man.

   And therefore if our Lord Jesus give him leave to tempt us, it is full
   worthily and mercifully done, that he doth so; and therefore welcome be
   our Lord Jesus by Himself, and by all His messengers. The soul feareth
   no more the blustering of the fiend than the stirring of a mouse.
   Wondrous wroth is the fiend when we say nay to his temptations, but his
   mouth is stopped with his own malice. His hands are bound like a
   thieve's, worthy to be judged and hanged in hell. And then the soul
   accuseth him, and doth justly condemn him according to his deserts.
   Wonder not at this saying, for St Paul meant the same, when he saith
   thus: Fratres, nescitis, &c.--Brethren, know ye not that we shall judge
   the angels? [340] namely, those that are wicked spirits through malice
   that were made good angels by nature. As who should say, yes; this
   judging is figured before the day of judgement in Contemplative souls,
   for they feel a little tasting in likeness of all that shall be done
   afterwards of our Lord Jesus openly in truth. Shamed and troubled [341]
   is the fiend greatly in himself, when he is thus used by a clean soul.
   He would fain fly away, but he cannot, for the power of the Highest
   holdeth him still, and that grieveth him more than all the fire of
   hell. Then falleth the soul wonderfully humble under Jesus with hearty
   praises, for that He so mightily saveth a simple soul from all the
   malice of so cruel an enemy by His great mercy.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [337] Cant. 3.

   [338] Prov. 12.

   [339] St Matt. 8.

   [340] 1 Cor. 4:3.

   [341] Shent.
     __________________________________________________________________

      SECTION II: How by the same light of Grace the Nature of the blessed
      Angels is seen. And how Jesus is God and Man above all Creatures,
      according to that which the Soul may see of Him here

   AND then after this by the selfsame light may the soul spiritually see
   the beauty of the Angels, the worthiness of their nature, the subtlety
   of their substance, their confirming in grace, their fulness in endless
   bliss, the diversity of their orders; the distinctions of persons, how
   they all live in light of endless truth; and how they burn all in love
   of the Holy Ghost, according to the worthiness of their orders; how
   they see and love and praise Jesus in blessed rest without ceasing.
   There is no sight of a body, nor any figure in imagination, in this
   manner of working, but all spiritual, and of spiritual creatures.

   Then beginneth the soul to have great acquaintance and great fellowship
   with the blessed spirits. They are full tender and full busy about such
   a soul to help it, they are masters to teach it. And often by their
   spiritual presence and touching of their light drive out fancies from
   the soul. They enlighten the soul graciously; they comfort the soul
   with sweet words suddenly sounded in a clean heart, and if any disease
   fall spiritually, they serve the soul and minister to it all that it
   needeth. Thus St Paul said of them: Know ye not that they are all
   ministering spirits, sent for them who shall be heirs of salvation?
   [342] As if he had said thus: Know ye that all this spiritual working
   of words and of reasons, brought to the mind, and such fair likeness
   are made by the ministry of Angels, when the light of grace abundantly
   shineth in a clean soul. It cannot be told by tongue the feelings, the
   enlightenings, the graces and the comforts in special that clean souls
   perceive by the favourable fellowship of blessed Angels. The soul is so
   well pleased with beholding what they do that it would willingly attend
   to nothing else.

   But then with the help of Angels the soul yet seeth more; for knowing
   in a clean soul riseth higher above all this, and that is to behold the
   blessed nature of Jesus. First of His glorious humanity, how it is
   worthily exalted above the nature of Angels, and afterwards of His
   blessed Divinity, for by knowing of creatures is known the Creator; and
   then beginneth the soul to perceive a little of the mysteries of the
   Blessed Trinity. And this it may do well enough, for the light of grace
   going before, she cannot err as long as she holdeth her in that light.
   Then is opened really to the eye of the soul the unity in substance,
   and distinction of persons in the Blessed Trinity, as it may be seen in
   this life, and much other truth of the Blessed Trinity pertinent to
   this matter; the which is openly declared and shown by writings of holy
   doctors of holy Church. And be you assured that one and the same verity
   concerning the Blessed Trinity that these holy doctors, inspired
   through grace, writ in their books for the strengthening of our truth,
   a clean soul may see in knowing through the same light of grace. I will
   not express too much of this matter here in particular, for it needeth
   not.

   Wondrous great love feedeth the soul with heavenly delight in feeling
   of this truth, when it is wrought through special grace; for love and
   light go both together in a clean soul. There is no love that riseth
   out of knowing, and from special beholding that can sooner touch our
   Lord than this can. For why? This knowing of Jesus, God and Man, is
   alone in itself the worthiest and the highest, if it be specially shown
   by the light of grace. And therefore is the fire of flaming love hereof
   more burning than it is of any creature, corporal or incorporal. And
   all these gracious knowings of the university of all creatures felt in
   a soul in manner abovesaid, and of our Lord Jesus, the maker and keeper
   of all this fair university, I call fair words, and sweet speakings of
   our Lord Jesus to a soul, which He means to make His true Spouse. He
   showeth His mysteries, proffereth rich gifts out of His treasury, and
   arrayeth the soul with them full beautifully. She need not
   thenceforward be ashamed of the company of her fellows, to appear
   before the face of Jesus her Spouse. All this lovely dalliance of
   private conference betwixt Jesus and a soul may be called a hidden
   word; of the which Scripture saith thus: Porro ad me dictum est verbum
   absconditum, &c.--Moreover to me there was spoken a secret word, and
   the veins of His whispering mine ear hath perceived. [343] The
   inspiration of Jesus is a hidden word, for it is privily hid from all
   lovers of the world, and shown to His lovers; through which a clean
   soul perceiveth readily the veins of His whispering, that is the
   special showings of His truth; for every gracious knowing of truth felt
   with inward savour and spiritual delight is a privy whispering of Jesus
   in the ear of a clean soul. He must have much cleanness and humility
   and all other virtues, and must be half deaf to the noise of worldly
   janglings, that will wisely perceive those sweet spiritual whisperings,
   that is the voice of Jesus. Of the which David saith thus: Vox Domini
   praeparantis cervos, &c.--The voice of the Lord prepareth harts, and
   shall discover thick woods. [344] That is, the inspiration of Jesus
   maketh souls light as deer, that start from the ground over bushes and
   briars of all worldly vanities; and He showeth to them the thickets,
   that is, His mysteries, which cannot be perceived but by a sharp eye.
   These beholdings, solidly grounded in grace and humility, make a soul
   wise and burning in desire to the face of Jesus. These are the
   spiritual things that I spake of before, and they be called new
   gracious feelings; and I do but touch them a little for direction of a
   soul; for a soul that is pure, stirred up by grace to use this working,
   may see more of such spiritual matter in an hour than can be writ in a
   great book.

   Thus finisheth this present book, which expoundeth many notable
   doctrines in Contemplation, which to me seemeth right expedient to
   those that set their felicity in busying themselves specially for their
   souls' health.

   The following verses form the colophon to Wynkyn de Worde's edition of
   the "Scale," and are reprinted from the 1659 edition.

   Infinite laud with thankings manifold,

   I yield to God, me succouring with His grace;

   This Book to finish, which as ye behold,

   Scale of Perfection's called in every place:

   Whereof th' Author Walter Hilton was,

   And Wynkin de Word this hath set in print;

   In William Caxton's house, so fell the case,

   God rest his soul, in joy there may it stint.

   This heavenly Book more precious than gold

   Was lately directed with great humility,

   For godly pleasure thereon to behold,

   Unto the right noble Margaret as ye see,

   The King's Mother of excellent bounty,

   Harry the seventh, that Jesus him preserve,

   This mighty Princess hath commanded me

   T'imprint this Book, her grace for to deserve.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [342] Heb. 1.

   [343] Job 4.

   [344] Ps. 28.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1   [2]3

   Leviticus

   [3]6

   Deuteronomy

   [4]11

   Job

   [5]3   [6]4   [7]11   [8]20   [9]34

   Psalms

   [10]1   [11]18   [12]24   [13]28   [14]28   [15]33   [16]35   [17]38
   [18]38   [19]40   [20]42   [21]44   [22]45   [23]63   [24]72   [25]72
   [26]83   [27]90   [28]90:5   [29]96   [30]118   [31]118   [32]118
   [33]130   [34]135   [35]138   [36]138   [37]138:16   [38]140   [39]141

   Proverbs

   [40]2   [41]4   [42]6   [43]12   [44]14

   Song of Solomon

   [45]1   [46]1   [47]1   [48]3   [49]3   [50]4   [51]5   [52]5

   Isaiah

   [53]2   [54]3   [55]5   [56]9   [57]9   [58]22   [59]24   [60]26
   [61]40   [62]43   [63]45   [64]47   [65]54:7-8   [66]58   [67]66

   Jeremiah

   [68]9   [69]20:9   [70]28

   Lamentations

   [71]4

   Daniel

   [72]12

   Hosea

   [73]2

   Joel

   [74]12

   Malachi

   [75]4

   Matthew

   [76]5   [77]5   [78]5   [79]5   [80]6   [81]8   [82]8   [83]11
   [84]13   [85]16   [86]19

   Luke

   [87]8   [88]9   [89]10   [90]13   [91]14   [92]14   [93]15   [94]16
   [95]24

   John

   [96]1   [97]1   [98]1   [99]1   [100]3   [101]3   [102]4   [103]4
   [104]4   [105]4:1   [106]4:3   [107]5   [108]10   [109]12   [110]13
   [111]13   [112]14   [113]14   [114]14   [115]15   [116]16   [117]17

   Acts

   [118]2   [119]2   [120]5

   Romans

   [121]5   [122]6   [123]7   [124]8   [125]8   [126]8   [127]8   [128]8
   [129]8   [130]8   [131]10   [132]12

   1 Corinthians

   [133]1   [134]2   [135]3   [136]4   [137]4:3   [138]6:17   [139]7
   [140]8   [141]10   [142]12   [143]13   [144]13   [145]13   [146]13
   [147]14:14   [148]14:15   [149]15

   2 Corinthians

   [150]1   [151]3:18   [152]4   [153]5:13-14

   Galatians

   [154]4   [155]4   [156]5   [157]5   [158]6

   Ephesians

   [159]3:18   [160]4   [161]4   [162]4   [163]5   [164]6

   Philippians

   [165]2   [166]3   [167]3:13

   Colossians

   [168]1   [169]3   [170]3   [171]3

   Hebrews

   [172]1   [173]4   [174]10   [175]10   [176]11   [177]12

   James

   [178]1   [179]3

   1 John

   [180]3   [181]4

   Revelation

   [182]2   [183]8   [184]21

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [185]2

   Sirach

   [186]4:18   [187]10   [188]15
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [189]1  [190]2  [191]3  [192]4  [193]5  [194]6
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.i-p4.1
   2. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xi-p5.1
   3. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.i-p25.1
   4. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.i-p5.1
   5. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.v-p6.1
   6. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xv.ii-p7.1
   7. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.ii-p17.1
   8. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.v.ii-p7.1
   9. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xi-p7.1
  10. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.ii-p4.1
  11. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p18.1
  12. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.vii-p15.1
  13. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p8.1
  14. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xv.ii-p8.1
  15. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.vi-p3.1
  16. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.iii-p9.1
  17. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xii-p3.1
  18. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.vii-p6.1
  19. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.i-p14.1
  20. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.v-p3.1
  21. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p27.1
  22. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.vi-p5.1
  23. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p19.1
  24. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p7.1
  25. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.viii-p11.1
  26. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.ii.i-p14.1
  27. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.ii-p12.1
  28. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.vii-p16.1
  29. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.vii-p7.1
  30. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p8.1
  31. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p14.1
  32. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xiii-p10.1
  33. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xii-p13.1
  34. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.i-p16.1
  35. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.ix-p5.1
  36. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.ix-p3.1
  37. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.vi.ii-p13.1
  38. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xii-p8.1
  39. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.i-p12.1
  40. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p11.1
  41. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xii-p9.1
  42. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xi-p12.1
  43. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xv.i-p7.1
  44. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.v.ii-p4.1
  45. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.ix-p3.1
  46. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.ix-p5.1
  47. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xi-p14.1
  48. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xi-p9.1
  49. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xv.i-p3.1
  50. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xi-p10.1
  51. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.ii-p16.1
  52. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p33.1
  53. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.ii-p5.1
  54. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xii-p13.1
  55. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.vi.i-p4.1
  56. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.vi-p5.1
  57. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.viii-p12.1
  58. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xiii-p7.1
  59. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p27.1
  60. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.v-p5.1
  61. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.vii-p9.1
  62. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.ix-p8.1
  63. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p24.1
  64. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.viii-p14.1
  65. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.ii-p16.1
  66. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.viii-p13.1
  67. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.xv-p24.1
  68. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.ix-p3.1
  69. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.i-p21.1
  70. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.xii.i-p9.1
  71. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.xi-p10.1
  72. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.v.i-p21.1
  73. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p23.1
  74. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xi-p4.1
  75. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.vii-p9.1
  76. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.xiv-p4.1
  77. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.vi.iii-p5.1
  78. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xi-p10.1
  79. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.viii-p12.1
  80. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p15.1
  81. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p10.1
  82. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xv.i-p8.1
  83. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p30.1
  84. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p25.1
  85. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.i-p8.1
  86. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.viii-p9.1
  87. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p16.1
  88. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p34.1
  89. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.i-p3.1
  90. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.i-p7.1
  91. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.xv-p14.1
  92. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.ix-p10.1
  93. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p13.1
  94. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.viii.iii-p6.1
  95. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xiii-p3.1
  96. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.ii-p12.1
  97. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.iii-p8.1
  98. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.xii.ii-p3.1
  99. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.v-p7.1
 100. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.ii-p4.1
 101. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xi-p30.1
 102. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.xv-p4.1
 103. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.iv-p5.1
 104. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.iv-p7.1
 105. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.x-p5.1
 106. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.xi-p6.1
 107. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.ix-p9.1
 108. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xiv-p5.1
 109. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.i-p8.2
 110. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p31.1
 111. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.vi.iii-p7.1
 112. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.ii-p15.1
 113. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iii.ii-p29.1
 114. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xiv-p3.1
 115. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xiii-p5.1
 116. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.ii-p8.1
 117. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.iii-p13.1
 118. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.ii-p3.1
 119. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.xi-p14.1
 120. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.viii-p15.1
 121. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.vi.ii-p3.1
 122. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iv.i-p5.1
 123. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.iv.i-p12.1
 124. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.v.i-p8.1
 125. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.vi.ii-p10.1
 126. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.v-p9.1
 127. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.viii-p6.1
 128. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.ix-p4.1
 129. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.v-p6.1
 130. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p14.1
 131. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.ii-p8.1
 132. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.i-p4.1
 133. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.i-p10.1
 134. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.ii-p6.1
 135. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.v-p10.1
 136. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xi-p11.1
 137. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xv.i-p10.1
 138. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.viii-p4.1
 139. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.iii-p3.1
 140. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.iv-p7.1
 141. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.xviii-p5.1
 142. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.iii-p4.1
 143. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.iv-p5.1
 144. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.ix-p4.1
 145. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.vi.ii-p7.1
 146. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xiii-p11.1
 147. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.i-p23.1
 148. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.i-p23.1
 149. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xii-p4.1
 150. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p16.1
 151. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.ix-p8.1
 152. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.iii-p12.1
 153. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.ix-p7.1
 154. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.v.ii-p10.1
 155. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xiii-p4.1
 156. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xii-p6.1
 157. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.viii-p4.1
 158. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.viii-p5.1
 159. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.xii-p3.1
 160. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.iii-p5.1
 161. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.i-p6.1
 162. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xii-p7.1
 163. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.vii-p3.1
 164. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.ix-p10.1
 165. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.v-p11.1
 166. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xi-p8.1
 167. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.xii-p4.1
 168. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.i-p5.1
 169. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.i-p9.1
 170. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.i-p7.1
 171. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.viii-p7.1
 172. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xv.ii-p4.1
 173. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p9.1
 174. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.vi-p3.1
 175. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xi-p25.1
 176. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.ii-p6.1
 177. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.iii-p11.1
 178. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xi-p20.1
 179. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.ii.vii-p6.1
 180. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.vi-p4.1
 181. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xii-p17.1
 182. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p28.1
 183. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.x-p10.1
 184. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.i.xi-p10.1
 185. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xi-p9.1
 186. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.ii.ii-p19.1
 187. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xi-p7.1
 188. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.i.xv-p23.1
 189. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#i-Page_1
 190. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii-Page_2
 191. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#iii-Page_3
 192. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#iv-Page_4
 193. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.i.iii.xiv-Page_5
 194. file:///ccel/h/hilton/ladder/cache/ladder.html3#ii_1.ii.iii.xv.ii-Page_6
