     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Life of God in the Soul of Man
      Creator(s): Scougal, Henry (1650-1678)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Classic; Christian Life; Proofed
      LC Call no: BV4500 .S32
     LC Subjects:

                  Practical theology

                  Practical religion. The Christian life
     __________________________________________________________________




    THE

                                  LIFE OF GOD

    IN THE

SOUL OF MAN



     __________________________________________________________________

  PART I.

   On Religion; the Natural and Divine Life; and the exemplification of
   Divine Love in our blessed Savior.

   my dear friend,

   This designation doth give you a title to all endeavours whereby I can
   serve your interests; and your pious inclinations to do so, happily
   conspire with my duty, that I shall not need to step out of my road to
   gratify you--but I may at once perform an office of friendship, and
   discharge an exercise of my function, since the advancing of virtue and
   holiness, (which I hope you make your greatest study,) is the peculiar
   business of my employment. This, therefore, is the most popular
   instance wherein I can vent my affection, and express my gratitude
   towards you, and I shall not any longer delay the performance of the
   promise I made you to this purpose; for though I know you are provided
   with better helps of this nature than any I can offer you, nor are you
   like to meet with any thing here which you knew not before, yet I am
   hopeful, that what cometh from one whom you are pleased to honour with
   your friendship, and which is more particularly designed for your use,
   will be kindly accepted by you; and God's providence perhaps may so
   direct my thoughts, that something or other may prove useful to you.
   Nor shall I doubt your pardon, if, for moulding my discourse into the
   better frame, I lay a low foundation, beginning with the nature and
   properties of religion, and all along give such way to my thoughts, in
   the prosecution of the subject, as may bring me to say many things
   which were not necessary, did I only consider to whom I am writing.

   I cannot speak of religion, but I must lament, that among so many
   pretenders to it, so few understand what it means: some placing it in
   the understanding, in orthodox notions and opinions; and all the
   account they can give of their religion is, that they are of this and
   the other persuasion, and have joined themselves to one of those many
   sects whereinto Christendom is most unhappily divided. Others place it
   in the outward man, in a constant course of external duties, and a
   model of performances. If they live peaceably with their neighbours,
   keep a temperate diet, observe the returns of worship, frequenting the
   church, or their closet, and sometimes extend their hands to the relief
   of the poor, they think they have sufficiently acquitted themselves.
   Others again put all religion in the affections, in rapturous hearts,
   and ecstatic devotion; and all they aim at is, to pray with passion,
   and think of heaven with pleasure, and to be affected with those kind
   and melting expressions wherewith they court their Saviour, till they
   persuade themselves they are mightily in love with him, and from thence
   assume a great confidence of their salvation, which they esteem the
   chief of Christian graces. Thus are these things which have any
   resemblance of piety, and at the best are but means of obtaining it, or
   particular exercises of it, frequently mistaken for the whole of
   religion: nay, sometimes wickedness and vice pretend to that name. I
   speak not now of those gross impieties wherewith the Heathens were wont
   to worship their gods. There are but too many Christians who would
   consecrate their vices, and follow their corrupt affections, whose
   ragged humour and sullen pride must pass for Christian severity; whose
   fierce wrath, and bitter rage against their enemies, must be called
   holy zeal; whose petulancy towards their superiors, or rebellion
   against their governors, must have the name of Christian courage and
   resolution.

   But certainly religion is quite another thing, and they who are
   acquainted with it will entertain far different thoughts, and disdain
   all those shadows and false imitations of it. They know by experience
   that true religion is a union of the soul with God, a real
   participation of the divine nature, the very image of God drawn upon
   the soul, or, in the apostle's phrase, "It is Christ formed within
   us."--Briefly, I know not how the nature of religion can be more fully
   expressed, than by calling it a Divine Life: and under these terms I
   shall discourse of it, showing first, how it is called a life; and
   then, how it is termed divine.

   I choose to express it by the name of life, first, because of its
   permanency and stability. Religion it not a sudden start, or passion of
   the mind, not though it should rise to the height of a rapture, and
   seem to transport a man to extraordinary performances. There are few
   but have convictions of the necessity of doing something for the
   salvation of their souls, which may push them forward some steps with a
   great deal of seeming haste; but anon they flag and give over. They
   were in a hot mood, but now they are cooled; they did shoot forth fresh
   and high, but are quickly withered, because they had no root in
   themselves. These sudden fits may be compared to the violent and
   convulsive motions of bodies newly beheaded, caused by the agitations
   of the animal spirits, after the soul is departed, which, however
   violent and impetuous, can be of no long continuance; whereas the
   motions of holy souls are constant and regular, proceeding from a
   permanent and lively principle. It is true, this divine life continueth
   not always in that same strength and vigour, but many times suffers sad
   decays; and holy men find greater difficulty in resisting temptations,
   and less alacrity in the performance of their duties. Yet it is not
   quite extinguished, nor are they abandoned to the power of those
   corrupt affections, which sway and overrule the rest of the world.

   Again, religion may be designed by the name of life, because it is an
   inward, free, and self-moving principle: and those who have made
   progress in it, are not actuated only by external motives, driven
   merely by threatenings, nor bribed by promises, nor constrained by
   laws; but are powerfully inclined to that which is good, and delight in
   the performance of it. The love which a pious man bears to God and
   goodness, is not so much by virtue of a command enjoining him so to do,
   as by a new nature instructing and prompting him to it; nor doth he pay
   his devotions as an unavoidable tribute only to appease the divine
   justice, or quiet his clamorous conscience; but those religious
   exercises are the proper emanations of the divine life, the natural
   employments of the new-born soul. He prays, and gives thanks, and
   repents, not only because these things are commanded, but rather
   because he is sensible of his wants, and of the divine goodness, and of
   the folly and misery of a sinful life. His charity is not forced, nor
   his alms extorted from him; his love makes him willing to give; and
   though there were no outward obligation, his heart would devise liberal
   things. Injustice or intemperance, and all other vices, are as contrary
   to his temper and constitution, as the basest actions are to the most
   generous spirit, and impudence and scurrility to those who are
   naturally modest. So that I may well say with St. John, "Whosoever is
   born of God, doth not commit sin: for his seed remaineth in him, and he
   cannot sin, because he is born of God." Though holy and religious
   persons do much eye the law of God, and have a great regard unto it,
   yet it is not so much the sanction of the law, as its reasonableness,
   and purity, and goodness, which do prevail with them. They account it
   excellent and desirable in itself, and that in keeping of it there is
   great reward; and that divine love wherewith they are actuated, makes
   them become a law unto themselves:

   Who shall prescribe a law to those that love?

   Love's a more powerful law which doth them move.

   In a word, what our blessed Saviour said of himself, is in some measure
   applicable to his followers, that "it is their meat and drink to do
   their Father's will." And, as the natural appetite is carried out
   toward food, though we should not reflect on the necessity of it for
   the preservation of our lives, so they are carried with a natural and
   unforced propension toward that which is good and commendable. It is
   true, external motives are many times of great use to excite and stir
   up this inward principle, especially in its infancy and weakness, when
   it is often so languid that the man himself can scarce discern it,
   hardly being able to move one step forward but when he is pushed by his
   hopes or his fears, by the pressure of an affliction, or the sense of a
   mercy, by the authority of the law, or the persuasion of others. Now,
   if such a person be conscientious and uniform in his obedience, and
   earnestly groaning under the sense of his dulness, and is desirous to
   perform his duties with more spirit and vigour, these are the first
   motions of the divine life, which, though it be faint and weak, will
   surely be cherished by the influences of heaven, and grow unto greater
   maturity. But he who is utterly destitute of this inward principle, and
   doth not aspire to it, but contents himself with those performances
   whereunto he is prompted by education or custom, by the fear of hell or
   carnal notions of heaven, can no more be accounted a religious person,
   than a puppet can be called a man. This forced and artificial religion
   is commonly heavy and languid, like the motion of a weight forced
   upward. It is cold and spiritless, like the uneasy compliance of a wife
   married against her will, who carries it dutifully toward the husband
   whom she does not love, out of some sense of virtue or honour. Hence
   also this religion is scant and niggardly, especially in those duties
   which do greatest violence to men's carnal inclinations; and those
   slavish spirits will be sure to do no more than is absolutely required.
   It is a law that compels them, and they will be loath to go beyond what
   it stints them to; nay, they will ever be putting such glosses on it,
   as may leave themselves the greatest liberty. Whereas, the spirit of
   true religion is frank and liberal--far from such peevish and narrow
   reckoning; and he who hath given himself entirely unto God, will never
   think he doth too much for him.

   By this time I hope it doth appear, that religion is with a great deal
   of reason termed a life, or vital principle, and that it is very
   necessary to distinguish betwixt it and that obedience which is
   constrained, and depends upon external causes. I come next to give an
   account why I designed it by the name of Divine Life: and so it may be
   called, not only in regard of its fountain and original, having God for
   its author, and being wrought in the souls of men by the power of his
   Holy Spirit; but also in regard of its nature, religion being a
   resemblance of the divine perfections, the image of the Almighty
   shining in the soul of man: nay, it is a real participation of his
   nature, it is a beam of the eternal light, a drop of that infinite
   ocean of goodness; and they who are endowed with it may be said to have
   "God dwelling in their souls, and Christ formed within them."

   Before I descend to a more particular consideration of that divine life
   wherein true religion doth consist, it will perhaps be fit to speak a
   little of that natural or animal life which prevails in those who are
   strangers to the other: and by this I understand nothing else, but our
   inclination and propension towards those things which are pleasing and
   acceptable to nature; or self-love issuing forth and spreading itself
   into as many branches as men have several appetites and inclinations.
   The root and foundation of the animal life, I reckon to be sense,
   taking it largely, as it is opposed unto faith, and importeth our
   perception and sensation of those things that are either grateful or
   troublesome to us. Now these animal affections, considered in
   themselves, and as they are implanted in us by nature, are not vicious
   or blameable; nay, they are instances of the the wisdom of the Creator,
   furnishing his creatures with such appetites as tend to the
   preservation and welfare of their lives. These are instead of a law
   unto the brute beasts, whereby they are directed towards the ends for
   which they were made: but man being made for higher purposes, and to be
   guided by more excellent laws, becomes guilty and criminal when he is
   so far transported by the inclinations of this lower life as to violate
   his duty, or neglect the higher and more noble designs of his creation.
   Our natural affections are not wholly to be extirpated and destroyed,
   but only to be moderated and overruled by superior and more excellent
   principle. In a word, the difference betwixt a religious and wicked man
   is, that in the one divine life bears sway, in the other the animal
   life doth prevail.

   But it is strange to observe unto what different courses this natural
   principle will sometimes carry those who are wholly guided by it,
   according to the diverse circumstances that concur with it to determine
   them; and then, not considering this doth frequently occasion very
   dangerous mistakes, making men think well of themselves by reason of
   that seeming difference which is betwixt them and others, whereas,
   perhaps, their actions do all the while flow from one and the same
   original. If we consider the natural temper and constitution of men's
   souls, we shall find some to be airy, frolicksome, and light, which
   make their behaviour extravagant and ridiculous; whereas others are
   naturally serious and severe, and their whole carriage composed into
   such gravity as gains them a great deal of reverence and esteem. Some
   are of a humorous, rugged, and morose temper, and can neither be
   pleased themselves, nor endure that others should be so. But all are
   not born with such sour and unhappy dispositions; for some persons have
   a certain sweetness and benignity rooted in their natures; and they
   find the greatest pleasure in the endearments of society, and the
   mutual complacency of friends, and covet nothing more than to have
   every body obliged to them: and it is well that nature hath provided
   this complexional tenderness, to supply the defect of true charity in
   the world, and to incline men to do something for one another's
   welfare. Again, in regard to education, some have never been taught to
   follow any other rules than those of pleasure or advantage; but others
   are so inured to observe the strictest rules of decency and honour, and
   some instances of virtue, that they are hardly capable of doing any
   thing which they have been accustomed to look upon as base and
   unworthy.

   In fine, it is no small difference in the deportment of mere natural
   men, that doth arise from the strength or weakness of their wit or
   judgment, and from their care and negligence in using them.
   Intemperance and lust, injustice and oppression, and all those other
   impieties which abound in the world, and render it so miserable, are
   the issues of self-love, the effect of the animal life, when it is
   neither overpowered by religion, nor governed by natural reason: but if
   it once take hold of reason, and get judgment and wit to be of its
   party, it will many times disdain the grosser sort of vices, and spring
   up into fair imitations of virtue and goodness. If a man have but so
   much reason as to consider the prejudice which intemperance and
   inordinate lust do bring unto his health, his fortune, and his
   reputation, self-love may suffice to restrain him; and one may observe
   the rules of moral justice, in dealing with others, as the best way to
   secure his own interest, and maintain his credit in the world. But this
   is not all; for this natural principle, by the help of reason, may take
   a higher flight, and come nigher the instances of piety and religion:
   it may incline a man to the diligent study of divine truths; for why
   should not these, as well as other speculations, be pleasant and
   grateful to curious and inquisitive minds? It may make men zealous in
   maintaining and propagating such opinions as they have espoused, and be
   very desirous that others should submit unto their judgment, and
   approve the choice of religion which they themselves have made. It may
   make them delight to hear and compose excellent discourses about the
   matters of religion; for eloquence is very pleasant, whatever be the
   subject: nay, some it may dispose to no small height of sensible
   devotion. The glorious things that are spoken of heaven, may make even
   a carnal heart in love with it: the metaphors and similitudes made use
   of in Scripture, of crowns and sceptres, and rivers of pleasure, &c.
   will easily affect a man's fancy, and make him wish to be there, though
   he neither understand nor desire those spiritual pleasures which are
   described and shadowed forth by them: and when such a person comes to
   believe that Christ has purchased those glorious things for him, he may
   feel a kind of tenderness and affection towards so great a benefactor,
   and imagine that he is mightily enamoured with him, and yet all the
   while continue a stranger to the holy temper and spirit of the blessed
   Jesus; and what hand the natural constitution may have in the rapturous
   devotions of some melancholy persons, hath been excellently discovered
   of late by several learned and judicious pens.

   To conclude, there is nothing proper to make a man's life pleasant, or
   himself eminent and conspicuous in the world, but this natural
   principle, assisted by wit and reason, may prompt him to it: and though
   I do not condemn those things in themselves, yet it concerns us nearly
   to know and consider their nature, both that we may keep within due
   bounds, and also that we may learn never to value ourselves on the
   account of such attainments, nor lay the stress of religion upon our
   natural appetites or performances.

   It is now time to return to the consideration of that divine life
   whereof I was discoursing before, that life which is hid with Christ in
   God; and therefore hath no glorious show or appearance in the world,
   and to the natural man will seem a mean and insipid notion. As the
   animal life consisteth in that narrow and confined love which is
   terminated on a man's self, and in his propension towards those things
   that are pleasing to nature; so the divine life stands in a universal
   and unbounded affection, and in the mastery over our natural
   inclinations, that they may never be able to betray us to those things
   which we know to be blameable. The root of the divine life is faith;
   the chief branches are love to God, charity to man, purity, and
   humility: for, as an excellent person hath well observed, however these
   names be common and vulgar, and make no extraordinary sound, yet do
   they carry such a mighty sense, that the tongue of man or angel can
   pronounce nothing more weighty or excellent. Faith hath the same place
   in the divine life, which sense hath in the natural, being indeed
   nothing else but a kind of sense, or feeling persuasion of spiritual
   things; it extends itself unto all divine truths; but in our lapsed
   estate, it hath a peculiar relation to the declaration of God's mercy
   and reconcilableness to sinners through a Mediator; and therefore,
   receiving its denomination from that principal object, is ordinarily
   termed faith in Jesus Christ.

   The love of God is a delightful and affectionate sense of the divine
   perfections, which makes the soul resign and sacrifice itself wholly
   unto him, desiring above all things to please him, and delighting in
   nothing so much as in fellowship and communion with him, and being
   ready to do or suffer any thing for his sake, or at his pleasure.
   Though this affection may have its first rise from the favours and
   mercies of God toward ourselves, yet doth it, in its growth and
   progress, transcend such particular considerations, and ground itself
   on his infinite goodness, manifested in all the works of creation and
   providence. A soul thus possessed with divine love, must needs be
   enlarged, toward all mankind, in a sincere and unbounded affection,
   because of the relation they have to God, being his creatures, and
   having something of his image stamped upon them; and this is that
   charity I named as the second branch of religion, and under which all
   the parts of justice, all the duties we owe to our neighbour, are
   eminently comprehended: for he who doth truly love all the world, will
   be nearly concerned in the interest of every one; and so far from
   wronging or injuring any person, that he will resent any evil that
   befals others, as if it happened to himself.

   By purity, I understand a due abstractedness from the body, and mastery
   over the inferior appetites; or such a temper and disposition of mind,
   as makes a man despise and abstain from all pleasures and delights of
   sense or fancy, which are sinful in themselves, or tend to extinguish
   or lessen our relish of more divine and intellectual pleasures; which
   doth also infer a resoluteness to undergo all those hardships he may
   meet with in the performance of his duty; so that not only chastity and
   temperance, but also Christian courage and magnanimity, may come under
   this head.

   Humility imports a deep sense of our own meanness, with hearty and
   affectionate acknowledgment of our owing all that we are to the divine
   bounty; which is always accompanied with a profound submission to the
   will of God, and great deadness toward the glory of the world and
   applause of men.

   These are the highest perfections that either men or angels are capable
   of--the very foundation of heaven laid in the soul; and he who hath
   attained them, needs not desire to pry into the hidden rolls of God's
   decrees, or search the volumes of heaven to know what is determined
   about his everlasting condition; but he may find a copy of God's
   thoughts concerning him, written in his own breast. His love to God may
   give him assurance of God's favour to him; and those beginnings of
   happiness, which he feels in the conformity of the powers of his soul
   to the nature of God, and compliance with his will, are a sure pledge
   that his felicity shall be perfected, and continued to all eternity;
   and it is not without reason that one said, "I had rather see the real
   impressions of a God-like nature upon my own soul, than have a vision
   from heaven, or an angel sent to tell me that my name was enrolled in
   the book of life."

   When we have said all that we can, the secret mysteries of a new nature
   and divine life can never be sufficiently expressed: language and words
   cannot reach them; nor can they be truly understood but by those souls
   that are enkindled within, and awakened unto the sense and relish of
   spiritual things: "There is a spirit in man; and the inspiration of the
   Almighty giveth this understanding." The power and life of religion may
   be better expressed in actions than in words; because actions are more
   lively things, and do better represent the inward principle whence they
   proceed; and, therefore, we may take the best measure of those gracious
   endowments from the deportment of those in whom they reside; especially
   as they are perfectly exemplified in the holy life of our blessed
   Saviour, a main part of whose business in this world was to teach, by
   his practice, what he did require of others,--and to make his own
   conversation an exact resemblance of those unparalleled rules which he
   prescribed; so that if ever true goodness was visible to mortal eyes,
   it was then, when his presence did beautify and illustrate this lower
   world.

   That sincere and devout affection wherewith his blessed soul did
   constantly burn towards his heavenly Father, did express itself in an
   entire resignation to his will; it was his very "meat to do the will,
   and finish the work of him that sent him." This was the exercise of his
   childhood, and the constant employment of his riper age. He spared no
   travel or pains while he was about his Father's business, but took such
   infinite content and satisfaction in the performance of it, that when,
   being faint and weary with his journey, he rested himself on Jacob's
   well, and entreated water of the Samaritan woman. The success of his
   conference with her, and the accession that was made to the kingdom of
   God, filled his mind with such delight, as seemed to have redounded to
   his very body, refreshing his spirits, and making him forget the thirst
   whereof he complained before, and refuse the meat which he had sent his
   disciples to buy. Nor was he less patient and submissive in suffering
   the will of God, than diligent in the doing of it: he endured the
   sharpest afflictions and extremest miseries that ever were inflicted on
   any mortal, without repining thought, or discontented word: for though
   he was far from a stupid insensibility, or a fantastic or stoical
   obstinacy, and had as quick a sense of pain as other men, and the
   deepest apprehension of what he was to suffer in his soul, (as his
   bloody sweat, and the sore amazement and sorrow which he professed, do
   abundantly declare,) yet did he entirely submit to that severe
   disposition of providence, and willingly acquiesced in it.

   And he prayed to God, that "if it were possible," (or, as one of the
   Evangelists hath it, "if he were willing,") "that cup might be
   removed:" yet he gently added, "nevertheless, not my will, but thine be
   done." Of what strange importance are the expressions, John xii. 27.
   where he first acknowledgeth the anguish of his spirit, "Now is my soul
   troubled," (which would seem to produce a kind of demur,) "and what
   shall I say?" And then he goes on to deprecate his sufferings, "Father,
   save me from this hour;" which he had no sooner uttered, but he doth,
   as it were, on second thoughts, recall it in these words, "But for this
   cause came I into the world;" and concludes, "Father, glorify thy
   name." Now, we must not look on this as any levity, or blameable
   weakness in the blessed Jesus: he knew all along what he was to suffer,
   and did most resolutely undergo it; but it shows us the inconceivable
   weight and pressure that he was to bear, which, being so afflicting,
   and contrary to nature, he could not think of without terror; yet
   considering the will of God, and the glory which was to redound from
   him thence, he was not only content, but desirous to suffer it.

   Another instance of his love to God was his delight in conversing with
   him by prayer, which made him frequently retire himself from the world,
   and, with the greatest devotion and pleasure, spend whole nights in
   that heavenly exercise, though he had not sins to confess, and but few
   secular interests to pray for; which, alas! are almost the only things
   that are wont to drive us to our devotions. Nay, we may say his whole
   life was a kind of prayer; a constant course of communion with God: if
   the sacrifice was not always offering, yet was the fire still kept
   alive; nor was ever the blessed Jesus surprised with that dulness, or
   tepidity of spirit, which we must many times wrestle with before we can
   be fit for the exercise of devotion.

   In the second place, I should speak of his love and charity toward all
   men: but he who would express it, must transcribe the history of the
   gospel, and comment upon it; for scarce any thing is recorded to have
   been done or spoken by him, which was not designed for the good and
   advantage of some one or other.--All his miraculous works were
   instances of his goodness as well as his power; and they benefited
   those on whom they were wrought, as well as they amazed the beholders.
   His charity was not confined to his kindred or relations; nor was all
   his kindness swallowed up in the endearment of that peculiar friendship
   which he carried toward his beloved disciple; but every one was his
   friend who obeyed his holy commands, John xv. 14. And whosoever did the
   will of his Father, the same was to him as his brother, sister, and
   mother.

   Never was any unwelcome to him who came with an honest intention, nor
   did he deny any request which tended to the good of those that asked
   it: so that what was spoken of that Roman emperor, who, for his
   goodness, was called the darling of mankind, was really performed by
   him, that never any departed from him with a heavy countenance, except
   that rich youth, (Mark x.) who was sorry to hear that the kingdom of
   heaven stood at so high a rate, and that he could not save his soul and
   his money too. And certainly it troubled our Saviour, to see that when
   a price was in his hand to get wisdom, yet he had no heart to it. The
   ingenuity that appeared in his first address had already procured some
   kindness for him; for it is said, "and Jesus, beholding him, loved
   him:" but must he, for his sake, cut out a new way to heaven, and alter
   the nature of things, which make it impossible that a covetous man
   should be happy?

   And what shall I speak of his meekness, who could encounter the
   monstrous ingratitude and dissimulation of that miscreant who betrayed
   him, in no harsher terms than these: "Judas, betrayest thou the Son of
   man with a kiss?" What farther evidence could we desire of his fervent
   and unbounded charity, than that he willingly laid down his life even
   for his most bitter enemies; and mingling his prayers with his blood,
   besought the Father that his death might not be laid to their charge,
   but might become the means of eternal life to those very persons who
   procured it?

   The third branch of the divine life is purity, which, as I said
   consists in a neglect of worldly enjoyment accommodations, in a
   resolute enduring of all such troubles as we meet with in doing of our
   duty. Now surely, if ever any person was wholly dead to all the
   pleasures of the natural life, it was the blessed Jesus, who seldom
   tasted them when they came in his way; but never stepped out of his
   road to seek them. Though he allowed others the comforts of wedlock,
   and honoured marriage with his presence, yet he chose the severity of a
   virgin life, and never knew the nuptial bed: and though at the same
   time he supplied the want of wine with a miracle, yet he would not work
   one for the relief of his own hunger in the wilderness; so gracious and
   divine was the temper of his soul, in allowing to others such lawful
   gratifications as himself thought good to abstain from, and supplying
   not only their more extreme and pressing necessities, but also their
   smaller and less considerable wants. We many times hear of our
   Saviour's sighs, and groans, and tears; but never that he laughed; and
   but once that he rejoiced in spirit: so that through his whole life, he
   did exactly answer that character given of him by the prophet of old,
   that he was "a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief." Nor were the
   troubles and disaccommodations of his life other than matters of
   choice; for never did there any appear on the stage of the world with
   greater advantages to have raised himself to the highest secular
   felicity. He who would bring together such a prodigious number of
   fishes into his disciples' net, and, at another time, receive that
   tribute from a fish which he was to pay to the temple, might easily
   have made himself the richest person in the world. Nay, without any
   money, he could have maintained an army powerful enough to have justled
   Cesar out of his throne, having oftener than once fed several thousands
   with a few loaves and small fishes; but, to show how small esteem he
   had of all the enjoyments in the world, he chose to live in so poor and
   mean a condition, "that though the foxes had holes, and the birds of
   the air had nests, yet he, who was Lord and heir of all things, had not
   whereon to lay his head." He did not frequent the courts of princes,
   nor affect the acquaintance or converse of great ones; but, being
   reputed the son of a carpenter, he had fishermen, and such other poor
   people for his companions, and lived at such a rate as suited with the
   meanness of that condition.

   And thus I am brought unawares to speak of his humility, the last
   branch of the divine life; wherein he was a most eminent pattern to us,
   that we might "learn of him to be meek and lowly in heart." I shall not
   now speak of that infinite condescension of the eternal Son of God, in
   taking our nature upon him, but only reflect on our Saviour's lowly and
   humble deportment while he was in the world. He had none of those sins
   and imperfections which may justly humble the best of men; but he was
   so entirely swallowed up with a deep sense of the infinite perfections
   of God, that he appeared as nothing in his own eyes; I mean so far as
   he was a creature. He considered those eminent perfections which shined
   in his blessed soul, not as his own, but the gifts of God; and
   therefore assumed nothing to himself for them, but, with the
   profoundest humility, renounced all pretences to them. Hence did he
   refuse that ordinary compellation of "Good Master," when addressed to
   his human nature, by one who, it seems, was ignorant of his divinity:
   "Why callest thou me good? there is none good but God only;" as if he
   had said, The goodness of any creature (and such only thou takest me to
   be) is not worthy to be named or taken notice of. It is God alone who
   is originally and essentially good.' He never made use of his
   miraculous power for vanity or ostentation. He would not gratify the
   curiosity of the Jews with a sign from heaven, some prodigious
   appearance in the air; nor would he follow the advice of his countrymen
   and kindred, who would have all his great works performed in the eyes
   of the world, for gaining him the greater fame. But when his charity
   had prompted him to the relief of the miserable, his humility made him
   many times enjoin the concealment of the miracle; and when the glory of
   God, and the design for which he came into the world, required the
   publication of them, he ascribeth the honour of all to his Father,
   telling them, "that of himself he was able to do nothing."

   I cannot insist on all the instances of humility in his deportment
   towards men: his withdrawing himself when they would have made him a
   king; his subjection, not only to his blessed mother, but to her
   husband, during his younger years; and his submission to all the
   indignities and affronts which his rude and malicious enemies did put
   upon him. The history of his holy life, recorded by those who convened
   with him, is full of such passages as these; and indeed the serious and
   attentive study of it is the best way to get right measures of
   humility, and all the other parts of religion which I have been
   endeavouring to desribe.

   But now, that I may lessen your trouble of reading a long letter, by
   making some pauses in it, let me here subjoin a prayer, that might be
   proper when one, who had formally entertained some false notions of
   religion, begins to discover what it is.

    A PRAYER.

   Infinite and eternal Majesty! Author and Fountain of being and
   blessedness! how little do we poor sinful creatures know of thee, or
   the way to serve and please thee! We talk of religion, and pretend unto
   it; but, alas! how few are there that know and consider what it means!
   How easily do we mistake the affections of our nature, and issues of
   self-love, for those divine graces which alone can render us acceptable
   in thy sight! It may justly grieve me to consider, that I should have
   wandered so long, and contented myself so often with vain shadows and
   false images of piety and religion; yet I cannot but acknowledge and
   adore thy goodness, who hast been pleased, in some measure, to open
   mine eyes, and let me see what it is at which I ought to aim. I rejoice
   to consider what mighty improvements my nature is capable of, and what
   a divine temper of spirit doth shine in those whom thou art pleased to
   choose, and causest to approach unto thee. Blessed be thine infinite
   mercy, who sentest thine own Son to dwell among men, and instruct them
   by his example as well as his laws, giving them a perfect pattern of
   what they ought to be. O that the holy life of the blessed Jesus may be
   always in my thoughts, and before mine eyes, till I receive a deep
   sense and impression of those excellent graces that shined so eminently
   in him! And let me never cease my endeavours, till that new and divine
   nature prevail in my soul, and Christ be formed within me.
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART II.

   On the Excellency of Religion and Divine Love.

   And now, my dear friend, having discovered the nature of true religion,
   before I proceed any further, it will not perhaps be unfit to fix our
   meditations a little on the excellency and advantages of it, that we
   may be excited to the more vigorous and diligent prosecution of those
   methods whereby we may attain so great a felicity. But, alas! what
   words shall we find to express that inward satisfaction, those hidden
   pleasures, which can never be rightly understood but by those holy
   souls that feel them? "A stranger intermeddleth not with their joys."
   Holiness is the right temper, the vigorous and healthful constitution
   of the soul. Its faculties had formerly been enfeebled and disordered,
   so that they could not exercise their natural functions; it had wearied
   itself with endless tossings and rollings, and was never able to find
   any rest. Now that distemper being removed, it feels itself well; there
   is due harmony in its faculties, and a sprightly vigour possesseth
   every part. The understanding can discern what is good, and the will
   can cleave to it. The affections are not tied to the motions of sense
   and the influence of external objects, but they are stirred by more
   divine impressions, are touched by a sense of invisible things.

   Let us descend, if you please, into a nearer and more particular view
   of religion, in those several branches of it which were named before.
   Let us consider that love and affection wherewith holy souls are united
   to God, that we may see what excellency and felicity is involved in it.
   Love is that powerful and prevalent passion, by which all the faculties
   and inclinations of the soul are determined, and on which both its
   perfection and happiness depend. The worth and excellency of a soul is
   to be measured by the object of its love. He who loveth mean and sordid
   things doth thereby become base and vile, but a noble and well-placed
   affection doth advance and improve the spirit into a conformity with
   the perfections which it loves. The images of these do frequently
   present themselves unto the mind, and, by a secret force and energy,
   insinuate into the very constitution of the soul, and mould and fashion
   it unto their own likeness. Hence we may see how easily lovers or
   friends do slide into the imitation of the persons whom they affect;
   and how, even before they are aware, they begin to resemble them, not
   only in the more considerable instances of their deportment, but also
   in their voice and gesture, and that which we call their mien or air;
   and certainly we should as well transcribe the virtues and inward
   beauties of the soul, if they were the object and motive of our love.
   But now, as all the creatures we converse with have their mixture and
   alloy, we are always in hazard to be sullied and corrupted by placing
   our affections on them. Passion doth easily blind our eyes, so that we
   first approve, and then imitate the things that are blameable in them.
   The true way to improve and ennoble our souls is, by fixing our love on
   the divine perfections, that we may have them always before us, and
   derive an impression of them on ourselves; and, "beholding with open
   face, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, we may be changed into the
   same image, from glory to glory." He who, with a generous and holy
   ambition, hath raised his eyes towards that uncreated beauty and
   goodness, and fixed his affection there, is quite of another spirit, of
   a more excellent and heroic temper, than the rest of the world, and
   cannot but infinitely disdain all mean and unworthy things; will not
   entertain any low or base thoughts which might disparage his high and
   noble pretensions. Love is the greatest and most excellent thing we are
   masters of and therefore it is folly and baseness to bestow it
   unworthily. It is indeed the only thing we can call our own: other
   things may be taken from us by violence, but none can ravish our love.
   If any thing else be counted ours by giving our love, we give all, so
   far as we make over our hearts and wills, by which we possess our other
   enjoyments. It is not possible to refuse him any thing, to whom by love
   we have given ourselves; nay, since it is the privilege of gifts to
   receive their value from the mind of the giver, and not to be measured
   by the event, but by the desire, he who loveth may, in some sense, be
   said not only to bestow all that he hath, but all things else which may
   make the beloved person happy; since he doth heartily wish them, and
   would really give them if they were in his power: in which sense it is
   that one makes to say, "That divine love doth, in a manner, give God
   unto himself, by the complacency it takes in the happiness and
   perfection of his nature." But though this may seem too strained an
   expression, certainly love is the worthiest present we can offer unto
   God, and it is extremely debased when we bestow it another way.

   When this affection is misplaced, it doth often vent itself in such
   expressions as point at its genuine and proper object, and insinuate
   where it ought to be placed. The flattering and blasphemous terms of
   adoration, wherein men do sometimes express their passion, are the
   language of that affection which was made and designed for God; as he
   who is accustomed to speak to some great person, doth perhaps,
   unawares, accost another with those titles he was wont to give him; but
   certainly that passion which accounteth its object a deity, ought to be
   bestowed on him who really is so. Those unlimited submissions, which
   would debase the soul if directed to any other, will exalt and ennoble
   it when placed here. Those chains and cords of love are infinitely more
   glorious than liberty itself; this slavery is more noble than all the
   empires in the world.

   Again, As divine love doth advance and elevate the soul, so it is that
   alone which can make it happy. The highest and most ravishing
   pleasures, the most solid and substantial delights that human nature is
   capable of, are those which arise from the endearments of a well-placed
   and successful affection. That which imbitters love, and makes it
   ordinarily a very troublesome and hurtful passion, is the placing it on
   those who have not worth enough to deserve it, or affection and
   gratitude to requite it, or whose absence may deprive us of the
   pleasure of their converse, or their miseries occasion our trouble. To
   all these evils are they exposed, whose chief and supreme affection is
   placed on creatures like themselves; but the love of God delivers us
   from them all.

   First, I say, love must needs be miserable, and full of trouble and
   disquietude, when there is not worth and excellency enough in the
   object to answer the vastness of its capacity. So eager and violent a
   passion cannot but fret and torment the spirit, when it finds not
   wherewith to satisfy its cravings; and, indeed, so large and unbounded
   in its nature, that it must be extremely pinched and straitened, when
   confined to any creature: nothing below an infinite good can afford it
   room to stretch itself, and exert its vigour and activity. What! is a
   little skin-deep beauty, or some small degrees of goodness, to match or
   satisfy a passion which was made for God: designed to embrace an
   infinite good? No wonder lovers do so hardly suffer any rival, and do
   not desire that others should approve their passions by imitating it;
   they know the scantiness and narrowness of the good which they love,
   that it cannot suffice two, being in effect too little for one. Hence
   love, "which is as strong as death;" occasioneth "jealousy which is as
   cruel as the grave," the coals whereof are coals of fire, which hath a
   most violent flame.

   But divine love hath no mixture of this gall. When once the soul is
   fixed on that supreme and all-sufficient good, it finds so much
   perfection and goodness, as doth not only answer and satisfy its
   affection, but master and overpower it too. It finds all its love to be
   too faint and languid for such a noble object, and is only sorry that
   it can command no more. It wisheth for the flames of a seraph, and
   longs for the time when it shall be wholly melted and dissolved into
   love; and because it can do so little itself, it desires the assistance
   of the whole creation, that angels and men would conquer with it the
   admiration and love of those infinite perfections.

   Again, Love is accompanied with trouble, when it misseth a suitable
   return of affection. Love is the most valuable thing we can bestow, and
   by giving it, we do, in effect, give all that we have; and therefore it
   must needs be afflicting to find so great a gift despised, that the
   present which one hath made of his whole heart, cannot prevail to
   obtain any return. Perfect love is a kind of self-dereliction, a
   wandering out of ourselves; it is a kind of voluntary death, wherein
   the lover dies to himself, and all his own interests, nor thinking of
   them, nor caring for them any more, and minding nothing but how he may
   please and gratify the party whom he loves. Thus he is quite undone,
   unless he meets with reciprocal affection; he neglects himself, and the
   other hath no regard to him: but if he be beloved, he is revived, as it
   were, and liveth in the soul and care of the person whom he loves; and
   now he begins to mind his own concernments, not so much because they
   are his, as because the beloved is pleased to own an interest in them:
   he becomes dear unto himself, because he is so unto the other.

   But why should I enlarge in so known a matter? Nothing can be more
   clear than that the happiness of love depends on the return it meets
   with: and herein the divine lover hath unspeakably the advantage,
   having placed his affection on him whose nature is love, whose goodness
   is as infinite as his being, whose mercy prevented us when we were his
   enemies, therefore cannot choose but embrace us when we are become his
   friends. It is utterly impossible that God should deny his love to a
   soul wholly devoted to him, and which desires nothing so much as to
   serve and please him; he cannot disdain his own image, nor the heart in
   which it is engraven. Love is all the tribute which we can pay him, and
   it is the sacrifice which he will not despise.

   Another thing which disturbs the pleasure of love, and renders it a
   miserable and unquiet passion, is absence and separation from those we
   love. It is not without a sensible affliction that friends do part,
   though for some little time: it is sad to be deprived of that society
   which is so delightful; our life becomes tedious, being spent in an
   impatient expectation of the happy hour wherein we may meet again: but
   if death has made the separation, as some time or other it must, this
   occasions a grief scarce to be paralleled by all the misfortunes of
   human life, and wherein we may pay dear enough for the comforts of our
   friendship. But O how happy are those who have placed their love on him
   who can never be absent from them! They need but open their eyes, and
   they shall every where behold the traces of his presence and glory, and
   converse with him whom their soul loveth; and this makes the darkest
   prison, or wildest desert, not only supportable, but delightful to
   them.

   In fine, A lover is miserable, if the person whom be loveth be so. They
   who have made an exchange of hearts by love, get thereby an interest in
   one another's happiness and misery; and this makes love a troublesome
   passion, when placed on earth. The most fortunate person hath grief
   enough to mar the tranquillity of his friend; and it is hard to hold
   out, when we are attacked on all hands, and suffer not only in our own
   person, but in another's. But if God were the object of our love, we
   should share in an infinite happiness, without any mixture or
   possibility of diminution; we should rejoice to behold the glory of
   God, and receive comfort and pleasure from all the praises wherewith
   men and angels do extol him. It should delight us, beyond all
   expression, to consider, that the beloved of our souls is infinitely
   happy in himself, and that all his enemies cannot shake or unsettle his
   throne: "that our God is in the heavens, and doth whatever he
   pleaseth."

   Behold, on what sure foundation his happiness is built, whose soul is
   possessed with divine love, whose will is transformed into the will of
   God, and whose great desire is, that his Maker should be pleased! O the
   peace, the rest, the satisfaction that attendeth such a temper of mind!

   What an infinite pleasure must it needs be, thus, as it were, to lose
   ourselves in him, and, being swallowed up in the overcoming sense of
   his goodness, to offer ourselves a living sacrifice, always ascending
   unto him in flames of love! Never doth a soul know what solid joy and
   substantial pleasure is, till once, being weary of itself, it renounce
   all propriety, give itself up unto the Author of its being, and feel
   itself become a hallowed and devoted thing, and can say, from an inward
   sense and feeling, "My beloved is mine," (I account all his interest
   mine own,) "and I am his:" I am content to be any thing for him, and
   care not for myself, but that I may serve him. A person, moulded into
   this temper, would find pleasure in all the dispensations of
   Providence: temporal enjoyments would have another relish, when he
   should taste the divine goodness in them, and consider them as tokens
   of love, sent by his dearest Lord and Maker: and chastisements, though
   they be not joyous, but grievous, would hereby lose their sting, the
   rod as well as the staff would comfort him: he would snatch a kiss from
   the hand that was smiting him, and gather sweetness from that severity;
   nay, he would rejoice, that though God did not the will of such a
   worthless and foolish creature as himself, yet he did his own will, and
   accomplished his own designs, which are infinitely more holy and wise.

   The exercises of religion, which to others are insipid and tedious, do
   yield the highest pleasures and delight to souls possessed with divine
   love. They rejoice when they are called "to go up to the house of the
   Lord," that they may "see his power and his glory, as they have
   formerly seen it in the sanctuary." They never think themselves so
   happy, as when, having retired from the world, and gotten free from the
   noise and hurry of affairs, and silenced all their clamorous passions
   (those troublesome guests within,) they have placed themselves in the
   presence of God, and entertain fellowship and communion with him: they
   delight to adore his perfections, and recount his favours,--and to
   protest their affection to him, and tell him a thousand times that they
   love him; to lay their troubles or wants before him, and disburden
   their hearts in his bosom. Repentance itself is a delightful exercise,
   when it floweth from the principle of love. There is a secret sweetness
   which accompanieth those tears of remorse, those meltings and
   relentings of a soul returning unto God, and lamenting its former
   unkindness.

   The severities of a holy life, and that constant watch which we are
   obliged to keep over our hearts and ways, are very troublesome to those
   who are only ruled and acted by an external law, and have no law in
   their minds inclining them to the performance of their duty: but where
   divine love possesseth the soul, it stands as sentinel to keep out
   every thing that may offend the beloved, and doth disdainfully repulse
   those temptations which assault it: it complieth cheerfully, not only
   with explicit commands, but with the most secret notices of the
   beloved's pleasure, and is ingenious in discovering what will be most
   grateful and acceptable unto him: it makes mortification and
   self-denial change their harsh and dreadful names, and become easy,
   sweet, and delightful things.

   But I find this part of my letter swell bigger than I designed, (indeed
   who would not be tempted to dwell on so pleasant a theme!) I shall
   endeavour to compensate it by brevity in the other points.

   The next branch of the Divine Life, is a universal charity and love.
   The excellency of this grace will be easily acknowledged; for what can
   be more noble and generous than a heart enlarged to embrace the whole
   world, whose wishes and designs are levelled at the good and welfare of
   the universe, which considereth every man's interest as its own? He who
   loveth his neighbour as himself, can never entertain any base or
   injurious thought, or be wanting in expressions of bounty. He had
   rather suffer a thousand wrongs, than be guilty of one; and never
   accounts himself happy, but when some one or other hath been benefited
   by him: the malice or ingratitude of men is not able to resist his
   love: he overlooks their injuries, and pities their folly, and
   overcomes their evil with good: and never designs any other revenge
   against his most bitter and malicious enemies, than to put all
   objections he can upon them, whether they will or not. Is it any wonder
   that such a person be reverenced and admired, and accounted the darling
   of mankind? This inward goodness and benignity of spirit reflects a
   certain sweetness and serenity upon the very countenance, and makes it
   amiable and lovely: it inspireth the soul with a holy resolution and
   courage, and makes it capable of enterprising and effecting the highest
   things. Those heroic actions which we are wont to read with admiration,
   have, for the most part, been the effects of the love of one's country,
   or of particular friendships: and, certainly, a more extensive and
   universal affection must be much more powerful and efficacious.

   Again, As charity flows from a noble and excellent temper, so it is
   accompanied with the greatest satisfaction and pleasure: it delights
   the soul to feel itself thus enlarged, and to be delivered from those
   disquieting, as well as deformed passions, malice, hatred, and envy;
   and become gentle, sweet, benign. Had I my choice of all things that
   might tend to my present felicity, I would pitch upon this, to have my
   heart possessed with the greatest kindness and affection towards all
   men in the world. I am sure this would make me partake in all the
   happiness of others: their inward endowments and outward prosperity;
   every thing that did benefit and advantage them would afford me comfort
   and pleasure: and though I should frequently meet with occasions of
   grief and compassion, yet there is a sweetness in commiseration, which
   makes it infinitely more desirable than a stupid insensibility: and the
   consideration of that infinite goodness and wisdom which governs the
   world, might repress any excessive trouble for particular calamities
   that happen in it: and the hopes or possibility of men's after
   happiness, might moderate their sorrow for their present misfortunes.
   Certainly, next to the love and enjoyment of God, that ardent charity
   and affection wherewith blessed souls do embrace one another, is justly
   to be reckoned as the greatest felicity of those regions above; and did
   it universally prevail in the world, it would anticipate that
   blessedness, and make us taste of the joys of heaven upon earth.

   That which I named as a third branch of religion, was purity; and you
   may remember I described it to consist in a contempt of sensual
   pleasures, and resoluteness to undergo those troubles and pains we may
   meet with in the performance of our duty. Now, the naming of this may
   suffice to recommend it as a most noble and excellent quality. There is
   no slavery so base, as that whereby a man becomes a drudge to his own
   lusts: nor any victory so glorious, as that which is obtained over
   them. Never can that person be capable of any thing that is noble or
   worthy, who is sunk in the gross and seculent pleasures of sense, or
   bewitched with the light and airy gratifications of fancy: but the
   religious soul is of a more sublime and divine temper; it knows it was
   made for higher things, and scorns to step aside one foot out of the
   ways of holiness, for the obtaining any of these.

   And this purity is accompanied with a great deal of pleasure.
   Whatsoever defiles the soul disturbs it too; all impure delights have a
   sting in them, and leave smart and trouble behind them. Excess and
   intemperance, and all inordinate lusts, are so much enemies to the
   health of the body, and the interest of this present life, that a
   little consideration might oblige any rational man to forbear them on
   that very score; and if the religious person go higher, and do not only
   abstain from noxious pleasures, but neglect those that are innocent,
   this is not to be looked upon as any violent and uneasy restraint, but
   as the effect of better choice, that their minds are taken up in the
   pursuit of more sublime and refined delights, so that they cannot be
   concerned in these. Any person that is engaged in a violent and
   passionate affection, will easily forget his ordinary gratifications,
   will be little curious about his diet, or his bodily ease, or the
   divertisements he was wonted to delight in. No wonder then, if souls
   overpowered with divine love despise inferior pleasures, and be almost
   ready to grudge the body its necessary attendance for the common
   accommodations of life, judging all these impertinent to their main
   happiness, those higher enjoyments they are pursuing. As for the
   hardships they may meet with, they rejoice in them, as opportunities to
   exercise and testify their affection; and since they are able to do so
   little for God, they are glad of the honour to suffer for him.

   The last branch of religion is humility; and however to vulgar and
   carnal eyes this may appear an abject, base, and despicable quality,
   yet really the soul of man is not capable of a higher and more noble
   endowment. It is a silly ignorance that begets pride. But humility
   arises from a nearer acquaintance with excellent things, which keeps
   men from doting on trifles, or admiring themselves because of some
   petty attainments. Noble and well-educated souls have no such high
   opinion of riches, beauty, strength, and other such like advantages, as
   to value themselves for them, or despise those that want them. And as
   for inward worth and real goodness, the sense they have of the divine
   perfections, makes them think very meanly of any thing they have
   hitherto attained, and be still endeavouring to surmount themselves,
   and make nearer approaches to those infinite excellencies which they
   admire.

   I know not what thoughts people may have of humility, but I see almost
   every person pretending to it, and shunning such expressions and
   actions as may make them be accounted arrogant and presumptuous, so
   that those who are most desirous of praise will be loathe to commend
   themselves. What are those compliments and modes of civility, so
   frequent in our ordinary converse, but so many protestations of the
   esteem of others, and the low thoughts we have of ourselves? And must
   not that humility be a noble and excellent endowment, when the very
   shadows of it are accounted so necessary a part of good breeding?

   Again, This grace is accompanied with a great deal of happiness and
   tranquility. The proud and arrogant person is a trouble to all that
   converse with him, but most of all unto himself: every thing is enough
   to vex him; but scarce any thing sufficient to content and please him.
   He is ready to quarrel with any thing that falls out; as if he himself
   were such a considerable person, that God Almighty should do every
   thing to gratify him, and all the creatures of heaven and earth should
   wait upon him, and obey his will. The leaves of high trees do shake
   with every blast of wind; and every breath, every evil word will
   disquiet and torment an arrogant man. But the humble person hath the
   advantage when he is despised, that none can think more meanly of him
   than he doth of himself; and therefore he is not troubled at the
   matter, but can easily bear those reproaches which wound the other to
   the soul. And withal, as he is less affected with injuries, so indeed
   he is less obnoxious unto them. "Contention which cometh from pride,"
   betrays a man into a thousand inconveniences, which those of a meek and
   lowly temper seldom meet with. True and genuine humility begetteth both
   a veneration and love among all wise and discerning persons, while
   pride defeateth its own design, and deprives a man of that honour it
   makes him pretend to.

   But as the chief exercises of humility are those which relate unto
   Almighty God, so these are accompanied with the greatest satisfaction
   and sweetness. It is impossible to express the great pleasure and
   delight which religious persons feel in the lowest prostration of their
   souls before God, when, having a deep sense of the divine majesty and
   glory, they sink (if I may so speak) to the bottom of their beings, and
   vanish and disappear in the presence of God, by a serious and
   affectionate acknowledgment of their own nothingness, and the shortness
   and imperfections of their attainments; when they understand the full
   sense and emphasis of the Psalmist's exclamation, "Lord! what is man?"
   and can utter it with the same affection. Never did any haughty and
   ambitious person receive the praises and applauses of men with so much
   pleasure, as the humble and religious do renounce them: "Not unto us, O
   Lord! not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for
   thy truth's sake."

   Thus I have spoken something of the excellencies and advantages of
   religion in its several branches; but should be very injurious to the
   subject, did I pretend to have given any perfect account of it. Let us
   acquaint ourselves with it, and experience will teach us more than all
   that ever hath been spoken or written concerning it. But, if we may
   suppose the soul to be already awakened unto some longing desires after
   so great a blessedness, it will be good to give them vent, and suffer
   them to issue forth in some such aspirations as these:----

    A PRAYER.

   Good God! what a mighty felicity is this to which we are called! How
   graciously hast thou joined our duty and happiness together, and
   prescribed that for our work, the performance whereof is a great
   reward! And shall such silly worms be advanced to so great a height?
   Wilt thou allow us to raise our eyes to thee? Wilt thou admit and
   accept our affection? Shall we receive the impression of thy divine
   excellencies, by beholding and admiring them,--and partake of thy
   infinite blessedness and glory, by loving thee, and rejoicing in thee?
   O the happiness of those souls that have broken the fetters of
   self-love, and disentangled their affection from every narrow and
   particular good! whose understandings are enlightened by thy Holy
   Spirit, and their wills enlarged to the extent of thine! who love thee
   above all things, and all mankind for thy sake! I am persuaded, O God,
   I am persuaded, that I can never be happy, till my carnal and corrupt
   affections be mortified, and the pride and vanity of my spirit be
   subdued, and till I come seriously to despise the world, and think
   nothing of myself. But O when shall it once be? O when wilt thou come
   unto me, and satisfy my soul with thy likeness, making me holy as thou
   art holy, even in all manner of conversation? Hast thou given me a
   prospect of so great a felicity, and wilt thou not bring me unto it?
   Hast thou excited these desires in my soul, and wilt thou not also
   satisfy them? O teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God; thy
   Spirit is good, lead me unto the land of uprightness. Quicken me, O
   Lord, for thy name's sake, and perfect that which concerneth me: thy
   mercy, O Lord, endureth for ever, forsake not the works of thine own
   hands."
     __________________________________________________________________

  PART III.

   On the Difficulties and Duties of the Christian Life.

   I have hitherto considered wherein true religion doth consist, and how
   desirable a thing it is; but when one sees how infinitely distant the
   common temper and frame of men is from it, he may perhaps be ready to
   despond, and give over, and think it utterly impossible to be attained.
   He may sit down in sadness, and bemoan himself, and say, in the anguish
   and bitterness of his spirit, "They are happy indeed whose souls are
   awakened unto the divine life, who are thus renewed in the spirit of
   their minds; but, alas! I am quite of another constitution, and am not
   able to effect so mighty a change. If outward observances could have
   done the business, I might have hoped to acquit myself by diligence and
   care; but since nothing but a new nature can serve the turn, what am I
   able to do? I could bestow all my goods in oblations to God, or alms to
   the poor, but cannot command that love and charity, without which this
   expense would profit me nothing. This gift of God cannot be purchased
   with money. If a man should give all the substance of his house for
   love, it would utterly be contemned. I could pine and macerate my body,
   and undergo many hardships and troubles; but I cannot get all my
   corruptions starved, nor my affections wholly weaned from earthly
   things. There are still some worldly desires lurking in my heart, and
   those vanities that I have shut out of the doors, are always getting in
   by the windows. I am many times convinced of my own meanness, of the
   weakness of my body, and the far greater weakness of my soul; but this
   doth rather beget indignation and discontent, than true humility in my
   spirit. And though I should come to think meanly of myself, yet I
   cannot endure that others should think so too. In a word, when I
   reflect on my highest and most specious attainments, I have reason to
   suspect, that they are all but the effects of nature, the issues of
   self-love acting under several disguises; and this principle is so
   powerful, and so deeply rooted in me, that I can never hope to be
   delivered from the dominion of it. I may toss and turn as a door on the
   hinges, but can never get clear off, or be quite unhinged of self,
   which is still the centre of all my motions; so that all the advantage
   I can draw from the discovery of religion, is but to see, at a huge
   distance, that felicity which I am not able to reach; like a man in a
   shipwreck, who discerns the land, and envies the happiness of those who
   are there, but thinks it impossible for himself to get ashore."

   These, I say, or such like desponding thoughts, may arise in the minds
   of those persons who begin to conceive somewhat more of the nature and
   excellency of religion than before. They have spied the land, and seen
   that it is exceeding good, that it floweth with milk and honey; but
   they find they have the children of Anak to grapple with, many powerful
   lusts and corruptions to overcome, and they fear they shall never
   prevail against them. But why should we give way to such discouraging
   suggestions? Why should we entertain such unreasonable fears, which
   damp our spirits and weaken our hands, and augment the difficulties of
   our way? Let us encourage ourselves, my dear friend, let us encourage
   ourselves with those mighty aids we are to expect in this spiritual
   warfare; for greater is he that is for us, than all that rise up
   against us. "The eternal God is our refuge, and underneath are the
   everlasting arms. Let us be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
   might," for he it is that shall "tread down our enemies." God hath a
   tender regard unto the souls of men, and is infinitely willing to
   promote their welfare. He hath condescended to our weakness, and
   declared with an oath, that he hath no pleasure in our destruction.
   There is no such thing as dispute or envy lodged in the bosom of that
   ever-blessed Being, whose name and nature is Love. He created us at
   first in a happy condition; and now, when we are fallen from it, "He
   hath laid help upon one that is mighty to save," hath committed the
   care of our souls to no meaner person than the Eternal Son of his love.
   It is he that is the Captain of our salvation, and what enemies can be
   too strong for us when we are fighting under his banners? Did not the
   Son of God come down from the bosom of his Father, and pitch his
   tabernacle amongst the sons of men, that he might recover and propagate
   the divine life, and restore the image of God in their souls? All the
   mighty works which he performed, all the sad afflictions which he
   sustained, had this for their scope and design; for this did he labour
   and toil, for this did he bleed and die. "He was with child, he was in
   pain, and hath he brought forth nothing but wind; hath he wrought no
   deliverance in the earth? Shall he not see of the travail of his soul?"
   Certainly it is impossible that this great contrivance of heaven should
   prove abortive, that such a mighty undertaking should fail and
   miscarry. It hath already been effectual for the salvation of many
   thousands, who were once as far from the kingdom of heaven as we can
   suppose ourselves to be, and our "High Priest continueth for ever, and
   is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him." He is
   tender and compassionate, he knoweth our infirmities, and had
   experience of our temptations. "A bruised reed will he not break, and
   smoking flax will he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto
   victory." He hath sent out his Holy Spirit, whose sweet but powerful
   breathings are still moving up and down in the world, to quicken and
   revive the souls of men, and awaken them unto the sense and feeling of
   those divine things for which they were made, and is ready to assist
   such weak and languishing creatures as we are, in our essays towards
   holiness and felicity: and when once it hath taken hold of a soul, and
   kindled in it the smallest spark of divine love, it will be sure to
   preserve and cherish, and bring it forth into a flame, "which many
   waters shall not quench, neither shall the floods be able to drown it."
   Whenever this day begins to dawn, "and the day-star to arise in the
   heart," it will easily dispel the powers of darkness, and make
   ignorance and folly, and all the corrupt and selfish affections of men,
   flee away as fast before it as the shades of night, when the sun cometh
   out of his chambers: "For the path of the just is as the shining light,
   which shineth more and more unto the perfect day. They shall go on from
   strength to strength, till every one of them appear before God in
   Zion."

   Why should we think it impossible, that true goodness and universal
   love should ever come to sway and prevail in our souls? Is not this
   their primitive state and condition, their native and genuine
   constitution, as they came first from the hands of their Maker? Sin and
   corruption are but usurpers, and though they have long kept possession,
   "yet from the beginning it was not so." That inordinate self-love,
   which one would think were rooted in our very being, and interwoven
   with the constitution of our nature, is nevertheless of a foreign
   extraction, and had no place at all in the state of integrity. We have
   still so much reason left as to condemn it; our understandings are
   easily convinced, that we ought to be wholly devoted to him from whom
   we have our being, and to love him infinitely more than ourselves, who
   is infinitely better than we; and our wills would readily comply with
   this, if they were not disordered and put out of tune: and is not he
   who made our souls, able to rectify and mend them again? Shall we not
   be able, by his assistance, to vanquish and expel those violent
   intruders, "and turn unto flight the armies of the aliens?"

   No sooner shall we take up arms in this holy war, but we shall have all
   the saints on earth, and all the angels in heaven, engaged on our
   party. The holy church throughout the world is daily interceding with
   God for the success of all such endeavours; and, doubtless, those
   heavenly hosts above are nearly concerned in the interests of religion,
   and infinitely desirous to see the divine life thriving and prevailing
   in this inferior world; and that the will of God may be done by us on
   earth, as it is done by themselves in heaven. And may we not then
   encourage ourselves, as the prophet did His servant, when he showed him
   the horses and chariots of fire, "Fear not, for they that be with us
   are more than they that be against us?"

   Away then with all perplexing fears and desponding thoughts. To
   undertake vigorously, and rely confidently on the divine assistance, is
   more than half the conquest. "Let us arise and be doing, and the Lord
   will be with us." It is true, religion in the souls of men is the
   immediate work of God, and all our natural endeavours can neither
   produce it alone, nor merit those supernatural aids by which it must be
   wrought. The Holy Ghost must come upon us, and the power of the Highest
   must overthrow us, before that holy thing can be begotten, and Christ
   be formed in us. But yet we must not expect that this whole work should
   be done without any concurring endeavours of our own. We must not lie
   loitering in the ditch, and wait till Omnipotence pull us from thence.
   No, no: we must bestir ourselves, and actuate those powers which we
   have already received. We must put forth ourselves to our utmost
   capacities, and then we may hope that "our labour shall not be in vain
   in the Lord." All the art and industry of man cannot form the smallest
   herb, or make a stalk of corn to grow in the field; it is the energy of
   nature, and the influences of Heaven, which produce this effect. It is
   God "who causeth the grass to grow, and herb for the service of man;"
   and yet nobody will say, that the labours of the husbandman are useless
   or unnecessary. So, likewise, the human soul is immediately created by
   God. It is he who both formeth and enliveneth the child; and yet he
   hath appointed the marriage-bed as the ordinary means for the
   propagation of mankind. Though there must intervene a stroke of
   Omnipotence to effect this mighty change in our souls, yet ought we to
   do what we can to fit and prepare ourselves; for we must break up our
   fallow ground, and root out the weeds, and pull up the thorns, that so
   we may be more ready to receive the seeds of grace, and the dew of
   heaven. It is true, God hath been found of some who sought Him not. He
   hath cast himself in their way, who were quite out of his. He hath laid
   hold upon them, and stopped their course on a sudden; for so was St.
   Paul converted in his journey to Damascus. But certainly this is not
   God's ordinary method of dealing with men. Though he hath not tied
   himself to means, yet he hath tied us to the use of them; and we have
   never more reason to expect the divine assistance, than when we are
   doing our utmost endeavours. It shall therefore be my next work, to
   show what course we ought to take for attaining that blessed temper I
   have hitherto described. But here, if, in delivering my own thoughts, I
   shall chance to differ from what is or may be said by others in this
   matter, I would not be thought to contradict and oppose them, more than
   physicians do, when they prescribe several remedies for the same
   disease, which perhaps are all useful and good. "Every one may propose
   the method he judges most proper and convenient; but he doth not
   thereby pretend that the cure can never be effected, unless that be
   exactly observed. I doubt it hath occasioned much unnecessary
   disquietude to some holy persons, that they have not found such a
   regular and orderly transaction in their souls, as they have seen
   described in books; that they have not passed through all those steps
   and stages of conversion, which some (who perhaps have felt them in
   themselves) have too peremptorily prescribed unto others. God hath
   several ways of dealing with the souls of men, and it sufficeth if the
   work be accomplished, whatever the methods have been.

   Again, though in proposing directions I must follow that order which
   the nature of things shall lead to, yet I do not mean that the same
   method should be so punctually observed in the practice, as if the
   latter rules were never to be heeded till some considerable time have
   been spent in practising the former. The directions I intend are
   mutually conducive one to another, and are all to be performed as
   occasion shall serve, and we find ourselves enabled to perform them.

   But now, that I may detain you no longer, if we desire to have our
   souls moulded to this holy frame, to become partakers of the divine
   nature, and have Christ formed in our hearts, we must seriously
   resolve, and carefully endeavour, to avoid and abandon all vicious and
   sinful practices. There can be no treaty of peace, till once we lay
   down these weapons of rebellion wherewith we fight against heaven; nor
   can we expect to have our distempers cured, if we be daily feeding on
   poison. Every wilful sin gives a mortal wound to the soul, and puts it
   at a greater distance from God and goodness; and we can never hope to
   have our hearts purified from corrupt affections, unless we cleanse our
   hands from vicious actions. Now, in this case we cannot excuse
   ourselves by the pretence of impossibility; for sure our outward man is
   some way in our power. We have some command of our feet, and hands, and
   tongue, nay, and of our thoughts and fancies too, at least so far as to
   divert them from impure and sinful objects, and to turn our mind
   another way; and we find this power and authority much strengthened and
   advanced, if we were careful to manage and exercise it. In the mean
   while, I acknowledge our corruptions are so strong, and our temptations
   so many, that it will require a great deal of steadfastness and
   resolution, of watchfulness and care, to preserve ourselves, even in
   this degree of innocence and purity.

   And, first, let us inform ourselves well what those sins are from which
   we ought to abstain. And here we must not take our measures from the
   maxims of the world, or the practices of those whom in charity we
   account good men. Most people have very light apprehensions of these
   things, and are not sensible of any fault, unless it be gross and
   flagitious, and scarce reckon any so great as that which they call
   preciseness: and those who are more serious, do many times allow
   themselves too great latitude and freedom. Alas! how much pride and
   vanity, and passion and honour; how much weakness, and folly, and sin,
   doth every day show itself in their converse and behaviour? It may be
   they are humbled for it, and striving against it, and are daily gaining
   some ground: but then the progress is so small, and their failings so
   many, that we have need to choose a more exact pattern. Every one of us
   must answer for himself, and the practices of others will never warrant
   and secure us. It is the highest folly to regulate our actions by any
   other standard than that by which we must be judged. If ever we would
   cleanse our way, it must be "by taking heed thereto according to the
   word of God;" and that "word which is quick and powerful, and sharper
   than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul
   and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
   thoughts and intents of the heart," will certainly discover many things
   to be sinful and hideous, which pass for very innocent in the eyes of
   the world. Let us therefore imitate the Psalmist, who saith,
   "Concerning the works of men, by the words of thy lips I have kept
   myself from the paths of the destroyer." Let us acquaint ourselves with
   the strict and holy laws of our religion. Let us consider the
   discourses of our blessed Saviour, (especially that divine sermon on
   the mount,) and the writings of his holy apostles, where an ingenuous
   and unbiassed mind may clearly discern those limits and bounds by which
   our actions ought to be confined. And then let us never look upon any
   sin as light and inconsiderable; but be fully persuaded, that the
   smallest is infinitely heinous in the sight of God, and prejudicial to
   the souls of men; and that, if we had the right sense of things, we
   should be as deeply affected with the least irregularities, as now we
   are with the highest crimes.

   But now, amongst those things which we discover to be sinful, there
   will be some unto which, through the disposition of our nature, or long
   custom, or the endearments of pleasure, we are so much wedded, that it
   will be like cutting off the right hand, or pulling out the right eye,
   to abandon them. But must we therefore sit down and wait till all
   difficulties be over, and every temptation be gone? This were to
   imitate the fool in the poet, who stood the whole day at the river-side
   till all the water should run by. We must not indulge our inclinations,
   as we do little children, till they grow weary of the thing they are
   unwilling to let go. We must not continue our sinful practices, in
   hopes that the divine grace will one day overpower our spirits, and
   make us hate them for their own deformity.

   Let us suppose that we are utterly destitute of any supernatural
   principle, and want that taste by which we should discern and abhor
   perverse things; yet sure we are capable of some considerations which
   may be of force to persuade us to this reformation of our lives. If the
   inward deformity and heinous nature of sin cannot affect us, at least
   we may be frightened by those dreadful consequences that attend it:
   that same selfish principle which pusheth us forward unto the pursuit
   of sinful pleasures, will make us loath to buy them at the rate of
   everlasting misery. Thus we may encounter self-love with its own
   weapons, and employ one natural inclination for repressing the
   exorbitancies of another. Let us therefore accustom ourselves to
   consider seriously, what a fearful thing it must needs be to irritate
   and offend that infinite Being on whom we hang and depend every moment,
   who needs but to withdraw his mercies to make us miserable, or his
   assistance to make us nothing. Let us frequently remember the shortness
   and uncertainty of our lives, and how that, after we have taken a few
   more turns in the world, and conversed a little longer amongst men, we
   must all go down unto the dark and silent grave, and carry nothing
   along with us but anguish and regret for all our sinful enjoyments; and
   then think what horror must needs seize the guilty soul, to find itself
   naked and all alone before the severe and impartial Judge of the world,
   to render an exact account, not only of its more important and
   considerable transactions, but of every word that the tongue hath
   uttered, and the swiftest and most secret thought that ever passed
   through the mind. Let us sometimes represent unto ourselves the terrors
   of that dreadful day, when the foundation of the earth shall be shaken,
   and the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements
   shall melt with fervent heat, and the present frame of nature be
   dissolved, and our eyes shall see the blessed Jesus, (who came once
   into the world in all humility to visit us, to purchase pardon for us,
   and beseech us to accept of it,) now appearing in the majesty of his
   glory, and descending from heaven in a flaming fire, to take vengeance
   on those that have despised his mercy, and persisted in rebellion
   against him. When all the hidden things of darkness shall be brought to
   light, and the counsels of the heart shall be made manifest; when those
   secret impurities and subtle frauds whereof the world did never suspect
   us, shall be exposed and laid open to public view, and many thousand
   actions which we never dreamed to be sinful, or else had altogether
   forgotten, shall be charged home upon our consciences, with such
   evident convictions of guilt, that we shall neither be able to deny nor
   excuse them. Then shall all the angels in heaven, and all the saints
   that ever lived on the earth, approve that dreadful sentence which
   shall be passed on wicked men; and those who perhaps did love and
   esteem them when they lived in the world, shall look upon them with
   indignation and abhorrence, and never make one request for their
   deliverance. Let us consider the eternal punishment of damned souls,
   which are shadowed forth in Scripture by metaphors taken from those
   things that are most terrible and grievous in the world, and yet all do
   not suffice to convey into our minds any full apprehensions of them.
   When we have joined together the importance of all these expressions,
   and added unto them whatever our fancy can conceive of misery and
   torment, we must still remember, that all this comes infinitely short
   of the truth and reality of the thing.

   It is true, this is a sad and melancholy subject; there is anguish and
   horror in the consideration of it; but sure it must be infinitely more
   dreadful to endure it: and such thoughts as these may be very useful to
   fright us from the courses that would lead us thither; how fond soever
   we may be of sinful pleasures, the fear of hell would make us abstain.
   Our most forward inclinations will startle and give back, when pressed
   with that question in the prophet, "Who amongst us can dwell with
   everlasting burnings?"

   To this very purpose it is that the terrors of another world are so
   frequently represented in holy writ, and that in such terms as are most
   proper to affect and influence a carnal mind: these fears can never
   suffice to make any person truly good; but certainly they may restrain
   us from much evil, and have often made way for more ingenious and
   kindly impressions.

   But it will not suffice to consider these things once and again, nor to
   form some resolutions of abandoning our sins, unless we maintain a
   constant guard, and be continually watching against them. Sometimes the
   mind is awakened to see the dismal consequences of a vicious life, and
   straight we are resolved to reform; but, alas! it presently falleth
   asleep, and we lose that prospect which we had of things, and then
   temptations take the advantage; they solicit and importune us
   continually, and so do frequently engage our consent before we are
   aware. It is the folly and ruin of most people to live at adventure,
   and take part in every thing that comes in their way, seldom
   considering what they are about to say or do. If we would have our
   resolutions take effect, we must take heed unto our ways, and set a
   watch before the door of our lips, and examine the motions that arise
   in our hearts, and cause them to tell us whence they come, and whither
   they go; whether it be pride or passion, or any corrupt and vicious
   humour, that prompteth us to any design, and whether God will be
   offended or any body harmed by it. And if we have no time for long
   reasonings, let us at least turn our eyes toward God, and place
   ourselves in his presence, to ask his leave and approbation for what we
   do. Let us consider ourselves under the all-seeing eye of that divine
   Majesty, as in the midst of an infinite globe of light, which
   compasseth us about both behind and before, and pierceth to the
   innermost corners of the soul. The sense and remembrance of the divine
   presence is the most ready and effectual means, both to discover what
   is unlawful, and to restrain us from it. There are some things a person
   could make a shift to pelliate or defend, and yet he dares not look
   Almighty God in the face, and adventure upon them. If we look unto him
   we shall be lightened; if we "set him always before us, he will guide
   us by his eye, and instruct us in the way wherein we ought to walk."

   This care and watchfulness over our actions must be seconded by
   frequent and serious reflections upon them, not only that we may obtain
   the divine mercy and pardon for our sins, by an humble and sorrowful
   acknowledgment of them; but also that we may re-enforce and strengthen
   our resolutions, and learn to decline or resist the temptations by
   which we have been formerly foiled. It is an advice worthy of a
   Christian, though it did first drop from a heathen pen, that before we
   betake ourselves to rest, we renew and examine all the passages of the
   day, that we may have the comfort of what we have done aright, and may
   redress what we find to have been done amiss, and make the shipwrecks
   of one day be as marks to direct our course in another. This may be
   called the very art of virtuous living, and would contribute
   wonderfully to advance our reformation, and preserve our innocence.
   But, withal, we must nor forget to implore the divine assistance,
   especially against those sins that do most easily beset us: and though
   it be supposed that our hearts are not yet moulded into that spiritual
   frame which should render our devotions acceptable; yet, methinks, such
   considerations as have been proposed to deter us from sin, may also
   stir us up to some natural seriousness, and make our prayers against it
   as earnest, at least, as they are wont to be against other calamities:
   and I doubt not but God, who heareth the cry of the ravens, will have
   some regard even to such petitions as proceed from those natural
   passions which himself hath implanted in us. Besides, that those
   prayers against sin, will be powerful engagements on ourselves to
   excite us to watchfulness and care; and common ingenuity will make us
   ashamed to relapse into those faults which we have lately bewailed
   before God, and against which we have begged his assistance.

   Thus are we to make the first essay for recovering the divine life, by
   restraining the natural inclinations, that they break not out into
   sinful practices. But now I must add, that Christian prudence will
   teach us to abstain from gratifications that are not simply unlawful,
   and that, not only that we may secure our innocence, which would be in
   continual hazzard, if we should strain our liberty to the utmost point;
   but also, that thereby we may weaken the force of nature, and teach our
   appetites to obey. We must do with ourselves as prudent parents with
   their children, who cross their wills in many little indifferent
   things, to make them manageable and submissive in more considerable
   instances. He who would mortify the pride and vanity of his spirit,
   should stop his ears to the most deserved praises, and sometimes
   forbear his just vindication from the censures and aspersions of
   others, especially if they reflect only upon his prudence and conduct,
   and not on his virtue and innocence. He who would check a revengeful
   humour, would do well to deny himself the satisfaction of representing
   unto others the injuries which he hath sustained; and if we would so
   take heed to our ways, that we sin not with our tongue, we must
   accustom ourselves much to solitude and silence, and sometimes with the
   Psalmist, "hold our peace even from good," till once we have gotten
   some command over that unruly member. Thus, I say, we may bind up our
   natural inclinations, and make our appetites more moderate in their
   cravings, by accustoming them to frequent refusals; but it is not
   enough to have them under violence and restraint.

   Our next essay must be, to wean our affections from created things, and
   all the delights and entertainments of the lower life, which sink and
   depress the souls of men, and retard their motions towards God and
   heaven; and this we must do by possessing our minds with a deep
   persuasion of the vanity and emptiness of worldly enjoyments. This is
   an ordinary theme, and every body can make declamations upon it; but,
   alas! how few understand or believe what they say? These notions float
   in our brains, and come sliding off our tongues, but we have no deep
   impression of them on our spirits; we feel not the truth which we
   pretend to believe. We can tell, that all the glory and splendour, all
   the pleasures and enjoyments of the world are vanity and nothing; and
   yet these nothings take up all our thoughts, and engross all our
   affections; they stifle the better inclinations of our soul, and
   inveigle us into many a sin. It may be in a sober mood we give them the
   slight, and resolve to be no longer deluded with them; but those
   thoughts seldom outlive the next temptation; the vanities which we have
   shut out at the doors get in at a postern: there are still some
   pretensions, some hopes that flatter us; and after we have been
   frustrated a thousand times, we must be continually repeating the
   experiment: the least difference of circumstances is enough to delude
   us, and make us expect that satisfaction in one thing which we have
   missed in another; but could we once get clearly off, and come to a
   serious and real contempt of worldly things, this were a very
   considerable advancement in our way. The soul of man is of a vigorous
   and active nature, and hath in it a raging and unextinguishable thirst,
   an immaterial kind of fire, always catching at some object or other, in
   conjunction wherewith it thinks to be happy; and were it once rent from
   the world, and all the bewitching enjoyments under the sun, it would
   quickly search after some higher and more excellent object, to satisfy
   its ardent and importunate cravings; and, being no longer dazzled with
   glittering vanities, would fix on that supreme and all-sufficient Good,
   where it would discover such beauty and sweetness as would charm and
   overpower all its affections. The love of the world, and the love of
   God, are like the scales of a balance; as the one falleth, the other
   doth rise: when our natural inclinations prosper, and the creature is
   exalted in our soul, religion is faint, and doth languish; but when
   earthly objects wither away, and lose their beauty, and the soul begins
   to cool and flag in its prosecution of them, then the seeds of grace
   take root, and the divine life begins to flourish and prevail. It doth,
   therefore, nearly concern us, to convince ourselves of the emptiness
   and vanity of creature-enjoyments, and reason our heart out of love
   with them: let us seriously consider all that our reason or our faith,
   our own experience or the observation of others, can suggest to this
   effect: let as ponder the matter over and over, and fix our thoughts on
   this truth, till we become really persuaded of it. Amidst all our
   pursuits and designs, let us stop and ask ourselves, For what end is
   all this? At what do I aim? Can the gross and muddy pleasures of sense,
   or a heap of white and yellow earth, or the esteem and affection of
   silly creatures like myself, satisfy a rational and immortal soul? Have
   I not tried these things already? Will they have a higher relish, and
   yield me more contentment tomorrow than yesterday, or the next year
   than they did the last? There may be some little difference betwixt
   that which I am now pursuing, and that which I enjoyed before; but
   sure, my former enjoyments did show as pleasant and promise as fair,
   before I attained them; like the rainbow, they looked very glorious at
   a distance, but when I approached I found nothing but emptiness and
   vapour. O what a poor thing would the life of man be, if it were
   capable of no higher enjoyments!

   I cannot insist on this subject; and there is the less need when I
   remember to whom I am writing. Yes, my dear friend, you have had as
   great experience of the emptiness and vanity of human things, and have,
   at present, as few worldly engagements as any that I know. I have
   sometimes reflected on those passages of your life wherewith you have
   been pleased to acquaint me; and, methinks, through all, I can discern
   a design of the divine Providence to wean your affections from every
   thing here below. The trials you have had of those things which the
   world dotes upon, have taught you to despise them; and you have found
   by experience, that neither the endowments of nature, nor the
   advantages of fortune, are sufficient for happiness; that every rose
   hath its thorn, and there may be a worm at the foot of the fairest
   gourd; some secret and undiscerned grief, which may make a person
   deserve the pity of those who, perhaps, do admire or envy their
   supposed felicity. If any earthly comforts have got too much of your
   heart, I think they have been your relations and friends; and the
   dearest of these are removed out of the world, so that you must raise
   your mind towards heaven when you would think upon them. Thus, God hath
   provided that your heart may be loosed from the world, and that he may
   not have any rival in your affection, which I have always observed to
   be so large and unbounded, so noble and disinterested, that no inferior
   object can answer or deserve it.

   When we have got our corruptions restrained, and our natural appetites
   and inclinations towards worldly things in some measure subdued, we
   must proceed to take such exercises as have a more immediate tendency
   to excite and awaken the divine life; and, first, let us endeavour
   conscientiously to perform those duties which religion doth require,
   and whereunto it would incline us, if it did prevail in our souls. If
   we cannot get our inward disposition presently charged, let us study at
   least to regulate our outward deportment: if our hearts be not yet
   inflamed with divine love, let us, however, own our allegiance to that
   infinite Majesty, by attending his service and listening to his word,
   by speaking reverently of his name and praising his goodness, and
   exhorting others to serve and obey him. If we want that charity, and
   those bowels of compassion which we ought to have towards our
   neighbours, yet must we not omit any occasion of doing them good: if
   our hearts be haughty and proud, we must, nevertheless study a modest
   and humble deportment. These external performances are of little value
   in themselves, yet they may help us forward to better things. The
   apostle indeed telleth us, "that bodily exercise profiteth little:" but
   he seems not to affirm that it is altogether useless; it is always good
   to be doing what we can, for then God is wont to pity our weakness, and
   assist our feeble endeavours; and when true charity and humility, and
   other graces of the divine Spirit, come to take root in our souls, they
   will exert themselves more freely, and with less difficulty, if we have
   before been accustomed to express them in our outward conversations.
   Nor need we fear the imputation of hypocrisy; though our actions do
   thus somewhat outrun our affections, seeing they do still proceed from
   a sense of our duty; and our design is not to appear better than we
   are, but that we may really become so.

   But as inward acts have a more immediate influence on the soul, to
   mould it to a right temper and frame, so ought we to be most frequent
   and sedulous in the exercise of them. Let us be often lifting up our
   hearts toward God; and if we do not say that we love him above all
   things, let us at least acknowledge, that it is our duty, and would be
   our happiness, so to do: let us lament the dishonour done to him by
   foolish and sinful men, and applaud the praises and adorations that are
   given him by that blessed and glorious company above: let us resign and
   yield ourselves up unto him a thousand times, to be governed by his
   laws, and disposed of at his pleasure; and though our stubborn hearts
   should start back and refuse, yet let us tell him we are convinced that
   his will is always just and good; and, therefore, desire him to do with
   us whatsoever he pleaseth, whether we will or not. And so, for
   begetting in us a universal charity towards men, we must be frequently
   putting up wishes for their happiness, and blessing every person that
   we see; and when we have done any thing for the relief of the
   miserable, we may second it with earnest desires, that God would take
   care of them, and deliver them out of all their distresses.

   Thus should we exercise ourselves unto godliness, and when we are
   employing the powers that we have, the Spirit of God is wont to strike
   in and elevate these acts of our soul beyond the pitch of nature, and
   give them a divine impression; and, after the frequent reiteration of
   these, we shall find ourselves more inclined unto them, they flowing
   with greater freedom and ease.

   I shall mention but two other means for begetting that holy and divine
   temper of spirit which is the subject of the present discourse. And the
   first is, a deep and serious consideration of the truths of our
   religion, and that, both as to the certainty and importance of
   them.--The assent which is ordinarily given to divine truth is very
   faint and languid, very weak and ineffectual, flowing only from a blind
   inclination to follow that religion which is in fashion, or a lazy
   indifferency and unconcernedness whether things be so or not. Men are
   unwilling to quarrel with the religion of their country, and since all
   their neighbours are Christians, they are content to be so too: but
   they are seldom at the pains to consider the evidences of those truths,
   or to ponder the importance and tendency of them; and thence it is that
   they have so little influence on their affections and practice. Those
   "spiritless and paralytic thoughts," (as one doth rightly term them,)
   are not able to move the will, and direct the hand. We must, therefore,
   endeavour to work up our minds to a serious belief and full persuasion
   of divine truths, unto a sense and feeling of spiritual things: our
   thoughts must dwell upon them till we be both convinced of them, and
   deeply affected with them. Let us urge forward our spirits, and make
   them approach the visible world, and fix our minds upon immaterial
   things, till we clearly perceive that these are no dreams; nay, that
   all things are dreams and shadows beside them. When we look about us,
   and behold the beauty and magnificence of this godly frame, the order
   and harmony of the whole creation, let our thoughts from thence take
   their flight towards that omnipotent wisdom and goodness which did at
   first produce, and doth still establish and uphold the same. When we
   reflect upon ourselves, let us consider that we are not a mere piece of
   organized matter, a curious and well-contrived engine; that there is
   more in us than flesh, and blood, and bones, even a divine spark,
   capable to know, and love, and enjoy our Maker; and though it be now
   exceedingly clogged with its dull and lumpish companion, yet ere long
   it shall be delivered, and can subsist without the body, as well as
   that can do without the clothes which we throw off at our pleasure. Let
   us often withdraw our thoughts from this earth, this scene of misery,
   and folly, and sin, and raise them towards that more vast and glorious
   world, whose innocent and blessed inhabitants solace themselves
   eternally in the divine presence, and know no other passions, but an
   unmixed joy and an unbounded love. And then consider how the blessed
   Son of God came down to this lower world to live among us, and die for
   us, that he might bring us to a portion of the same felicity; and think
   how he hath overcome the sharpness of death, and opened the kingdom of
   heaven to all believers, and is now set down on the right hand of the
   Majesty on high, and yet is not the less mindful of us, but receiveth
   our prayers, and presenteth them unto his Father, and is daily visiting
   his church with the influences of his Spirit, as the sun reacheth us
   with his beams.

   The serious and frequent consideration of these, and such other divine
   truths, is the most proper method to beget that lively faith which is
   the foundation of religion, the spring and root of the divine life. Let
   me further suggest some particular subjects of meditation for producing
   the several branches of it. And, first, To inflame our souls with the
   love of God, let us consider the excellency of his nature, and his love
   and kindness towards us. It is little we know of the divine
   perfections; and yet that little may suffice to fill our souls with
   admiration and love, to ravish our affections, as well as to raise our
   wonder; for we are not merely creatures of sense, that we should be
   incapable of any other affection but that which entereth by the eyes.
   The character of any excellent person whom we have never seen, will
   many times engage our hearts, and make us hugely concerned in all his
   interests. And what is it, I pray you, that engages us so much to those
   with whom we converse? I cannot think that is merely the colour of
   their face, in their comely proportions, for then we should fall in
   love with statues, and pictures, and flowers. These outward
   accomplishments may a little delight the eye, but would never be able
   to prevail so much on the heart, if they did not represent some vital
   perfection. We either see or apprehend some greatness of mind, or
   vigour of spirit, or sweetness of disposition; some sprightliness, or
   wisdom, or goodness, which charm our spirit and command our love. Now
   these perfections are not obvious to the sight, the eyes can only
   discern the signs and effects of them; and if it be the understanding
   that directs our affection, and vital perfections prevail with it,
   certainly the excellencies of the divine nature (the traces whereof we
   cannot but discover in every thing we behold) would not fail to engage
   our hearts, if we did seriously view and regard them. Shall we not be
   infinitely more transported with that almighty wisdom and goodness
   which fills the universe, and displays itself in all the parts of the
   creation, which establisheth the frame of nature, and turneth the
   mighty wheels of Providence, and keepeth the world from disorder and
   ruin, than with the faint rays of the very same perfections which we
   meet with in our fellow-creatures? Shall we dote on the sacred pieces
   of a rude and imperfect picture, and never be affected with the
   original beauty; This were an unaccountable stupidity and blindness.
   Whatever we find lovely in a friend, or in a saint, ought not to
   engross, but to elevate our affections: we should conclude with
   ourselves, that if there be so much sweetness in a drop, there must be
   infinitely more in the fountain; if there be so much splendour in a
   ray, what must the sun be in its glory?

   Nor can we pretend the remoteness of the object, as if God were at too
   great a distance for our converse or our love. "He is not far from
   every one of us; for in him we live, move, and have our being." We
   cannot open our eyes, but we must behold some footsteps of his glory;
   and we cannot turn toward him, but we shall be sure to find his intent
   upon us, waiting as it were to catch a look, ready to entertain the
   most intimate fellowship and communion with us. Let us therefore
   endeavour to raise our minds to the clearest conceptions of the divine
   nature. Let us consider all that his works do declare, or his word doth
   discover of him unto us; and let us especially contemplate that visible
   representation of him which was made in our own nature by his Son, who
   was the "brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person,"
   and who appeared in the world to discover at once what God is, and what
   we ought to be. Let us represent him unto our minds as we find him
   described in the gospel, and there we shall behold the perfections of
   the divine nature, though covered with the vail of human infirmities;
   and when we have framed unto ourselves the clearest notion that we can
   of a Being infinite in power, in wisdom, and goodness, the Author and
   fountain of all perfections, let us fix the eyes of our souls upon it,
   that our eyes may affect our heart--and while we are musing the fire
   will burn.

   Especially, if we hereunto add the consideration of God's favour and
   good-will towards us; nothing is more powerful to engage our affection,
   than to find that we are beloved. Expressions of kindness are always
   pleasing and acceptable unto us, though the person should be otherwise
   mean and contemptible; but to have the love of one who is altogether
   lovely, to know that the glorious Majesty of heaven hath any regard
   unto us, how must it astonish and delight us, how must it overcome our
   spirits, and melt our hearts, and put our whole soul into a flame! Now,
   as the word of God is full of the expressions of his love towards men,
   so all his works do loudly proclaim it. He gave us our being, and, by
   preserving us in it, doth renew the donation every moment. He hath
   placed us in a rich and well-furnished world, and liberally provided
   for all our necessities. He raineth down blessings from heaven upon us,
   and causeth the earth to bring forth our provision. He giveth us our
   food and raiment, and while we are spending the productions of one
   year, he is preparing for us against another. He sweeteneth our lives
   with innumerable comforts, and gratifieth every faculty with suitable
   objects. The eye of his providence is always upon us, and he watcheth
   for our safety when we are fast asleep, neither minding him nor
   ourselves. But, lest we should think these testimonies of his kindness
   less considerable, because they are the easy issues of his omnipotent
   power, and do not put him to any trouble or pain, he hath taken a more
   wonderful method to endear himself to us: he hath testified his
   affection to us by suffering as well as by doing; and because he could
   not suffer in his own nature he assumed ours. The eternal Son of God
   did clothe himself with the infirmities of our flesh, and left the
   company of those innocent and blessed spirits who knew well how to love
   and adore him, that he might dwell among men, and wrestle with the
   obstinacy of that rebellious race, to reduce them to their allegiance
   and felicity, and then to offer himself up as a sacrifice and
   propitiation for them. I remember one of the poets hath an ingenious
   fancy to express the passion wherewith he found himself overcome after
   a long resistance: that the god of love had shot all his golden arrows
   at him, but could never pierce his heart, till at length he put himself
   into the bow, and darted himself straight into his breast. Methinks
   this doth some way adumbrate God's method of dealing with men. He had
   long contended with a stubborn world, and thrown down many a blessing
   upon them; and when all his other gifts could not prevail, he at last
   made a gift of himself, to testify his affection and engage theirs. The
   account which we have of our Saviour's life in the gospel, doth all
   along present us with the story of his love: all the pains that he
   took, and the troubles that he endured, were the wonderful effects and
   uncontrollable evidences of it. But, O that last, that dismal scene! Is
   it possible to remember it, and question his kindness, or deny him
   ours? Here, here it is, my dear friend, that we should fix our most
   serious and solemn thoughts, "that Christ may dwell in our hearts by
   faith; that we, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to
   comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
   and heighth; and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge,
   that we may be filled with all the fulness of God."

   We ought also frequently to reflect on those particular tokens of
   favour and love, which God hath bestowed on ourselves; how long he hath
   borne with our follies and sins, and waited to be gracious unto
   us--wrestling, as it were, with the stubbornness of our hearts, and
   essaying every method to reclaim us. We should keep a register in our
   minds of all the eminent blessings and deliverances we have met with,
   some whereof have been so conveyed, that we might clearly perceive they
   were not the issues of chance, but the gracious effects of the divine
   favour, and the signal returns of our prayers. Nor ought we to imbitter
   the thoughts of these things with any harsh or unworthy suspicions, as
   if they were designed on purpose to enhance our guilt, and heighten our
   eternal damnation. No, no, my friend, God is love, and he hath no
   pleasure in the ruin of his creatures. If they abuse his goodness, and
   turn his grace into wantonness, and thereby plunge themselves into the
   greater depth of guilt and misery, this is the effect of their
   obstinate wickedness, and not the design of those benefits which he
   bestows.

   If these considerations had once begotten in our hearts a real love and
   affection towards almighty God, that would easily lead us unto the
   other branches of religion; and, therefore, I shall need say the less
   of them.

   We shall find our hearts enlarged in charity toward men, by considering
   the relation wherein they stand unto God, and the impresses of his
   image which are stamped upon them. They are not only his creatures, the
   workmanship of his hands, but such of whom he taketh special care, and
   for whom he hath a very dear and tender regard, having laid the designs
   of their happiness before the foundations of the world, and being
   willing to live and converse with them in all the ages of eternity. The
   meanest and most contemptible person whom we behold is the offspring of
   heaven, one of the children of the Most High; and however unworthy he
   might behave himself of that relation, so long as God hath not
   abdicated and disowned him by a final sentence, he will have us to
   acknowledge him as one of him, and as such to embrace him with a
   sincere and cordial affection. You know what a great concernment we are
   wont to have for those that do any ways belong to the person whom we
   love; how gladly we lay hold on every opportunity to gratify the child
   or servant of a friend; and sure our love towards God would as
   naturally spring forth in charity towards men, did we mind the interest
   that he is pleased to take in them, and consider that every soul is
   dearer unto him than all the material world; and that he did not
   account the blood of his Son too great a price for their redemption.

   Again, as all men stand in a near relation to God, so they have still
   so much of his image stamped on them as may oblige and excite us to
   love them. In some, this image is more eminent and conspicuous, and we
   can discern the lovely traces of wisdom and goodness; and though in
   others it may be miserably sullied and defaced, yet it is not
   altogether razed--some lineaments at least do still remain. All men are
   endowed with rational and immortal souls, with understandings and wills
   capable of the highest and most exalted things; and if they be at
   present disordered, and put out of tune by wickedness and folly, this
   may indeed move our compassion, but ought not, in reason, to extinguish
   our love. When we see a person of a rugged humour and perverse
   disposition, full of malice and dissimulation, very foolish and very
   proud, it is hard to fall in love with an object that presents itself
   unto us under an idea so little grateful and lovely. But when we shall
   consider these evil qualities as the diseases and distempers of a soul,
   which, in itself, is capable of all that wisdom and goodness wherewith
   the best of saints have ever been adorned, and which may, one day, come
   to be raised to such heights of perfection as shall render it a fit
   companion for the holy angels; this will turn our aversion into pity,
   and make us behold him with such resentments as we should have when we
   look upon a beautiful body that were mangled with wounds, or disfigured
   by some loathsome disease; and however we hate the vices, we shall not
   cease to love the man.

   In the next place, for purifying our souls, and disentangling our
   affections from the pleasures and enjoyments of this lower life, let us
   frequently ponder the excellency and dignity of our nature, and what a
   shameful and unworthy thing it is for so noble and divine a creature as
   the soul of man, to be sunk and immersed in brutish and sensual lusts,
   or amused with airy and fantastical delights, and so to lose the relish
   of solid and spiritual pleasures; that the best should be fed and
   pampered, and the man and the Christian be starved in us. Did we but
   mind who we are, and for what we were made, this would teach us, in a
   right sense, to reverence and stand in awe of ourselves; it would beget
   a modesty and shamefacedness, and make us very shy and reserved in the
   use of the most innocent and allowable pleasures.

   It will be very effectual to the same purpose, that we frequently raise
   our minds towards heaven, and represent to our thoughts the joys that
   are at God's right hand, those pleasures that endure for evermore; "for
   every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is
   pure." If our heavenly country be much in our thoughts, it will make us
   as "strangers and pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lust, which war
   against the soul," and keep ourselves unspotted from this world, that
   we may be fit for the enjoyments and felicities of the other. But then
   we must see that our notions of heaven be not gross and carnal, that we
   dream not of a Mahometan paradise, nor rest on those metaphors and
   similitudes by which these joys are sometimes represented: for this
   might perhaps have a quite contrary effect; it might entangle us
   farther in carnal affections, and we should be ready to indulge
   ourselves in a very liberal foretaste of those pleasures wherein we had
   placed our everlasting felicity. But when we come once to conceive
   aright of those pure and spiritual pleasures; when the happiness we
   propose to ourselves is from the sight, and love, and enjoyment of God,
   and our minds are filled with the hopes and forethoughts of that
   blessed estate; O how mean and contemptible will all things here below
   appear in our eyes! With what disdain shall we reject the gross and
   muddy pleasures that would deprive us of those celestial enjoyments, or
   any way unfit and indispose us for them!

   The last branch of religion is humility, and sure we can never want
   matter of consideration for begetting it. All our wickednesses and
   imperfections, all our follies and our sins, may help to pull down that
   fond and overweening conceit which we are apt to entertain of
   ourselves. That which makes any body esteem us, is their knowledge or
   apprehension of some little good, and their ignorance of a great deal
   of evil that may be in us; were they thoroughly acquainted with us,
   they would quickly change their opinion. The thoughts that pass in our
   hearts, in the best and most serious day of our life, being exposed
   unto public view, would render us either hateful or ridiculous. And
   now, however we conceal our failings from one another, yet sure we are
   conscious of them ourselves, and some serious reflections upon them
   would much qualify and allay the vanity of our spirits. Thus holy men
   have come really to think worse of themselves, than of any other person
   in the world: not but that they knew that gross and scandalous vices
   are, in their nature, more heinous than the surprisals of temptations
   and infirmity; but because they were much more intent on their own
   miscarriages than on those of their neighbours, and did consider all
   the aggravations of the one, and every thing that might be supposed to
   diminish and alleviate the other.

   But it is well observed by a pious writer, that the deepest and most
   pure humility doth not so much arise from the consideration of our own
   faults and defects, as from a calm and quiet contemplation of the
   divine purity and goodness. Our spots never appear so clearly, as when
   we place them before this infinite light; and we never seem less in our
   own eyes, than when we look down upon ourselves from on high. O how
   little, how nothing, do all these shadows of perfection then appear,
   for which we are wont to value ourselves! That humility, which cometh
   from a view of our own sinfulness and misery, is more turbulent and
   boisterous; but the other layeth us full as low, and wanteth nothing of
   that anguish and vexation wherewith our souls are apt to boil, when
   they are the nearest objects of our thoughts.

   There remains yet another means for begetting a holy and religious
   disposition in the soul, and that is, fervent and hearty prayer.
   Holiness is the gift of God--indeed the greatest gift he doth bestow,
   or we are capable to recieve; and he hath promised his Holy Spirit to
   those who ask it of him. In prayer we make the nearest approaches to
   God, and lie open to the influences of heaven; then it is that the Sun
   of Righteousness doth visit us with his directest rays, and dissipateth
   our darkness, and imprinteth his image on our souls. I cannot now
   insist on the advantages of this exercise, or the disposition wherewith
   it ought to be performed; and there is no need I should, there being so
   many books that treat on this subject. I shall only tell you, that as
   there is one sort of prayer wherein we make use of the voice, which is
   necessary in public, and may sometimes have its own advantages in
   private; and another, wherein though we utter no sound, yet we conceive
   the expressions, and form the words, as it were, in our minds; so there
   is a third and more sublime kind of prayer, wherein the soul takes a
   higher flight, and having collected all its forces by long and serious
   meditation, it darteth itself (if I may so speak) towards God in sighs
   and groans, and thoughts too big for expression. As when, after a deep
   contemplation of the divine perfections appearing in all his works of
   wonder, it addresseth itself unto him in the profoundest adoration of
   his majesty and glory: for, when after sad reflections on its vileness
   and miscarriages, it prostrates itself before him with the greatest
   confusion and sorrow, not daring to lift up its eyes, or utter one word
   in his presence; or when, having well considered the beauty of
   holiness, and the unspeakable felicity of those that are truly good, it
   panteth after God, and sendeth up such vigorous and ardent desires as
   no words can sufficiently express, continuing and repeating each of
   these acts, as long as it finds itself upheld by the force and impulse
   of the previous meditation.

   This mental prayer is of all others the most effectual to purify the
   soul, and dispose it unto a holy and religious temper, and may be
   termed the great secret of devotion, and one of the most powerful
   instruments of the divine life; and, it may be, the apostle hath a
   peculiar respect unto it, when he saith, that "the Spirit helpeth our
   infirmities, making intercession for us with groanings that cannot be
   uttered," or, as the original may bear, "that cannot be worded." Yet I
   do not so recommend this sort of prayer, as to supersede the use of the
   other; for we have so many several things to pray for, and every
   petition of this nature requireth so much time, and so great an
   attention of spirit, that it were not easy therein to overtake them
   all: to say nothing, that the deep sighs and heavings of the heart,
   which are wont to accompany it, are something oppressive to nature, and
   make it hard to continue long in them. But certainly a few of these
   inward aspirations will do more than a great many fluent and melting
   expressions.


   Thus, my dear friend, I have briefly proposed the method which I judge
   proper for moulding the soul into a holy frame; and the same means
   which serve to beget this divine temper, must still be practiced for
   strengthening and advancing it: and therefore I shall recommend but one
   more for that purpose, and it is the frequent and conscientious use of
   that holy sacrament, which is peculiarly appointed to nourish and
   increase spiritual life, when once it is begun in the soul. All the
   instruments of religion do meet together in this ordinance; and while
   we address ourselves unto it, we are put to practice all the rules
   which were mentioned before. Then it is that we make the severest
   survey of our actions, and lay the strictest obligations on ourselves;
   then are our minds raised up to the highest contempt of the world, and
   every grace doth exercise itself with the greatest activity and vigour;
   all the subjects of contemplation do there present themselves unto us
   with the greatest advantage; and then, if ever, doth the soul make its
   most powerful sallies toward heaven, and assault it with a holy and
   acceptable force. And certainly the neglect or careless performance of
   this duty, is one of the chief causes that bedwarfs our religion, and
   makes us continue of so low a size.

   But it is time I should put a close to this letter, which is grown to a
   far greater bulk than at first intended. If these poor papers can do
   you the smallest service, I shall think myself very happy in this
   undertaking; at least I am hopeful you will kindly accept the sincere
   endeavors of a person who would fain acquit himself of some part of
   that which he owes you.

    A PRAYER.

   And now, O most gracious God, Father and Fountain of mercy and
   goodness, who has blessed us with the knowledge of our happiness, and
   the way that leadeth unto it! excite in our souls such ardent desires
   after the one, as may put us forth to the diligent prosecution of the
   other. Let us neither presume on our own strength, nor distrust thy
   divine assistance: but while we are doing our utmost endeavours, teach
   us still to depend on thee for success. Open our eyes, O God, and teach
   us out of thy law. Bless us with an exact and tender sense of our duty,
   and a knowledge to discern perverse things. O that our ways were
   directed to keep thy statutes, then shall we not be ashamed when we
   have respect unto all thy commandments. Possess our hearts with a
   generous and holy disdain of all those poor enjoyments which this world
   holdeth out to allure us, that they may never be able to inveigle our
   affections, or betray us to any sin: turn away our eyes from beholding
   vanity, and quicken thou us in thy law. Fill our souls with such a deep
   sense, and full persuasion of those great truths which thou hast
   revealed in the gospel, as may influence and regulate our whole
   conversation; and that the life which we henceforth live in the flesh,
   we may life through faith in the Son of God. O that the infinite
   perfections of thy blessed nature, and the astonishing expressions of
   thy goodness and love, may conquer and overpower our hearts, that they
   may be constantly rising toward thee in flames of devoutest affection,
   and enlarging themselves in sincere and cordial love towards all the
   world for thy sake; and that we may cleanse ourselves from all
   filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in thy fear,
   without which we can never hope to behold and enjoy thee. Finally, O
   God! grant that the consideration of what thou art, and what we
   ourselves are, may both humble and lay us low before thee, and also
   stir up in us the strongest and most ardent aspiration towards thee. We
   desire to resign and give up ourselves to the conduct of thy Holy
   Spirit; lead us in thy truth, and teach us, for thou art the God of our
   salvation; guide us with thy counsel, and afterwards recieve us unto
   glory, for the merits and intercession of thy blessed Son our Saviour.
   Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [1]37  [2]38  [3]39  [4]40  [5]41  [6]42  [7]43  [8]44  [9]45  [10]46
   [11]47  [12]48  [13]49  [14]50  [15]51  [16]52  [17]53  [18]54  [19]55
   [20]56  [21]57  [22]58  [23]59  [24]60  [25]61  [26]62  [27]63  [28]64
   [29]65  [30]66  [31]67  [32]68  [33]69  [34]70  [35]71  [36]72  [37]73
   [38]74  [39]75  [40]76  [41]77  [42]78  [43]79  [44]80  [45]81  [46]82
   [47]83  [48]84  [49]85  [50]86  [51]87  [52]88  [53]89  [54]90  [55]91
   [56]92  [57]93  [58]94  [59]95  [60]96  [61]97  [62]98  [63]99
   [64]100  [65]101  [66]102  [67]103  [68]104  [69]105  [70]106  [71]107
   [72]108  [73]109  [74]110  [75]111  [76]112  [77]113
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#i-Page_37
   2. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_38
   3. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_39
   4. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_40
   5. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_41
   6. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_42
   7. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_43
   8. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_44
   9. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_45
  10. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_46
  11. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_47
  12. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_48
  13. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_49
  14. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_50
  15. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_51
  16. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_52
  17. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_53
  18. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_54
  19. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_55
  20. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_56
  21. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_57
  22. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#ii-Page_58
  23. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_59
  24. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_60
  25. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_61
  26. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_62
  27. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_63
  28. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_64
  29. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_65
  30. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_66
  31. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_67
  32. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_68
  33. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_69
  34. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_70
  35. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_71
  36. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_72
  37. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_73
  38. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_74
  39. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iii-Page_75
  40. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_76
  41. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_77
  42. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_78
  43. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_79
  44. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_80
  45. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_81
  46. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_82
  47. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_83
  48. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_84
  49. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_85
  50. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_86
  51. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_87
  52. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_88
  53. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_89
  54. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_90
  55. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_91
  56. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_92
  57. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_93
  58. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_94
  59. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_95
  60. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_96
  61. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_97
  62. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_98
  63. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_99
  64. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_100
  65. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_101
  66. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_102
  67. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_103
  68. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_104
  69. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_105
  70. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_106
  71. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_107
  72. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_108
  73. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_109
  74. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_110
  75. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_111
  76. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_112
  77. file:///ccel/s/scougal/life/cache/life.html3#iv-Page_113
