     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The History of the Origins of Christianity. Book VII.
                  Marcus-Aurelius.
      Creator(s): Renan, Ernest.
   CCEL Subjects: All; History
     __________________________________________________________________

THE HISTORY

  OF THE

                            ORIGINS OF CHRISTIANITY.

BOOK VII.

MARCUS--AURELIUS.

  BY

ERNEST RENAN

    MEMBER OF THE FRENCH ACADEMY.

London:

MATHIESON & COMPANY

25, Paternoster Square. E.C.
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE.

   This volume closes the series of essays which I have dedicated to the
   History of the Origins of Christianity. It contains the exhibition of
   the development of the Church during the reign of Marcus-Aurelius, and
   the parallel picture of the efforts of philosophy to improve civil
   society. The second century of our era has had the double glory of
   definitely founding Christianity--that is to say, the grand principle
   which has wrought the reformation of manners by faith in the
   supernatural, and of unrolling, thanks to stoical teaching and without
   any element of the marvellous, the finest attempt of the laic school of
   virtue which the world has known till now. These two attempts were
   strangers to each other, and rather contradict than aid each other
   reciprocally; but the triumph of Christianity is only explicable when
   we have taken account of what there was of force and of insufficiency
   in the philosophical attempt. Marcus-Aurelius is on this point the
   subject of study to which we must constantly refer. He sums up all that
   there was of good in the ancient world, and he offers criticism this
   advantage, of presenting himself to it unveiled, thanks to a writing of
   an uncontested sincerity and authenticity.

   More than ever do I think that the period of the beginning, if we might
   so express it, closed at the death of Marcus-Aurelius, in 180. At that
   data the child had all its organs: it is separated from its mother; it
   shall henceforth live its own life. The death of Marcus-Aurelius could
   have been considered as marking the end of ancient civilisation. What
   good has been done after that, has been done by the Helleno-Roman
   principle; the Judæo-Syrian principle gains, and, although more than a
   hundred years shall pass away before its final triumph, we see well
   already that the future is its own. The third century is the agony of a
   world, which, in the second century, is still full of life and energy.

   Far from me be the thought of lowering the ages which follow the epoch
   with which I have closed my work. These are sad days in history: there
   are no days barren and without interest. The development of
   Christianity remains a spectacle highly interesting, while the
   Christian Churches count such men as St. Irenæus, Clement of
   Alexandria, Tertullian, and Origen. The development of Christianity,
   which was wrought at Rome and in Africa, in the time of St. Cyprian,
   and of Pope Cornelius, ought to be studied with the most extreme care.
   The martyrs of the time of Decius and Diocletian do not yield in
   heroism to those of Rome, Smyrna, and Lyons the first and second
   centuries. But it is there we have what is called Ecclesiastical
   History--a history eminently curious and worthy of being written with
   love and all the refinements of the most attentive science, but
   essentially distinct, nevertheless, from the history of Christian
   origins--that is to say, of the analysis of the successive
   transformations which the germ laid by Jesus in the bosom of humanity
   has submitted to before becoming a complete and durable Church. Its
   needs methods quite different to treat the different ages of a grand
   formation, whether religious or political. The investigation of these
   origins supposes a philosophical mind--a lively intuition of what is
   certain, probable, or plausible--a profound sentiment of life and
   metamorphoses, a special art in drawing from rare texts all they
   possess, all that which, in fact, they include of revelations as to
   psychological situations far removed from us. In the history of an
   already complete institution, such as is the Christian Church in the
   third century, and with greater reasons in the following ages, the
   qualities of judgment and solid erudition of a Tillemont nearly
   suffice. That is why the seventeenth century, which has made such great
   progress in ecclesiastical history, has never taken up the problem of
   its origin. The seventeenth century had no taste but for that which can
   be expressed with the appearances of certainty. Such a search, of which
   the result cannot but be to meet possibilities, flying clouds--such a
   narration, which is forbidden to tell how a thing has passed, but which
   is limited to say: "These are one or two of the ways in which it can be
   imagined that the thing has taken place," could not be to its taste. In
   presence of the questions of origin, the seventeenth century either
   took all with an artless credulity, or suppressed what it felt to be
   half fabulous. The knowledge of obscure conditions, anterior to the
   clear reflection, that is to say, rightly of conditions where the human
   conscience shows itself especially creative and fertile, is the
   intellectual question of the nineteenth century. I have sought, without
   any other motive than a very lively curiosity, to make the application
   of the methods of criticism which have prevailed in our days in those
   delicate matters in the most important religious appearance which had a
   place in history. Since my youth I have been preparing this work. The
   edition of seven volumes to compose, which has taken me twenty years.
   The general index which will appear at the same time as this volume
   will permit these being found easily in a work which it did not depend
   on me to render less complex and less charged with details.

   I thank the infinite Goodness for the time and necessary ardour to
   accomplish this difficult purpose. If there should remain to me some
   years of work, I shall dedicate them to complete from another side the
   subject which I have made the centre of my reflections. To be strictly
   logical, I should have begun a History of the Origin of Christianity by
   a history of the Jewish people. Christianity commences in the eighth
   century B.C., at the moment when the great prophets, taking up the
   people of Israel, made of it the people of God, charged to inaugurate
   in the world the pure religion. Up till then the worship of Israel had
   not essentially differed from that egotistical, self-interested cult
   which was that of all the tribes and nations, and which is revealed to
   us in the inscription of King Mesha, for example. A revolution was
   accomplished when an imprisoned man, not belonging to the priesthood,
   said: "Can we believe God will be pleased with the smoke of your
   victims or with the fat of your bullocks? Leave then these sacrifices,
   which only disgrace, and do good." Isaiah is in that sense the first
   founder of Christianity. Jesus has not really said, in popular and
   charming language, what 750 years before him had been said in the
   Hebrew classic. To show how the religion of Israel, which in its origin
   had not perhaps any superiority over the religion of Ammon or Moab,
   became a moral religion, and how the religious history of the Jews has
   been a constant progress towards worship in spirit and in truth, that
   is what would need to be shown before introducing Jesus upon the scene
   of the facts. But life is short, and its duration uncertain. I
   therefore betook myself to the most pressing of them: I threw myself
   into the midst of the subject, and commenced with the Life of Jesus,
   holding for well-known the former revolutions of the Jewish religion.
   Now that it has been given me to treat, with all the care I desired,
   that part on which I laid the greatest value, it shall be my care to go
   back to the earlier history, and dedicate to it what still remains to
   me of force and energy.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                MARCUS-AURELIUS

  AND THE

                           END OF THE ANCIENT WORLD.

CHAPTER I.

  ADVENT OF MARCUS-AURELIUS.

   Antoninus died 7th March, 161, in his palace of Lorium, with the
   calmness of an accomplished sage. When he felt death approaching, he,
   like a plain individual, put his family affairs in order, and commanded
   to be transferred into the chamber of his adopted son, Marcus-Aurelius,
   the golden statue of Fortune which had hitherto always stood in the
   apartment of the emperor. To the Tribune in attendance he gave the
   watchword Æquanimitas; then, turning himself, he appeared to fall
   asleep. Every order of the State rivalled each other in doing homage to
   his memory. There were established in his honour priesthoods, games,
   and societies. His piety, his clemency, and his holiness were the
   subjects of unusual eulogiums.

   It was remarked that during the whole of his reign he had not caused to
   be shed a drop of Roman blood, nor a drop of blood of foreigners. In
   piety, in his religious observance of ceremonies, as well as in the
   happiness and security he had been able to give to the empire, he was
   compared to Numa.

   Antoninus would have had the reputation of being the best of sovereigns
   if he had not designated for his successor a man equal to himself in
   goodness and in modesty--one who joined to these shining qualities
   talent, and a charm which make an image to live in the recollection of
   mankind. Simple, amiable, full of sweet gaiety, Antoninus was a
   philosopher without pretending to be so, and almost without knowing it.
   Marcus-Aurelius was a philosopher whose humanity and sincerity were
   admirable, but yet reflective. In this respect Antoninus was the
   greater. His kindness did not lead him to commit mistakes. He was not
   tormented by the evil instincts which gnawed at the heart of his
   adopted son. That extraneous evil, that restless study of self, that
   demon of scrupulousness, that fever of perfection, are the indications
   of a nature less strong than distinguished. The most beautiful thoughts
   are those which men do not commit to writing; but let it be added that
   we should have known nothing of Antoninus if Marcus-Aurelius had not
   handed down to us that exquisite portrait of his adopted father, in
   which he seems, by reason of humility, to have applied himself to paint
   an image superior to what he himself was, Antoninus resembled a Christ
   who would not have had an Evangel; Marcus-Aurelius a Christ who would
   have written his own.

   It is the glory of sovereignty that two models of irreproachable virtue
   are to be found in its ranks, and that the most beautiful lessons of
   patience and disinterestedness could proceed from a condition which we
   may suppose was unreservedly exposed to all the seductions of pleasure
   and vanity. The throne sometimes is an aid to virtue; and
   Marcus-Aurelius certainly would not have been what he was if it had not
   been that he exercised supreme power. It is the faculties which such an
   exceptional position alone puts into exercise, alongside of the
   reality, which make it appear to better advantage. It is
   disadvantageous to fame when the sovereign, the servant of all, cannot
   allow his genius to have free scope; but such a situation, when there
   is brought to bear on it an elevated soul, is very favourable to the
   development of the individual genius and talent which constitute the
   moralist. The sovereign really worthy of the name observes humanity
   from his exalted position in the most complete manner. His point of
   view resembles that of the philosophical historian--that which results
   from those sweeping glances cast over our poor species; it is a sweet
   sentiment mixed with resignation, piety, and hope. The cold severity of
   an artist cannot belong to a sovereign. The first condition of art is
   freedom; but the sovereign, subjected as he is to the prejudices of
   middle-class society, is the least free of men. He has not the right to
   his own opinions; he has hardly any right to his own tastes. A crowned
   Goethe even could not avow that royal disdain for bourgeois ideas, that
   haughty indifference to practical results, which are the essential
   characteristics of the artist; but one can imagine the mind of a good
   sovereign like that of a sympathetic Goethe, a Goethe converted to the
   good, brought to see that there is something greater than art, led to
   estimate men by the habitual nobleness of his thoughts and by the
   feeling of his own happiness.

   Such were these two admirable sovereigns, Antoninus the Pious and
   Marcus-Aurelius, at the head of the greatest empire that ever existed.
   History only presents another example of this heredity of wisdom upon
   the throne, in the persons of the three great Mogul emperors, Baber,
   Humaïoun, Akbar, the latter of whom shows, when compared with
   Marcus-Aurelius, some traits of striking resemblance. The salutary
   principle of adoption had made of the imperial court, in the second
   century, a true nursery of virtue. The noble and learned Nerva, in
   establishing that principle, assured the happiness of the human species
   for nearly three hundred years, and gave to the world the most
   beautiful century of progress which has been conserved by the memory of
   man.

   It is Marcus-Aurelius himself who has sketched for us in the first book
   of his Thoughts this latter admirable plan, in which we see moving, in
   a celestial light, the noble and pure features of his father, mother,
   ancestors and masters. Thanks to him, we can comprehend what the old
   Roman families, who had witnessed the reign of the bad emperors,
   guarded still of honesty, dignity, right, the civil spirit, and, if I
   may say so, republican. People lived there in the admiration of Cato,
   of Brutus, of Thraseas, and of the great Stoics, whose souls had not
   been subjugated by tyranny. The reign of Domitian was there abhorred.
   The sages who opposed him without flinching were honoured as heroes.
   The advent of the Antonines was only the succession to power of the
   society whose just colours Tacitus has handed down to us, a society of
   sages brought into existence by the league of all those who had
   revolted against the despotism of the first Cæsars.

   Neither the oriental pomps of some oriental royalties, founded upon the
   baseness and the stupidity of men, nor the pedantic pride of the
   royalties of the middle ages, founded upon an exaggerated sentiment of
   heredity, and upon the simple faith of the Germanic races in the rights
   of blood, can give us an idea of this wholly republican sovereignty of
   Nerva, of Trajan, of Hadrian, of Antoninus, and of Marcus-Aurelius.
   There was nothing of the hereditary prince or of right divine; none of
   the military captain; it was a kind of grand civil magistrature, with
   nothing which resembled a court, nor which stripped the emperor of his
   individual character. Marcus-Aurelius was neither little nor much of a
   king in the proper sense of the term; his fortune was immense, but
   consisted wholly of patrimony; his aversion to the Cæsars (the emperors
   before Nerva), whom he regarded as a species of Sardanapalus,
   magnificent, debauched and cruel, appeared at every minute of his life.
   The civility of his manners was perfection; he gave back to the Senate
   the whole of its ancient importance; when he was at Rome he never
   missed a sitting, nor quitted his place until the Consul had pronounced
   the formula: Nihil vos moramur, Patres conscripti.

   The sovereignty thus possessed in common by a group of the élite of
   men, which bound them together or separated them, according to the
   exigencies of the moment, lost a part of that attraction which renders
   it so dangerous. One reached the throne without having to canvass for
   it, but also without owing it to birth or to a kind of abstract right;
   one attained to it undeceived, wearied of men, prepared by long
   authority. The empire was a burden, which one accepted when one's hour
   came, without one's dreaming of precipitating that hour.
   Marcus-Aurelius was designated for it so young that the idea of
   reigning had hardly any commencement, and did not exercise over his
   mind a moment's seduction. At eight years old, when he was already
   proesul of the Salic priests, Hadrian remarked this brooding, sweet
   child, and loved him for his good nature, his docility, and his
   incapacity to lie. At ten years old, the empire was assured to him. He
   waited patiently for it for twenty-two years. The evening on which
   Antoninus felt himself to be dying, and caused to be carried into his
   chamber the statue of Fortune, had for him neither surprise nor joy. He
   had for a long time been surfeited by the joys which he had never
   tasted; he had, by reason of the profoundness of his philosophy,
   perceived their absolute vanity.

   His youth had been tranquil and pleasant, divided between the pleasures
   of the country, exercises in Latin rhetoric in the slightly frivolous
   manner of his master Fronto, and philosophical meditations. Greek
   pedagogy had attained its perfection, and, as happens in these sort of
   things, perfection was approaching decadence. The lettered men and the
   philosophers were divided in opinion, and were engaged in ardent
   combat. The rhetoricians dreamed only of affected ornaments of
   discourse; philosophers favoured almost baldness and negligence of
   expression. In spite of his friendship for Fronto, and his adjurations
   against the latter, Marcus-Aurelius was soon an adept in philosophy.
   Junius Rusticus became his favourite master, and won him wholly over to
   the severe discipline which he opposed to the ostentation of the
   rhetoricians. Rusticus continued to be the confidant and the intimate
   counsellor of his august pupil, who acknowledged having received from
   him his taste for a simple style, for a demeanour noble and serious,
   not to mention a still superior benefit, to wit: "I am indebted to him
   for my knowledge of he Conversations of Epictetus,' which he lent me
   from his own library." Claudius Severus, the peripatetic, laboured to
   the same end, and ultimately led young Marcus to philosophy. Marcus had
   a habit of calling him his brother, and appeared to have had for him a
   deep attachment.

   Philosophy was at that time a kind of religious profession, implying
   mortification and rules almost monastic. From the age of twelve Marcus
   assumed the philosophic mantle, learned to sleep upon a hard bed and to
   practise all the austerities of ascetic stoicism. It required his
   mother on several occasions to induce him to spread a few skins upon
   his couch. His health was more than once affected by this excessive
   rigour. But that did not prevent him from presiding at feasts, or from
   fulfilling his duties as a youthful prince, with that affable air which
   in him was the result of the greatest disinterestedness.

   His hours were as strict as those of a religious recluse. In spite of
   his feeble health, he could, thanks to the sobriety of his régime and
   to the strictness of his morals, lead a life of labour and fatigue. He
   had not what is called esprit, and he had very little passion. Esprit
   rarely succeeds apart from a certain amount of malignity. It is
   accustomed to do this by turns which are neither wholly good-natured
   nor troublesome. Marcus understood nothing perfectly--except duty. What
   he lacked was the kissing of a fairy at his birth, a thing quite
   philosophical in its way; I mean, the art of unbending to nature and to
   gaiety, which teaches that abstinence and sustenance are not
   everything, and that life might as well be summed up in "laughter and
   mirth."

   In every art he had for masters the most eminent professors. Claudius
   Severus instructed him in peripateticism; Apollonius of Chalcis was
   brought expressly from the East by Antoninus to take charge of his
   adopted son, who appears to have been a perfect preceptor; Sextus of
   Cheronea, the nephew of Plutarch, the accomplished stoic; Diognetus,
   who trained him to love asceticism; Claudius Maximus, always brimful of
   fine sentences; Alexander of Cotyus, who taught him Greek; Herodus
   Atticus, who recited to him the ancient harangues of Athens. His
   exterior was that of his masters themselves; habits simple and modest,
   beard almost neglected, body attenuated and reduced to a shadow, eyes
   twitching with hard labour. No study, not even that of painting, was
   strange to him. With Greek he was familiar; when he reflected on
   philosophical subjects he thought in that language; but his solid mind
   discovered the folly of literary exercises, in which Hellenic education
   was lost; his Greek style, though correct, has something artificial
   which smells of the midnight oil. Morality was to him the last word of
   existence, and he brought to bear on it constant application.

   How did these respectable pedagogues, none of them of any consequence,
   succeed in forming such a man? This is a question which one asks
   himself with some surprise. To judge of it by the ordinary analogies,
   it had all the appearance that an education so overdone would turn out
   to be the very worst. But to speak the truth, superior to all these
   masters who had been selected from every corner of the globe, Marcus
   had a single master whom he revered above them all; and that was
   Antoninus. The moral value of the man is in proportion to his faculty
   of admiration. It was because Marcus-Aurelius had by his side the most
   beautiful model of a perfect life, and one whom he understood and
   loved, that he became what he was.

   Beware of "Cæarising" or losing your true colour; that approaches.
   Preserve thyself simple, good, pure, grave, the enemy of pomp, the
   friend of justice and religion, benevolent, human, firm in the practice
   of duties. Make every effort to remain such as philosophy would have
   thee do; revere the gods, watch the preservation of men. Life is short,
   the only fruit of earthly life is to maintain one's soul in a holy
   frame, to do actions useful to society. Act always like a disciple of
   Antoninus; recall to thyself his constancy in the accomplishments of
   the prescriptions of reason, the equanimity of his disposition in all
   situations, his holiness, his serenity of countenance, his extreme
   gentleness, his contempt for vain-glory, his determination to penetrate
   the meaning of things; how he never allowed anything to pass before he
   had examined and well understood it; how he bore unjust reproaches
   without recriminating; how he did nothing with precipitation; how he
   would not listen to detractors; how carefully he studied character and
   action; neither spiteful nor fastidious, nor suspicious, nor
   sophistical: content with so little as to house, sleep, garments, food,
   service; laborious, patient, sober, so much so that he could occupy
   himself till night in the same business without having to leave for his
   necessary wants, except at the usual hours. And that friendship always
   constant, equable, and that goodness in supporting contradiction, and
   that joy in receiving counsel better than his own: and that piety
   without superstition! Think of these things, so that the last hour may
   find thee like him, with a consciousness of good accomplished.

   The consequence of this austere philosophy might have produced
   stiffness and severity. But here it was that the rare goodness of the
   nature of Marcus-Aurelius shone out in all its brilliancy. His severity
   was confined only to himself. The fruit of this great tension of mind
   is inexhaustible benevolence. His whole life was a study of how to
   render good for evil. After some sad experience of human perversity, he
   can only contrive in the evening to note down the following: "If thou
   canst do it, correct them; in the contrary case, remember thou how thou
   must act towards those who had bestowed kindness on thee. The gods
   themselves are benevolent to these creatures; they aid them (so great
   is their bounty!), bestow on them health, riches, and glory; to thee it
   is permitted to do as the gods." Another day men were very wicked; for
   here is what he writes on his tablets: "Such is the order of nature:
   some men of that sort must, of necessity, act thus. To wish that it be
   otherwise is to wish that the fig-tree should produce no figs. Remember
   thou, in a word, this: In a very short time thou and he will die; soon
   after, your names will be remembered no more." These reflections on
   universal forgiveness recur continually.

   It is on rare occasions that he mixes with that superlative kindness an
   imperceptible smile. "The best way to revenge oneself on the wicked is
   not to render them like for like," or, with a soft emphasis of pride:
   "It is a royal thing, when one does good, to remember the evil that is
   in himself." One day he has to reproach himself: "Thou hast forgotten
   that this holy relationship re-unites each man with the human species;
   a relationship not of blood and of birth, but a participation in the
   same intelligence. Thou hast forgotten that the reasonable soul of each
   person is a god, a thing derived from the Supreme Being."

   In the business of life he must have been exquisite, though, no doubt,
   a little simple, like the majority of men who are very good. He was
   sincerely humble, without hypocrisy, make-believe, or studied deceit.
   One of the maxims of the excellent emperor was that the wicked are
   unhappy, that one is wicked only in spite of himself and through
   ignorance; he grieves for those who are not like himself; he did not
   believe in the right of imposing on them.

   He perceived clearly the baseness of men, but he did not avow it. This
   habit of blinding oneself willingly was the defect of the hearts of the
   élite. The world not being such as they would wish it, they deceived
   themselves in order to see it otherwise than it was. Hence he was a
   little lenient in his judgments. With Marcus-Aurelius, this pliableness
   produces in us sometimes a cause of irritation. If we were to believe
   him, his masters, several of whom were mediocre enough, must have been
   without exception superior men. We should have to admit that everybody
   about him was virtuous. It is at such a point as this that we are
   compelled to ask if that brother, upon whom he has made so great an
   eulogium in his acts of thanks to the gods, was not his brother by
   adoption, the debauched Lucius Verus. It is certain that the good
   emperor was capable of gross illusions when the matter in hand was the
   rendering to others their proper meed of virtue.

   No person of sense will deny that his was a great soul. But had he a
   great mind? Yes; since he saw into the infinite depths of duty and of
   conscience. He lacked decision only in one point. He never dared deny
   absolutely the supernatural. We certainly can share his dread of
   atheism; we understand perfectly what he meant when he speaks to us of
   his horror of a world without God and without Providence. But that
   which we little comprehend is when he speaks to us seriously of the
   gods intervening in human affairs through the will of particular
   persons. The meagreness of his scientific education can alone explain
   such weakness. To protect himself from vulgar errors, he had neither
   the nimbleness of Hadrian nor the adroitness of Lucian. But it must be
   added that those errors were in him of no consequence. The supernatural
   was not the base of his piety. His religion was limited to some medical
   superstitions, and to a patriotic condescension for old usages. The
   initiations of Eleusis did not appear to have occupied a large place in
   his moral life. His virtue, like that of the present day, rested on
   reason and upon nature. Saint Louis was a very virtuous man, and,
   according to the ideas of his time, a very good sovereign, because he
   was a Christian. Marcus-Aurelius was the most pious of men, not because
   he was a pagan, but because he was an accomplished man. He was the
   embodiment of human nature, and not of a fixed religion. Whatever may
   be the religious and philosophical revolutions of the future, his
   grandeur will not suffer any reproach, for it rests entirely upon that
   which can never perish--upon excellence of heart.

   To live with the gods! He who lives with the gods here shows always a
   mind contented with the lot which has fallen to him, and is obedient to
   the genius which Jupiter has separated, even as it were a part of
   himself, to serve as our director and guide. This genius is the
   intelligence and the reasoning faculty of each one.

   The world is either but chaos--successive aggregation or
   segregation--or it is providence, order, and unity. In the first case,
   why should we desire to remain in such a cloaca? The segregation alone
   will know how to reach me. In the latter case, I adore, I rest myself,
   I have confidence in him who governs.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER II.

  PROGRESS AND REFORMS. THE ROMAN LAW.

   Considered as a sovereign, Marcus-Aurelius was the embodiment of the
   liberal politician. Respect for mankind formed the basis of his
   conduct. He recognised that in the interest of good itself, we ought
   not to impose this good on others in an arbitrary manner, the free play
   of freedom being the first condition of human life. He desired the
   amelioration of mind and not merely physical obedience to the law; he
   sought for the public felicity, but such felicity not to be procured
   through servitude, which is the greatest of errors. His ideal of
   government was wholly republican. The prince was the first subject
   under the law. He was only the lessee and tenant of the wealth of the
   State. He must indulge no useless luxury; be strictly economical; his
   charity real and inexhaustible; easily accessible and affable of
   speech; pursuing in everything the public good, and not public
   applause.

   Some historians, more or less imbued with this polity, which was
   regarded as superior because it assuredly had no connection with any
   philosophy, have endeavoured to prove that a man so accomplished as
   Marcus-Aurelius could but be a bad administrator and a mediocre
   sovereign. It might be, indeed, that Marcus-Aurelius sinned more than
   once through being too indulgent. However, apart from the evils which
   it was absolutely impossible to foresee or to prevent, his reign stands
   out to us as being great and prosperous. The improvement in manners was
   considerable. Many of the secret aims which instinctively pursued
   Christianity were legally attained. The general political system had
   some grave defects; but the wisdom of the good emperor covered all with
   a temporary palliative. It was a singular thing that this virtuous
   prince, who never once made the least concession to false popularity,
   was adored by the people. He was democratic in the best sense of the
   word. The old Roman aristocracy inspired him with antipathy. He had no
   regard for birth, nor even for education and manners; he only looked to
   merit. As he could not find amongst the patricians fit subjects to
   second his ideas of wise government, he entrusted those functions to
   men whose only nobility was their honesty.

   Public assistance, established by Nerva and Trajan, developed by
   Antoninus, reached, under Marcus-Aurelius, the highest point it had
   ever attained. The principle that the State has in some sort paternal
   duties to perform towards its members (a principle which ought to be
   remembered with gratitude, even when we have got beyond it)--that
   principle, I say, was proclaimed in the world for the first time in the
   second century. The education of children in a liberal manner had
   become, on account of the insufficiency of morals, and in consequence
   of the defective economical principles upon which society reposed, one
   of the great pre-occupations of statesmen. Since the time of Trajan it
   had been endowed by hypothecating sums of money, the revenues from
   which were managed by the procurators. Marcus Aurelius made the
   procurators functionaries of the first rank; he selected them with the
   greatest care from amongst the consuls and prætors, and increased their
   powers. His great private fortune rendered it easy for him to place
   these largesses on a secure basis. He himself created a great number of
   endowments for the succour of the youth of both sexes. The institute of
   the Young female Faustinas dated from Antoninus. After the death of the
   second Faustina, Marcus-Aurelius founded New female Faustinas. An
   elegant bas-relief represents these young women pressing around the
   empress, who drops wheat into a fold of their robes.

   Stoicism, since the reign of Hadrian, had permeated the Roman law with
   its broad maxims and had made of it a natural law, a philosophical law,
   so that reason might conceive it as applicable to all men. The
   perpetual edict of Salvius Julianus was the first complete expression
   of that new law destined to become the universal law. It was the
   triumph of the Greek mind over the Latin mind. The strict law yielded
   to equity; mildness turned the scale on severity; justice seemed
   inseparable from beneficence. The great jurisconsulates of Antoninus,
   Salvius Valens, Ulpius Marcellus, Javolenus, Volusius Moecianus
   continued the same work. The last was the master of Marcus-Aurelius in
   the matter of jurisprudence, and, to speak the truth, the work of the
   two holy emperors ought not to have been separated. From them dates the
   majority of the sensible and humane laws which modify the rigour of the
   ancient law and form, from legislation primarily narrow and implacable,
   a code susceptible of being adopted by all civilised peoples.

   The weak individual, in ancient societies, was somewhat dependent.
   Marcus-Aurelius constituted himself in a fashion the tutor of all those
   who had not one. The wants of the poor child and the sick child were
   assured. The tutelary Prætor was created to give guarantees for the
   orphaned. The civil law and the registration of births were commenced.
   A multitude of ordinances, completely just, introduced into the whole
   administration a remarkable spirit of mildness and of humanity. The
   expenses of the cures were diminished. Thanks to a better system of
   provisioning, famines in Italy were rendered impossible. In the order
   of judicature many reforms of an excellent character dated in like
   manner from the reign of Marcus. The regulation of manners, notably
   that which had reference to indiscriminate baths, was made more strict.
   It was to the slaves especially that Antoninus and Marcus-Aurelius
   showed themselves beneficent. Some of the greatest monstrosities of
   slavery were corrected. It was henceforward admitted that the master
   could commit an injustice to a slave. From the time of the new
   legislation corporal punishments were regulated. To kill a slave became
   a crime; to treat him with excessive cruelty was a misdemeanour, and
   drew upon the master the necessity of selling the unfortunate whom he
   had tortured. The slave, in time, resorted to the tribunals, became a
   somebody, and a member of the city. He was proprietor of his own
   substance, had his family, and it was not allowable to sell separately
   husband, wife, and children. The application of the question to servile
   persons was limited. The master might not, except in certain cases,
   sell his slaves to make them fight with wild beasts in the
   amphitheatres. The servant, sold under the condition ne prostituatur,
   was preserved from the bordelles. There was what was called favor
   libertatis; in case of doubt, interpretation the most favourable to
   liberty was admitted. People placed humanity against the rigour of the
   law, often even against the letter of the statute. In point of fact,
   from the time of Antoninus, the jurisconsulate, imbued with Stoicism,
   considered slavery as a violation of the rights of nature, and were
   inclined to restrict it. Enfranchisement was favoured in every way.
   Marcus-Aurelius went further and recognised within certain limits the
   right of slaves to the goods of the master. If a person did not present
   himself to claim the heritage of a testator, slaves were authorised to
   divide the goods amongst themselves; when one only or several were
   admitted to the adjudication the result was the same. The enfranchised
   person was in like manner protected by the most stringent enactments
   against slavery, which had a thousand different devices for seizing on
   him again.

   The son, the wife, the minor were the objects of legislation at once
   intelligent and humane. The son was obliged to maintain his father, but
   ceased to be under his control. The most odious excesses, which the
   ancient Roman law regarded as quite natural to permit to paternal
   authority, were abolished or restrained. The father had duties towards
   his children, and could get nothing back for having fulfilled them; the
   son, on his side, owed to his kindred alimentary succour, in proportion
   to his fortune.

   The laws, up to this time, of tutelage and trusteeship had been most
   incomplete; Marcus-Aurelius made them models of administrative
   foresight. By the ancient law the mother made hardly any part of the
   family of her husband and of her children. The Tertullian Senatus
   consultum (in the year 158), and the Orphitian Senatus consultum (178)
   established to the mother the right of succession, from the mother to
   the child and from the child to the mother. Sentiment and natural law
   took precedence. The excellent laws in regard to banks, to the sale of
   slaves, to informers and slanderers, put an end to a multitude of
   abuses. The fiscal laws had always been severe, exacting. It was
   henceforward settled in principle that in doubtful cases it should be
   the treasury that was wrong. Imposts of a vexatious character were
   abolished. The length of processes was diminished. The criminal law
   became less cruel, and the inculpated person was given valuable
   guarantees; still, it was the personal characteristic of
   Marcus-Aurelius to diminish, in application, the established penalties.
   In cases of folly punishment was remitted. The great stoical principle,
   that culpability resided in the motive, not in the deed, became the
   soul of laws.

   Thus was definitely established that great marvel the Roman law, a sort
   of revelation in its way which ignorance has placed to the honour of
   the compilers of Justinian, but which in reality was the work of the
   great emperors of the second century, and admirably interpreted and
   continued by the eminent jurisconsulates of the third century. The
   Roman law had a less clamorous triumph than Christianity, but in a
   sense a more durable one. Wiped out first by barbarism, it was
   resuscitated about the close of the Middle Ages, was the law of the
   world of the Renaissance, and became once more in a modified form the
   law of modern peoples. It was hence that the great Stoical school in
   the second century attempted to reform the world, after having to
   appearance miserably failed, and achieved in reality a complete
   victory. Compiled by the classical jurisconsults of the times of
   Severus, mutilated and altered by Tribonian, the texts survived, and
   these texts became later the code of the entire world. Now these texts
   were the work of the eminent legalists who, grouped about Hadrian,
   Antoninus, and Marcus-Aurelius, caused the law to enter definitely into
   its philosophic age. The labour was continued under the Syrian
   emperors; the frightful political decadence of the third century did
   not prevent that vast edifice from continuing its slow and splendid
   growth.

   It was not that Marcus-Aurelius made a parade of the innovating spirit.
   On the contrary, he conducted himself in such a manner as to give to
   the reforms a conservative appearance. He treated man always as a moral
   being; he never affected, as did often the pretended transcendental
   politicians, to treat him as a machine or a means to an end. If he
   could not change the atrocious penal code of the times he mitigated it
   in its application. A fund was established for the obsequies of the
   poor citizens; funeral colleges were authorised to receive legacies and
   to become civil societies, having the right to possess property,
   slaves, franchises. Seneca had said: "All men, if we go back to the
   origin of things, have gods for fathers." On the morrow Ulpian will
   say: "By the law of nature all men are born free and equal."

   Marcus-Aurelius wished to suppress the hideous scenes which made the
   amphitheatres actual places of horror for whoever possessed a moral
   sense. But he did not succeed; these abominable representations were a
   part of the life of the people. When Marcus-Aurelius armed the
   gladiators for the great Germanic war, there was almost a revolution.
   "He wishes to take away from us our amusements," cried the multitude,
   "and to constrain us to philosophy." The habitués of the amphitheatres
   were the only persons who did not love him. Compelled to yield to an
   opinion which was stronger than he, Marcus-Aurelius protested
   nevertheless in every possible way. He brought some alleviation to
   evils he was not able to suppress; we hear of rope-dancers having
   mattresses placed under them, and of people not being allowed to fight
   unless their arms were covered. The emperor visited the spectacles as
   seldom as he could help, and only out of complaisance. He affected
   during the representation to read, to give audiences, to sign
   despatches, without making himself the object of the raillery of the
   public. One day a lion that a slave had pricked for the purpose of
   devouring some men made so much of his master that on every side the
   public clamoured for his manumission. The emperor, who during this time
   had turned his head, responded with temper: "This man has done nothing
   worthy of liberty." He issued several edicts to prevent precipitate
   manumissions, called for under the excitement of popular plaudits,
   which seemed to him a first reward for cruelty.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER III.

  THE REIGN OF THE PHILOSOPHERS.

   The problem of the happiness of humanity had never before been known to
   have been pursued with so much assiduousness and heartiness. The ideal
   of Plato was realised; the world was governed by the philosophers. All
   that had been in the form of a beautiful sentiment in the great soul of
   Seneca had come to be a reality. Though railed at for two hundred years
   by the brutal Romans, the Greek philosophy, by dint of patience,
   triumphed. We have seen already under Antoninus philosophers
   privileged, pensioned, enjoying almost the position of public
   functionaries; now the emperor is wholly surrounded with them. His old
   masters have become his ministers, his men of state. He showers honours
   upon them with profusion, raises statues to them, places their
   monuments among his household gods, and, on the anniversary of their
   death, goes to sacrifice at their tombs, which he always keeps decked
   with flowers. The consulship, which until now had been reserved for the
   Roman aristocracy, is invaded by the rhetoricians and the philosophers.
   Herodus Atticus, Fronto, Junius Rusticus, Claudius Severus, Proculus,
   became in their day consuls or proconsuls. Marcus-Aurelius had in
   particular for Rusticus the most tender affection. He made him twice
   consul, and always embraced him before saluting the prefect of the
   prætorium. The important functions of the prefect of Rome were for some
   years as if placed immutably in his hands.

   It was inevitable that this sudden favour, accorded by the emperor to a
   class of men who combined all that was excellent and contemptible,
   should lead to many abuses. From all parts of the world the good
   Marcus-Aurelius had caused to be brought philosophers of renown. Among
   the proud mendicants, clad in ragged blouses, which that large call had
   put in movement, there were more than one person of mediocrity, more
   than one charlatan. That which implied an exterior profession provoked
   always a comparison between real manners and those which habit
   engendered. These parvenus were accused of greediness, of
   avariciousness, of gormandising, of impertinence, and of rancour.
   People sometimes laughed at the weaknesses which their mantles could
   shelter. Their badly combed hair, their beards, their nails were the
   objects of raillery. "His beard is worth to him ten thousand
   sestercias," said some people, "it will soon be necessary to salary
   also goats." Their vanity gave often occasion to these pleasantries.
   Peregrinus, sacrificing himself upon Mount Olympus (in 166), showed how
   far the necessity of the tragic could lead a fool who was infatuated
   with his rôle and eager to have himself spoken of.

   Their pretended absolute self-sufficiency called forth stinging
   rebukes. People repeated the phrase attributed to Demonax, upon
   Apollonius of Chalcis, departing from Rome with his suite: "Here comes
   Apollonius and his argonauts." These Greeks, these Syrians, flocking to
   the assault of Rome, seemed to be setting out for the conquest of a new
   fleece of gold. The pensions and the exemptions which they enjoyed
   meant that they were in charge of the republic; and Marcus-Aurelius was
   compelled to justify himself on this point. People complained
   especially of their maltreatment of certain individuals. The ordinary
   insolences of the cynics only too far justified those accusations.
   These miserable snarling dogs possessed neither shame nor respect, and
   they were very numerous.

   Marcus-Aurelius did not dissimulate the defects of his friends; but his
   perfect sagacity led him to make a distinction between the doctrine and
   the weaknesses of those whom he taught. He knew that there were few or
   none of the philosophers really practical in what they advised.
   Experience had taught him that the majority of them were greedy,
   quarrelsome, vain, insolent; that they sought only disputation, that
   they were possessed solely by a spirit of pride, malignity, and
   jealousy. But he was too judicious to expect perfection in men. As St.
   Louis was not disturbed for a moment in his faith by the disorders of
   the clericals, so Marcus-Aurelius was never disgusted with
   philosophy--with what were the vices of the philosophers. "I esteem the
   true philosophers, indulgently exempt from blame the pretended
   philosophers, without, however, ever being duped by them," was what he
   remarked in Antoninus, and the rule he himself observed. He went and
   listened in their schools to Apollonius and to Sextus of Cheronea, and
   was not made angry by people laughing at him. Like Antoninus, he had a
   faculty for supporting the ill-natured remarks of vain and badly
   educated people, which those honours probably exaggerated and rendered
   impertinent. Alexander saw him walking in the streets without
   courtiers, without a guard, clad in the mantle of the philosopher and
   living like one of them. At Athens he instituted chairs for all the
   sciences, and endowed them liberally; and he was able to give to the
   institution called the university of that city an éclat superior even
   to that which she had received from Hadrian.

   It was natural that the representatives of what still remained of
   solidity, endurance, and of strength in the ancient Roman nature should
   exhibit some impatience at that invasion of the high places in the
   republic by people without family renown, without military audacity,
   belonging for the most part to those oriental races which the true
   Roman contemned. Such was especially the position unfortunately taken
   by Avedius Cassius, a true soldier and statesman, an enlightened man
   even, and sympathising fully with Marcus-Aurelius, but one who was
   persuaded that government existed for another purpose than philosophy.
   By reason of calling the emperor in jest "a good female philosopher,"
   he was led into embracing the most fatal of ideas, to wit, revolt. The
   great reproach that he laid at the door of Marcus-Aurelius was the
   confiding of the highest positions to men who, whether as regards
   fortune, antecedents, and even education, could offer no guarantees,
   Bassæus and Pompeian, for example. The good emperor went, in fact, so
   far as innocently to desire that Pompeian should marry his daughter
   Lucilla, the, widow of Lucius Verus, and to pretend that Lucilla loved
   Pompeian, because he was the most virtuous man in the empire. This
   unfortunate idea was one of the principal causes which corrupted his
   internal government; for Faustina supported the resistance of his
   daughter, and that was one of the causes which threw her into the
   opposition against her husband.

   If Marcus-Aurelius had not united to his goodness a rare degree of
   practical sense, his infatuation for a class of persons, who were not
   always worth that which his profession would have made one suppose,
   would have led him into errors. Religion has had its absurdities;
   philosophy has had its also. Those people who crowded the public
   places, armed with truncheons, parading their long beards, their
   wallets, and their threadbare cloaks, these shoe-makers, these artisans
   who abandoned their benches to lead the idle life of begging cynics,
   exciting amongst people of mind the same antipathy which later on the
   Capuchin vagabond excited amongst the well-educated bourgeoisie. But,
   in general, despite the somewhat exaggerated respect which he had à
   priori for the costumes of the philosophers, Marcus-Aurelius exercised
   in his discernment of men a very perfect tact. The whole group of sages
   who had seized power on all sides presented a very venerable aspect;
   the emperor regarded them less as masters or friends than as brothers,
   who were associated with him in the government. The philosophers, as
   Seneca had dreamed, had become a power in the State, a certain
   constitutional institution, a privy council, whose influence in the
   affairs of State was of first importance.

   This curious phenomenon, which has been witnessed but once in history,
   partook certainly of the character of the emperor; but it partook also
   of the nature of the empire, and of the Roman conception of the State,
   a conception wholly rationalistic, into which there entered no
   theocratic idea. The law was the expression of reason; it was hence
   natural that men of reason should attain one day or other to power.
   Like judges in cases of conscience, the philosophers had a rôle which
   was in a manner legal. For centuries the Greek philosophy had
   constituted the education of the highest Roman society; almost all the
   preceptors were Greeks; education was imparted wholly in Greek. Greece
   could not name a more splendid victory than that which she had thus
   gained through her pedagogues and professors. Philosophy took more and
   more the character of a religion; she had her preachers, her
   missionaries, her directors of consciences, her casuists. The great
   personages conversed with one another in a familiar philosophy, which
   was at the same time their intimate friend, their monitor, the guardian
   of their souls. It was hence a philosophy which had its thorns, and the
   first conditions of which were a venerable exterior, a fine beard, and
   a fashion of wearing a cloak with dignity.

   Rubellius Plautus had near him, it is said, "two doctors of wisdom,"
   Coeranus and Musonius, the one Greek, the other Etruscan, in order to
   furnish him with the grounds for being able to await death with
   courage. Before death, people conversed with some sage, similar to what
   is called with us a priest, so that the last breath drawn might have a
   moral religious character. Canus Julius walked to the scaffold
   accompanied by "his philosopher." Thraseus died assisted by the cynic
   Demetrius.

   People hold it to be the first duty of a philosopher to enlighten men,
   to sustain them and to direct them. In great afflictions we send for a
   philosopher to give consolation, and often the philosophers, like our
   priests invoked in extremis, complain that they have only been sent for
   at the last minute when it is too late. We only purchase remedies when
   we are very sick; we neglect the philosopher in like manner, except
   when we are very unfortunate. We see a man rich, enjoying good health,
   and having a wife bien portants, but should he lose his fortune, or his
   health, should his wife, or his son, or his brother be struck down
   dead, then it is that the philosopher is sent for; he is called in to
   administer some consolation, to explain to the rich man in what manner
   one can support so much misfortune.

   It was the conscience of the sovereign in particular that the
   philosophers, like the Jesuits later, sought to gain over to the right.
   "The sovereign is good and wise for the benefit of others;" in
   bettering him the philosopher accomplished more than if he had seduced
   into the paths of wisdom hundreds of isolated individuals. Areus was to
   Augustus a director, a kind of confessor, to whom the emperor unfolded
   all his thoughts, even to his most secret movements. When Livy lost his
   son Drusus it was Areus who condoled with him. Seneca played at
   intervals a similar part to Nero. The philosopher in the times of
   Epictetus, though he was still treated with great rudeness by the
   unpolished personages in Italy, became the comes of the prince, his
   most intimate friend, he whom he received at all times. It might be
   said of these species of almoners that they had functions and received
   regular treatment. Dion Chrysostom wrote for Trajan his discourses on
   the duties of royalty. Hadrian has been represented to us as being
   surrounded with Sophists.

   The public had, like the princes, its regular lessons in philosophy.
   There were in important cities an eclectic official teacher, lessons,
   conferences. All the ancient denominations of the school subsisted.
   There were yet Platonists, Pythagoreans, Cynics, Epicureans,
   Peripaticians, drawing equal salaries, on the sole condition of their
   proving that their teaching was in full accord with that of Plato,
   Pythagoras, Diogenes, Epicurus, and Aristotle. The scoffers even
   pretended that certain professors taught at once several philosophies,
   and were paid for playing divers parts. A sophist presented himself at
   Athens as being acquainted with all the philosophies: "When Aristotle
   calls me to the Lyceum," said he, "I am he; when Plato invites me to
   the Academy I enter it; if Zeno calls me, I make myself the guest of
   the Portico; at one word of Pythagoras I am silent." "Suppose that
   Pythagoras were to call thee?" responded Demonax.

   It is too often forgotten that the second century had a veritable Pagan
   preaching, similar to that of Christianity, and in many respects in
   accord with the latter. It was not uncommon at the circus, at the
   theatre, or in the assemblies to see a sophist get up, like a divine
   messenger, in the name of eternal truth. Dionysius Chrysostom had
   already furnished the model of these homilies, borrowed from a
   polytheism greatly mitigated by philosophy, and which recalls the
   teachings of the Fathers of the Church. The Cynic Theagenus, at Rome,
   attracted the multitude to the course of lectures he gave in the
   gymnasium of Trajan. Maximus of Tyre in his Sermons presents to us a
   theology, at bottom monotheistic, in which the representations set
   forth are conserved only as the necessary symbols of human weakness,
   and which could satisfy alone the sages. All cults, according to that
   sometimes eloquent thinker, are an impotent effort in the direction of
   a unique ideal. The varieties which they present are insignificant, and
   ought not to be any impediment to the veritable worshipper.

   Thus there was realised a veritable historical miracle, what might be
   called the reign of philosophers. This is the moment to study that
   which such a régime favoured, that which it contemned. It assisted
   marvellously the social and moral progress; humanity, the softening of
   manners, increased exceedingly; the idea of a state being governed by
   wisdom, benevolence, and reason was established for ever. On the other
   hand, the military force, art, and literature underwent a certain
   decadence. Philosophy and letters were far from being the same thing.
   The philosophers regarded with pity the frivolity of lettered persons
   and their taste for applause. The lettered laughed at the barbarousness
   of the style of the philosophers, their lack of manners, their beards,
   and their mantles. Marcus-Aurelius, after hesitating between the two
   factions, decided boldly for the philosophers. He neglected Latin,
   ceased to encourage the necessity of writing in that language,
   preferred the Greek, which was the language of his favourite authors.

   The utter ruin of the Latin literature was then decided. The West
   decayed rapidly, whilst the East became day by day more brilliant; the
   dawn of Constantine was already apparent. The plastic arts, so greatly
   loved by Hadrian, must have appeared to Marcus-Aurelius a sort of
   semi-vanity. That which remains of his arch is insipid enough;
   everybody, even the barbarians, are given in it a dignified air; the
   horses have tender and philanthropic eyes. The Antonine column is a
   curious work, but is without delicacy in the execution, greatly
   inferior to the temple of Antoninus and Faustina, erected under the
   preceding reign. The equestrian statue of the Capitol charms us by the
   exact image it presents to us of the excellent emperor; but the artist
   has not the right to give up all boasting on this point. We feel that
   the total ruin of the art of design, which was accomplished in fifty
   years, has some profound causes. Christianity and philosophy equally
   contributed to it. The world began to be too indifferent to form and
   beauty; it asked no more than what improves the lot of the weak and
   sweetens the strong.

   The dominant philosophy was moral in the highest degree, but it was not
   very scientific; it did not urge research. Such a philosophy had
   nothing in it incompatible with cults so little dogmatic as were those
   of that time. Philosophers were often invested with sacerdotal
   functions in their respective towns. Thus Stoicism, which contributed
   so powerfully to spiritual improvement, was weak against superstition;
   it elevated the heart, not the intellect. The number of truly learned
   was very small. Galienus himself is not a practical spirit; he admits
   medical dreams and many superstitions of the time. In spite of the
   laws, the most mischievous magicians succeeded. The East overflowed
   with its mass of chimeras. In the province every folly found followers.

   Bæotia had a semi-god, a certain Sostratus, a kind of colossal idiot,
   leading a savage life, in whom everybody saw Hercules resuscitated. He
   was considered to be the good genius of the country, and they consulted
   him from all quarters.

   A most incredible thing! the stupid religion of Alexander of
   Abonoticos, which we saw emerging from the depths of the Paphlagonian
   folly, found some adherents in the higher ranks of Roman society and
   among the friends of Marcus-Aurelius. Severian, legate of Cappadocia,
   allowed himself to be taken in by it. At Rome the people desired to see
   the impostor; a consular personage, Publius Mummius Sisenna Rutilianus,
   became his apostle, and when sixty years old found himself honoured by
   marrying a girl whom this base rogue pretended to have had by the moon.
   At Rome Alexander established certain mysteries which lasted three
   days; the first day they celebrated the birth of Apollo and Æsculapius;
   the second day the epiphany of Glycon; the third, the birth of
   Alexander; each one with pompous processions and dances by torchlight.
   There were enacted in these mysteries scenes of revolting immorality.
   During the plague of 166 the talismanic formulas of Alexander, engraved
   on the doors of houses, were believed by the superstitious multitude to
   be preservatives against it. At the time of the great war of Pannonia
   (169-171), Alexander still spoke of his serpent, and it was by his
   orders that two live lions were thrown into the Danube with solemn
   sacrifices. Marcus-Aurelius personally presided over the ceremony,
   attired as pontiff, surrounded by personages clothed in long robes. The
   two lions were beaten to death by blows of the bludgeon on the other
   bank, and the Romans cut in pieces. These exhibitions did not at all
   hurt the impostor, who, protected by Rutilianus, was able to escape all
   that the defenders of the good public feeling attempted to do to arrest
   his career. He died in his glory; statues of him were, about 178, the
   object of public worship, especially at Parium, where his tomb
   decorated the public square. Nicomedia stamped Glycon on its coins;
   Pergamos also honoured him. Some Latin inscriptions, found in Dacia and
   in Upper Mysia, prove that Glycon had a large number of devotees, and
   that Alexander had recognised him as a god.

   This uncouth theology had even its development. They gave the serpent a
   female, the Dracena; they connected Glycon with the agathodemon
   Chnoubis and the mystic Iao. Nicomedia kept the serpent with the human
   head upon its coins till about 240. In 252 the religion of Glycon still
   flourished at Ionopolis. The name substituted by the impostor for
   Abonoticos has been more lasting than a thousand changes better
   justified. It continues in our day under the Turkish-looking name
   Ineboli.

   Peregrinus, after his extraordinary suicide at Olympia, also obtained
   at Parium statues and a worship. He pronounced oracles, and sick people
   were cured by his intercession.

   Thus intellectual progress did not advance at the same pace as social
   progress. Attachment to the State religion only nourished superstition,
   and prevented the establishment of good public education. But that was
   not the emperor's fault. He did what he could. The object he had in
   view--the improvement of men--needed centuries. Those centuries
   Christianity had before it; the empire had not.

   The universal cause, said the emperor, is a torrent which carries
   everything along with it. What wretched politicians are those little
   men who pretend to rule the world by the maxims of philosophy; they are
   babies whose noses require to be wiped with a pocket-handkerchief. Man,
   what would you do? Do that which nature demands at the present moment.
   Go before it if you can and don't disturb yourself by seeking to know
   whether anyone occupies himself with what you are doing. Do not hope
   ever to have a republic like Plato's; let it he sufficient for you to
   improve some things, and do not regard this as a success of
   inconsiderable importance. How, in fact, can the inward dispositions of
   men be changed? And, without this change in their thoughts, what are
   they but slaves fastened to the yoke, people affecting a hypocritical
   persuasion? Come then, and tell me about Alexander, Philip, Demetrius
   of Phaleria. If they have only played the part of tragic actors, no one
   has condemned me to imitate them. The work of philosophy is simple and
   modest; do not persuade me therefore with a dead-house full of
   pretension. (Thoughts, ix. 29.)
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IV.

  PERSECUTIONS AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS.

   The philosophy, which had so thoroughly conquered the mind of
   Marcus-Aurelius, was hostile to Christianity. Fronton, his tutor, seems
   to have been full of prejudice against the Christians; and we know that
   Marcus-Aurelius guarded like a religion the recollections of his youth,
   and the impression made by his teachers. In general, the Greek
   pedagogues as a class were opposed to the new culture. Proud in looking
   at himself as the father of his family, the preceptor considered
   himself injured by the illiterate catechists who acted as spies
   clandestinely upon his functions, and put their pupils on their guard
   against him. These pedants, in the world of the Antonines, enjoyed a
   perhaps exaggerated favour. Often the denunciations against the
   Christians came from conscientious teachers, who considered themselves
   bound to save the young people confided to their care from an
   indiscreet propaganda, opposed to the opinions of their families.
   Littérateurs of the style of Ælius Aristides did not show themselves
   less severe. Jews and Christians are to them impious people, who deny
   the gods, enemies of society, disturbers of the peace of families,
   intriguers who seek to intrude everywhere, to draw everything to
   themselves, tormenting, presumptuous, and malevolent brawlers. Some men
   like Galienus, of practical mind as well as philosophers or
   rhetoricians, showed less partiality, and without reserve praised the
   purity, the austerity, the pleasant manners of the inoffensive
   sectaries whom calumny had succeeded in transforming into odious
   malefactors.

   The emperor's principle was to maintain the ancient Roman maxims in
   their integrity. It could not therefore be but that the new reign
   should be little favourable to the Church. Roman tradition is a dogma
   for Marcus-Aurelius; it incites him to virtue "like a man, like a
   Roman." The prejudices of the Stoic doubled themselves with those of
   patriot, and it has been recorded that the best of men will commit the
   most awkward faults by excess of earnestness, of sedulousness and
   conservative mind. Ah! if he had possessed something of the
   thoughtlessness of Hadrian or the laughter of Lucian.

   Marcus-Aurelius certainly knew many Christians. He had them among his
   servants; he conceived little esteem for them. The kind of supernatural
   which formed the basis of Christianity was repugnant to him, and he had
   the feelings of all the Romans against the Jews. It does not appear
   that any edition of the Gospel text came under his eyes; the name of
   Jesus was, perhaps, unknown to him; that which struck him as a Stoic
   was the courage of the martyr. But one feature shocked him, that was
   their air of triumph, their way of acting in the face of death. This
   bravado against the law appeared hateful; as chief of the state he saw
   in it a danger. Stoicism, besides, did not teach one to seek death, but
   to endure it. Had Epictetus not represented the heroism of the
   "Galileans" as the effect of an obdurate fanaticism? Ælius Aristides
   expressed himself nearly in the same manner. Those voluntary deaths
   appeared to the august moralist as little rational as the theatrical
   suicide of Peregrinus. We find this note among his memoranda of
   thoughts: "A disposition of the soul always ready to be separated from
   the body, whether to be annihilated, to be dispersed, or to continue.
   When I say ready, I mean that this should be the effect of a proper
   judgment, not out of pure opposition, as among the Christians; it must
   be a reflective act, grave, capable of persuading others, without any
   mingling of tragic display." He was right, but the true liberal must
   refuse everything to fanatics, even the pleasure of being martyrs.

   Marcus-Aurelius changed nothing of the established rules against the
   Christians. The persecutions were the result of the fundamental
   principles of the empire brought into combination. Marcus-Aurelius, far
   from exaggerating the former legislation, mitigated it with all his
   energy, and one of the glories of his reign is the extension he gave to
   the rights of colleges. His decree, pronouncing banishment on
   superstitious agitations, applied even more to political prophecies or
   to knaves who traded on the public credulity than to established
   religions. Yet he did not quite go to the root; he did not completely
   abolish the laws against the collegia illicita, and there resulted from
   this some application of these in the provinces infinitely to be
   regretted. The reproach that might be brought against him is the very
   same that might be addressed to the sovereigns of our day, who do not
   suppress, by a stroke of the pen, all the restrictive laws concerning
   freedom of meeting, association, the press. At the distance we are
   removed from him, we can see that Marcus-Aurelius, in being more
   thoroughly liberal, was wiser. Perhaps Christianity, left free, would
   have developed in a less disastrous way the theocratic and absolute
   principle which was in it. But we cannot reproach a statesman with
   having promoted a radical revolution by a foresight of the events which
   should occur many years afterwards. Trajan, Hadrian, and
   Marcus-Aurelius could not understand the principles of general history
   and political economy which have been realised only in the 19th
   century, and which our last revolutions have revealed to us.

   In any case as to the application of the laws, the mildness of the
   emperor was safe from all reproach. We have not, on this point, the
   right to be harder than Tertullian, who was, in infancy and youth, an
   eye-witness of this fatal struggle. "Consult your annals," said he to
   the Roman magistrates, "and you will find that the princes who have
   been cruel to us are those whom it was held an honour to have as
   persecutors. On the contrary, of all princes who have known divine and
   human law, name one of them who has persecuted the Christians. We might
   even instance one of them who declared himself their protector, the
   wise Marcus-Aurelius. If he did not openly revoke the edicts against
   our brethren, he destroyed the effect of them by the severe penalties
   he instituted against their accusers." The torrent of universal
   admiration carried away the Christians themselves. "Great" and
   "good"--these were the two words in which a Christian of the 3rd
   century summed up the character of this mild persecutor.

   It is necessary to recollect that the Roman empire was ten or twelve
   times larger than France, and that the responsibility of the emperor
   for the sentences pronounced in the provinces was very small. It must
   be especially remembered that Christianity demanded nothing but freedom
   of worship; all the other religions which were tolerated were quite
   free in the empire; that which gave to Christianity, and formerly to
   Judaism, a distinct position was their intolerance, their spirit of
   exclusiveness. The liberty of thought was absolute. From Nero to
   Constantine, not a thinker, not a scholar was disturbed in his
   researches.

   The law was the persecutor, but the people were even more so. The evil
   reports spread by the Jews and kept up by malignant missionaries, a
   sort of commercial travellers of calumny, estranged the most moderate
   and sincere minds. The people held by their superstitions, and were
   irritated against those who attacked them by sarcasm. Even some
   enlightened people, such as Celsus and Apuleius, believed that the
   political feebleness of the age arose from the progress of unbelief in
   the national religion. The position of the Christians was that of a
   Protestant missionary settled in a very Catholic town in Spain and
   preaching against the saints, the Virgin, and processions. The saddest
   episodes of persecution under Marcus-Aurelius arose from the hatred of
   the people. At every famine, inundation, and epidemic, the cry "The
   Christians to the lion!" resounded like a gloomy menace. Never had a
   reign witnessed so many calamities; the people believed the gods were
   angry, and redoubled their devotion; they called over the expiatory
   acts. The attitude of the Christians, in the midst of all this,
   remained obstinately disdainful, or even provocative. Often they
   received their condemnation with an insult to the judge. Before a
   temple or an idol they breathed hard, as if to repulse an impure thing,
   or made the sign of the Cross. It was not rare to see a Christian stop
   before a statue of Jupiter or Apollo, and say to it as he struck it
   with his staff: "Ah well, you see, your god does not avenge you!" The
   temptation was strong in such a case to arrest the sacrilegious one and
   to crucify him, saying, "And does your god avenge you!" The Epicurean
   philosophers were not less hostile to these vulgar superstitions, and
   yet they did not persecute them. Never did one see a philosopher forced
   to offer sacrifice, to swear by the emperor, or to carry flambeaux. The
   philosopher could have consented to those vain formalities, and that
   was enough without more being asked.

   All the pastors, all the grave men dissuaded the faithful from going to
   offer themselves as martyrs; but they could not conquer a fanaticism
   which saw in condemnation the grandest triumph, and in punishment a
   kind of pleasure. In Asia this thirst for death was infectious, and
   produced certain phenomena analogous to those which, later on, were
   developed on a large scale among the "circoncellions" of Africa. One
   day the proconsul of Asia, Arrius Antoninus, having ordered certain
   rigorous proceedings against some Christians, beheld all the believers
   in the town present themselves in a body at the bar of his tribunal
   claiming the right of their co-religionists chosen for martyrdom;
   Arrius Antoninus, furious, made them lead a small number to punishment,
   sending away the others with the words, "Be off then, you wretches! If
   you wish so much to die you have precipices and cords!"

   When, in the heart of a great state, a faction has certain interests
   opposed to those of all the rest, hatred is inevitable. Now the
   Christians desired, at bottom, that everything should go on in the
   worst way. Far from making common cause with the good citizens, and
   seeking to exorcise dangers from their native land, the Christians
   rejoiced in these. The Montanists and the whole of Phrygia went to the
   extreme of folly in their malignant prophecies against the empire. They
   could imagine themselves gone back to the times of the grand Apocalypse
   of 69. These kinds of prophecies formed a crime forbidden by law; Roman
   society felt instinctively that it was growing weaker; it saw but
   vaguely the causes of this feebleness; it laid them, not without some
   reason, on Christianity. It imagined that a return to the old gods
   would recall fortune. These gods had made the greatness of Rome; they
   were supposed to be irritated now by the blasphemies of the Christians.
   Was the way to appease them not to kill the Christians? No doubt these
   latter did not suspend their mockeries as to the inanity of sacrifices,
   and of the means they employed to ward off the plague. What would they
   think in England of a sceptic bursting with laughter in public on a day
   of feasting and prayer commanded by the Queen?

   Some atrocious calumnies, some bloody scoffs were the revenge the
   Pagans took. The most abominable of the calumnies was the accusation of
   worshipping the priests by shameful embraces. The attitude of the
   penitent in confession gave rise to this disgraceful report. Some
   odious caricatures circulated among the public, and were placed on the
   walls. The absurd fable, according to which the Jews adored an ass,
   made people imagine that it was the same thing with the Christians.
   Here it was, the picture of a crucified person with an ass's head
   receiving the adoration of a half-witted lad. In other details it was
   one with a long cloak and long ears, the feet in clogs, and he held a
   book with a devout air, while this epigram was beneath the
   representation, DEVS CHRISTIANORVM ONOKOITHC (the only-begotten God of
   the Christians). An apostate Jew, who had become an attendant in the
   amphitheatre, painted a great caricature at Carthage in the last years
   of the second century. A mysterious cock, having an aphallus for a
   beak, and with the inscription COTHP KOCMOU (Saviour of the world), had
   also a relation to the Christian beliefs.

   The liking of the catechists for women and children afforded scope for
   a thousand jests. Opposed to the dryness of Paganism, the church
   produced the effect of a conventicle of effeminate persons. The tender
   feeling of every one towards another, showed in the aspasmos and
   glorified by martyrdom, created a kind of atmosphere of softness, full
   of attraction for gentle souls, and of danger for certain others. This
   movement of good women concerned about the church, the habit of calling
   each other brother and sister, this respect for the bishop, shown by
   frequently kneeling before him, had something in it repulsive, and
   which provoked disagreeable interpretations. The grave preceptor, who
   saw himself deprived of his pupils by this womanish attraction,
   conceived for it a profound hatred, and believed that he was serving
   the State by seeking to revenge himself on it. Children, in fact,
   allowed themselves to be easily drawn by the words of mystic tenderness
   which reached them secretly, and sometimes this drew on them severe
   chastisements from their parents.

   Thus persecution attained a degree of energy which it had not reached
   till now. The distinction between the simple fact of being a Christian
   and certain crimes connected with the name was forgotten. To say: "I am
   a Christian"--that was to sign a declaration whose consequence might be
   a sentence of death. Terror became the habitual condition of the
   Christian life. Denunciations came from all sides, especially from
   slaves, Jews, and Pagans. The police, knowing the days and the place
   when and where their meetings were held, made sudden incursions into
   the hall. The questioning of the inculpated persons furnished to the
   fanatics occasions of witticisms. The Acts of these proceedings were
   collected by the faithful as triumphal documents; they circulated them;
   they read them greedily; they made out of them a kind of literature.
   The appearing before the judges became a pre-occupation for which they
   prepared with coquetry. The reading of these papers, when the best part
   always fell to the accused, exalted the imagination, provoked
   imitators, and inspired a hatred of civil society, and a condition of
   things where good people could be treated thus. The fearful punishments
   of the Roman law were applied with all their severity. The Christian as
   humilior, and even as a wretch, was punished by the cross, beasts,
   fire, the rod. For death there was sometimes substituted condemnations
   to the mines, and transportation to Sardinia. Cruel mitigation! The
   judges, in "putting the question," were guided by a thoroughly
   arbitrary disposition, and sometimes a perfect perversion of ideas.

   There was here a wretched spectacle. No one suffered from it more than
   the true friend of philosophy. But what could be done? Two
   contradictory things could not exist at the same time. Marcus-Aurelius
   was a Roman, when he persecuted he acted as a Roman. For sixty years an
   emperor, as good-hearted, but less enlightened in mind than
   Marcus-Aurelius, Alexander Severus, shall carry out without regard to
   any Roman maxims the true principles of liberalism; he shall grant
   complete freedom of conscience, and shall withdraw the laws restrictive
   of the liberty of meeting. We approve of that thoroughly. But Alexander
   Severus did this because he was a Syrian, and a stranger to the
   imperial tradition. He failed, besides, completely in his undertaking.
   All the great restorers of Roman affairs, who shall appear after him,
   Decius, Aurelian, Diocletian, shall return to the principles
   established and followed by Trajan, Antoninus, and Marcus-Aurelius. The
   perfect peace of conscience experienced by these men should not,
   therefore, surprise us; it was evidently with absolute serenity of
   heart that Marcus, in particular, dedicates in the Capitol a temple to
   his favourite goddess "Goodness."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER V.

  INCREASING GRANDEUR OF THE CHURCH OF ROME--PSEUDO-CLEMENTINE WRITINGS.

   Rome became every day more and more the capital of Christianity, and
   replaced Jerusalem as the religious centre of the human race. Civitas
   sacrosancta! That extraordinary city was at the culminating point of
   its grandeur; nothing could allow one to foresee the events which, in
   the third century, should happen to cause it to degenerate and become
   nothing more than the capital of the West. Greek was at last as much
   spoken there as Latin, and the great rupture of the East could not be
   guessed. Greek was exclusively the language of the Church; the liturgy,
   the preaching, the propaganda were carried on in Greek.

   Anicet ruled the Church with a high hand. They consulted him throughout
   all the Christian world. It was fully admitted that the Church of Rome
   had been founded by Peter; it was believed that this apostle had
   transmitted to his church the primacy with which Jesus had invested
   him; there was applied to this church the strong language in which it
   was believed that Jesus had conferred on Cephas the position of the
   corner-stone in the edifice he would build up. By unparalleled effort
   the Church of Rome had succeeded in remaining at the same time the
   church of Paul. Peter and Paul reconciled--that was the grand act which
   founded the ecclesiastical supremacy of Rome for the future. A new
   mythical duality replaced that of Romulus and Remus. We have already
   seen the question of Easter, the struggles of Gnosticism, those of
   Justin and Tatian meeting at Rome. All the controversies which rent the
   Christian conscience followed the same path, up till Constantine
   dissentients demanded from the Church of Rome an arbitration, if not a
   judgment. Celebrated doctors considered it a duty to visit, for their
   instruction, that Church in which, since the disappearance of the first
   Church of Jerusalem, all recognised the prestige of an ancient origin.

   Among the Orientals who came to Rome under Anicet, there must be named
   a converted Jew, called Joseph or Hegesippus, originally no doubt from
   Palestine. He had received a careful Rabbinical education, knew Hebrew
   and Syriac, and was versed in the unwritten traditions of the Jews; but
   he lacked critical taste. Like the majority of converted Jews he made
   use of the Gospel of the Hebrews. Zeal for the purity of the faith
   induced him to undertake long voyages and a sort of apostolate. He went
   from church to church conferring with the bishops, informing himself as
   to their faith, arranged the succession of pastors by which they were
   connected with the apostles. The dogmatic agreement which he found
   among the bishops filled him with joy. All these little churches on the
   borders of the Eastern Mediterranean showed a complete accord. At
   Corinth, in particular, Hegesippus was specially comforted by his
   meeting with the primate bishop and with the faithful, whom he found in
   the most orthodox path. He thence embarked for Rome, where he put
   himself in communication with Anicet and carefully remarked the
   condition of tradition. Anicet had a deacon Eleutherus, who later on
   became in his turn bishop of Rome. Hegesippus, although a Judaiser and
   even an Ebionite, was delighted with these churches of Paul, and he had
   the more merit in this because his mind was subtle and specially
   inclined to observed heresies. "In every succession of bishops, in
   every town, things are carried out as the law, the prophets, and the
   Lord ordain." He settled at Rome like Justin and remained there more
   than twenty years, much respected by all, in spite of the surprise
   which his Oriental Christianity and the address of his mind would
   excite. Like Papias he had, in the midst of the rapid transformations
   of the church, the effect of "an ancient man," a sort of survivor of
   the apostolic age.

   A material cause contributed greatly to the pre-eminence which all the
   churches recognised in the Church of Rome. That church was extremely
   rich; its property, ably administered, served as a fund for help and
   propagandism to other churches. The confessors condemned to the mines
   received a subsidy from her. The common treasury of Christianity was in
   some sort at Rome. The Sunday collection, a constant practice in the
   Roman church, was already probably established. A marvellous spirit of
   management animated this little community, where Judea, Greece, and
   Latium appeared to have mingled, in view of a prodigious future, their
   very diverse gifts. While the Jewish monotheism furnished the immovable
   basis of the new formation, while Greece continued by Gnosticism its
   free speculation, Rome applied itself with an astonishing persistence
   to the work of organisation and government. All authority, all
   artifices, were to it good for that end. Policy did not retreat before
   fraud; but policy had already chosen its seat in the most secret
   councils of the Church of Rome. It produced about this time a new vein
   of apocryphal literature, by which Roman piety sought once more to
   impose itself on the Christian world.

   The name of Clement was the fictitious guarantee which the forgers
   chose to serve as a cover to their pious designs. The great reputation
   which the old Roman pastor had left, the right which they recognised in
   him to give in some sort his recommendatory note to the books which
   were worthy of circulation, recommended him for this position. Upon the
   basis of the Cerygmata and Periodi of Peter, an unknown author, a Pagan
   born and introduced into Christianity by the Esseno-Ebionite door,
   built up a romance of which Clement was supposed to be at once the
   author and the hero. This precious document, entitled The Confessions,
   because of the surprises of the denouement, has reached us in two
   editions different enough from each other, and of which probably
   neither the one nor the other is the original. Both appear to be
   derived from a lost document, which made at the time we speak of its
   first appearance.

   The author sets out from the hypothesis that Clement was the immediate
   successor of Peter in the presidency of the Church of Rome, and
   received from the prince of the apostles the episcopal ordination. Just
   as the Cerygmata were dedicated to James, just as the new romance bore
   as a heading an epistle where Clement recounted to James, "Bishop of
   bishops and chief of the Holy Church of the Hebrews at Jerusalem," the
   violent death of Peter, and narrates how that apostle, the first of
   them all, the true companion, the true friend of Jesus, constituted by
   Jesus the only foundation of the Church, has established him, Clement,
   as his successor in the episcopate of Rome, and has recommended him to
   write compendiously, and to address to James the record of their
   journeys and their preachings in common. The work does not speak of
   Peter's sojourn at Rome nor of the circumstances of his death. These
   last accounts doubtless formed the basis of a second work which was of
   service to him who has preserved them to us.

   The Ebionite spirit, hostile to Paul, which formed the basis of the
   first Cerygmata, is here much effaced. Paul is not named in the whole
   work. It is surely not without reason that the author affects not to
   know other apostles than the twelve presided over by Peter and James,
   and that he attributes to Peter only the honour of having spread
   Christianity in the Pagan world. In a multitude of places the wrongs of
   the Judeo-Christians were still to be seen, but all is said in a half
   word; a disciple of Paul could scarcely read the book without being
   shocked. Little by little, indeed, this calumnious history of apostolic
   struggles, invented by a hateful school, but which had some portions
   made to please all the Christians, lost its sectarian colour, became
   almost catholic, and was adopted by the greatest number of the
   faithful. The allusions against St. Paul were obscure enough. Simon the
   Magician stands charged with everything odious in the story; the
   allusions his name had served to fail were forgotten; nothing more than
   a double of Nero in the infernal rôle of Antichrist.

   The work is composed according to all the rules of ancient romance.
   Nothing is wanting: travels, love episodes, shipwrecks, twins which
   resemble each other, people taken by pirates, recognition of people
   separated for long years. Clement, from a confusion which arises from a
   very ancient epoch, was considered to belong to the imperial family.
   Mattidia, his mother, is a perfectly chaste Roman lady, married to the
   noble Faustus. Pursued with a criminal love by her brother-in-law,
   wishing at the same time to save her honour and the reputation of her
   family, she quits Rome, with her husband's permission, and goes to
   Athens to educate her sons, Faustinus and Faustinian. At the end of
   four years, not receiving news of them, Faustus embarks with his third
   son, Clement, to go in search of his wife and her sons. After a
   thousand adventures the father, the mother, and the three sons meet.
   They were not Christians at first, but all deserved to be, and all
   became so. As Pagans they had had honest morals; and charity has this
   privilege, that God owes it to Himself to save those who practise it by
   natural instinct. "If it were not an absolute rule that no one could be
   saved without baptism the chaste Pagan would be saved." The infidels
   who are converted are those who have deserved it by their regulated
   morals. Clement, in fact, meets the apostles, Peter and Barnabas, makes
   them his companions, recounts to us their preachings, their contest
   with Simon, and becomes for all the members of his family the occasion
   of a conversion, for which they were so well prepared.

   This romantic framework is only a pretext for making an apology for the
   Christian religion, and for showing how superior it is to the
   philosophical and theurgic opinion of the age. St. Peter is no longer
   the apostle we know by the Acts and the letters of Paul; he is a
   skilful polemic--a master, who brings all the trickeries of the
   sophist's art into the service of the truth. The ascetic life he led,
   his rigorous xerophagy, repelled the Essenes. His wife travels with him
   as a deaconess. The ideas which were given of the social condition, in
   the midst of which Jesus and his apostles lived, had already become
   altogether erroneous. The most simple data of apostolic theology were
   unknown. It must be said, to the author's praise, that if his
   confidence in the credulity of the public is very naïve, he has at
   least a belief in discussion which does honour to his tolerance. He
   admits readily that one may be innocently deceived. Among the figures
   of the romance Simon the Magician alone is altogether sacrificed. His
   disciples, Apion and Anubion, represent, the first, the effort to draw
   from mythology something religious; the second, the misguided sincerity
   which shall one day be rewarded by the knowledge of the truth. Simon
   and Peter dispute metaphysically, Clement and Apion discuss morally. A
   touching shade of pity and sympathy with the erring spreads a charm
   over these pages, which we feel are written by one who has passed
   through the throes of scepticism, and knows better than any other how
   we may suffer and acquire merit in seeking the truth. Clement, like
   Justin of Neapolis, has tried all the philosophies, the lofty problems
   of the immortality of the soul, future rewards and punishments,
   Providence, the relations of man with God possess his mind; no school
   has satisfied him; he is despairingly about to plunge into the grossest
   superstitions when the voice of Christ comes to him. He finds, in the
   teaching which has been given as that of Christ, the reply to all his
   doubts; he is a Christian.

   The system of refutation of Paganism which shall make the basis of the
   argumentation of all the Fathers is already found complete in the
   pseudo-Clement. The primitive meaning of mythology was lost everywhere;
   the old physical myths became unseemly tales, offered no food for the
   soul. It was easy to show that the gods of Olympus have given very bad
   examples, and that the man who imitates them would be a villain. Apion
   vainly seeks to escape by symbolic explanations. Clement establishes
   without difficulty the absolute powerlessness of polytheism to produce
   a serious morality. Clement has unconquerable demands of soul; honest,
   pious, candid, he wishes a religion which shall satisfy his lively
   sensibility. One moment the two adversaries recall the souvenirs of
   youth, of which they now make arms to fight. Apion had once been the
   guest of Clement's father. Seeing the latter sad and sick one day from
   the anguish which seeking the truth gave him, Apion, who had medical
   pretensions, asked him what was wrong. "The disease of the young. I
   have a disease of the soul!" replied Clement. Apion thought he was a
   prey to love, made him the most unseemly proposals, and composed for
   him a piece of erotic literature, which Clement brings into the debate
   with more malice than reason.

   The philosophy of the book is Deism, considered as the fruit of a
   revelation, not of reason. The author speaks of God, of His nature,
   attributes, and Providence, of evil, regarded as a proof and as a
   source of merit for man, in the style of Glycon and Epictetus. A lucid
   and correct mind, opposed to the Montanist aberrations, and to the
   quasi-polytheism of the Gnostics, the author of the pseudo-Clementine
   romance is a strict monotheist, or, as might be said, a monarchist. God
   is the being whose essence is of Himself alone. The Son is by nature
   inferior to Him. These ideas, very analogous to those of the
   pseudo-Hermias, were long the basis of the Roman theology. Far from
   being revolutionary thoughts, they were at Rome the conservative ideas.
   It was at bottom the theology of the Nazarenes and the Ebionites, or
   rather of Philo and the Essenes, developed in the Gnostic sense. The
   world is the theatre and the struggle of good and evil. The good gains
   always a little upon the evil, and at last will overcome it. The
   partial triumphs of good are wrought by means of the appearance of
   successive prophets, Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Noah, Moses; or rather
   a single prophet, Adam, immortal and impeccable, the typical man par
   excellence, the perfect image of God, the Christ, ever living, ever
   changing in form and name, pervading the world unceasingly and
   fulfilling history, preaching eternally the same law in the name of the
   same Holy Spirit.

   The true law of Moses had nearly realised the ideal of the absolute
   religion. But Moses wrote nothing, and his institutions were altered by
   his successors. The sacrifices were a victory of Paganism over the pure
   law. A crowd of errors have slipped into the Old Testament. David, with
   his harp and his bloody wars, is a prophet quite inferior. The other
   prophets were still less perfect, Adam-Christs. The Greek philosophy,
   on its side, is a tissue of chimeras--a true logomachy. The prophetic
   spirit, which is nothing else than the Holy Spirit manifested, the
   primitive man, Adam, such as God made him, has appeared now in a last
   Christ, in Jesus, who is Moses himself; so much so that between them
   there is no contest or rivalry. To believe in the one is to believe in
   the other--it is to believe in God. The Christian, by being a
   Christian, does not cease to be a Jew (Clement gave himself always this
   latter name; he and all his family "were Jews"). The Jew who knows
   Moses and does not know Jesus shall not be condemned if he practises
   well what he knows, and does not hate what he is ignorant of. The
   Christian of Pagan origin, who knows Jesus and does not know Moses,
   shall not be condemned if he observes the law of Jesus, and does not
   hate the law which has been revealed to him. Revelation, besides, is
   only the ray by which some truths, hidden in all men's hearts, become
   visible to each of them; to know this is not to apprehend--it is to
   comprehend.

   The relation of Jesus to God has been that of all the other prophets.
   He has been the instrument of the Spirit, that is all. The ideal Adam,
   who is found more or less obscured in every man coming into this world,
   is, according to the prophet, master of the world, in the condition of
   clear knowledge and full possession. "Our Lord," says Peter, "has never
   said that there should be another God than He who created everything,
   and did not proclaim Himself God: He has only, with good reason,
   declared the man blessed who has proclaimed Him Son of the God who has
   created all." "But does it not appear," said Simon, "as if He, who
   comes from God, is God?" "How can that be?" said Peter. "The essence of
   the Father has not been begotten, the essence of the Son is begotten;
   therefore he who has been begotten cannot compare himself to him who
   has begotten himself. He who is not in everything identical with
   another being cannot have the same names in common with him." The
   author never speaks of the death of Jesus, and seems to attach no
   theological importance to that death.

   Jesus is then a prophet, the last of the prophets, he whom Moses had
   announced as coming after him. His religion is only a clearer edition
   of that of Moses, a choice between traditions, of which some are good
   and others bad. His religion is perfect; it suits Jews and Greeks,
   educated and barbarous men alike; it satisfies alike the heart and the
   mind. It is continued in due course by the twelve apostles, of whom
   Peter is chief, and by those who hold their powers from them. The
   appeal to dreams, private visions, is presumptuous.

   An odd mingling of Ebionism and philosophical liberalism, of strict
   catholicism and heresy, of exalted love for Jesus and of fear lest his
   part should be exaggerated, of profane instruction and of chimerical
   philosophy, of rationalism and faith--the book could not long satisfy
   orthodoxy; but it suited an age of syncretism, in which the points of
   the Christian faith were badly defined. It needed the prodigies of
   sagacity of modern criticism to recognise the satire of Paul behind the
   mask of Simon Magus. The book is, in short, a book of conciliation. It
   is the work of a moderate Ebionite, of an eclectic mind, opposed at
   once to the unjust judgments of the Gnostics, and of Marcion against
   Judaism, and to the effeminate prophesying of the disciples of
   Montanus. Circumcision is not commanded; yet the circumcised have a
   rank superior to the uncircumcised. Jesus is equal to Moses; Moses is
   as good as Jesus. Perfection is to see that both of them constitute
   only one, that the new law is the old, and the old the new. Those who
   have the one can do without the other. Let each one abide by his own,
   and let him not hate others.

   It was, it will be seen, the absolute denial of the doctrine of Paul.
   Jesus is to our theologian a restorer rather than an innovator. In the
   very work of this restoration, Jesus is only the interpreter of a
   tradition of sages, who, in the midst of the general corruption, had
   never lost the true meaning of the law of Moses, which is itself
   nothing but the religion of Adam, the primitive religion of humanity.
   According to the pseudo-Clement, Jesus is Adam himself. According to
   St. Paul, Jesus is a second Adam, altogether opposed to the first. The
   idea of the fall of Adam, the basis of the theology of St. Paul, nearly
   disappears here. On one side especially the author shows himself more
   reasonable than Paul. The latter never ceases to protest that man owes
   to no personal merit his election and Christian calling. The Ebionite,
   more liberal, believes that the honest Pagan makes a way for his
   conversion by his virtues. He is far from thinking that all acts of
   unbelievers are sins. The merits of Jesus have not, in his eyes, the
   transcendent part they possess in the system of Paul. Jesus places man
   in a relation to God, but he does not substitute himself for God.

   The Roman pseudo-Clementine separates himself clearly from the truly
   authentic writings of the first Christian inspiration by his prolixity,
   his rhetoric, his abstract philosophy, borrowed for the most part from
   the Greek schools. There is no longer here a Semitic book, shadowless,
   like the purely Judeo-Greek writings. A great admirer of Judaism, the
   author possesses a Græco-Italian mind, a political mind, preoccupied
   above all with the social needs, with the morale of the people. His
   culture is quite Hellenic; in Hellenism he only repels one thing--the
   religion. The author shows himself in every point quite superior to St.
   Justin. A considerable fraction of the Church adopted the work, and
   gave it a place beside the most reverenced books of the apostolic age,
   upon the borders of the New Testament. The gross errors which we read
   here as to the divinity of Jesus Christ, and as to the sacred books,
   are opposed to the rest of the work. But people continued to read it;
   the orthodox replied to exert thing by saying that Clement had written
   his book without a blemish, but that some heretics had altered it. Some
   extracts were made in which the offensive passages were omitted, and to
   which they readily attributed inspiration. We have seen, and we shall
   see, many other examples of romances invented by the heretics, forcing
   thus the gates of the orthodox Church, and causing themselves to be
   accepted by her, because they were edifying and capable of furnishing a
   nourishment to piety.

   The fact is that this Ebionite literature, in spite of its rather
   childish freshness, had the Christian unction in the highest degree.
   The tone was that of a moving preaching; its character was essentially
   ecclesiastical and pastoral. The pseudo-Clement is a partisan of the
   hierarchy quite as enthusiastic as the pseudo-Ignatius. The community
   recapitulates itself in its chief; the clergy is the indispensable
   mediator between God and His flock. The bishop's meaning must be taken
   at once; one must not wait till he says "Such a man is my enemy" to
   shun that man. To be a friend of anyone whom the bishop does not love,
   to speak to one whom he shuns--that is to place oneself out of the
   church, to pass into the ranks of its worst enemies. The office of a
   bishop is so difficult! Everybody ought to labour to make it easy for
   him; the deacons are the eyes of the bishop, they ought to survey
   everything, to know everything for him. A sort of espionage is
   recommended; what maybe called the clerical spirit has never been
   expressed in stronger language.

   Abstinence and Essenian practices were placed very high. Purity of
   manners was the principal preoccupation of these worthy sectaries. The
   adulterer in their eyes is worse than the homicide. "The chaste woman
   is the most beautiful object in the world--the most perfect
   reminiscence of God's primitive creation. The pious woman, who only
   finds her pleasure with the saints, is the ornament, the perfume, the
   example of the Church; she helps the pure to be pure; she delights God
   Himself. God loves her, is pleased with her, watches over her; she is
   His child, the bride of the Son of God, clothed as she is with holy
   light."

   Those mystic images do not constitute the author a partisan of
   virginity. He is too much a Jew for that. He wishes the priest to marry
   the young people in good time, causing even the old to marry. The
   Christian woman loves her husband, covers him with caresses, makes much
   of him, serves him, seeks to please him, obeys him in all which is not
   a disobedience to God! To be loved by another than her husband is for
   her a living misery. Ah! how foolish is the man who seeks to separate
   his wife from the fear of God! The grand source of chastity is the
   Church. It is there that woman learns her duties, and hears of this
   judgment of God which punishes a moment of pleasure by an eternal
   punishment. The husband ought to compel his wife to go to hear such
   sermons, if he cannot succeed by persuasion.

   "But what is better," adds the author, addressing himself to the
   husband, "is that you come yourself, leading her by the hand, that you
   also may be chaste, and capable of understanding the happiness of
   honourable marriage. To become a father, to love your children, to be
   loved by them, all this is at your disposal, if you desire it. He who
   wishes to have a chaste wife loves chastely, pays her conjugal duties,
   eats with her, lives with her, goes with her to the sanctifying
   preaching, does not grieve her or scold her without reason, seeks to
   please, procures for her all the pleasures he can, and makes up for
   those he cannot give her by caresses. Those caresses, besides, the
   chaste wife does not need in order that she should fulfil her duties.
   She looks on her husband as her master. Is he poor, she bears with his
   poverty; she is hungry with him, if he is hungry; if he emigrates, she
   emigrates; she consoles him when he is sad; when she has even a dowry
   larger than what her husband possesses, she takes the inferior attitude
   of one who has nothing. The husband, on his side, if he has a poor
   wife, ought to consider her wisdom as an ample dowry. The prudent woman
   is temperate in eating and drinking; . . . . she never remains alone
   with young men, she even avoids old men; she shuns boisterous laughter
   . . . . she delights in grave conversations, she avoids those which
   have not the marks of decorum."

   The good Mattidia, Clement's mother, is an actual example of the
   practice of these pious maxims. A Pagan, she sacrifices everything to
   chastity; chastity preserves her from the greatest perils, and is as
   good to her as the knowledge of the true religion.

   Christian preaching developed itself, became blended with culture. The
   sermon was the essential part of the sacred meeting. The Church became
   the mother of all edification and consolation. The rules as to
   ecclesiastical discipline were already multiplied. To give them
   authority they referred them to the apostles, and as Clement was
   thought the best guarantee where apostolic traditions were concerned,
   since he had been in intimate relations with Peter and Barnabas, it was
   still under the name of that revered pastor that we see dawning a whole
   apocryphal literature of Constitutions reputed to be founded by the
   College of the Twelve. The nucleus of this apocryphal compilation, the
   first basis of a collection of ecclesiastical canons, was preserved,
   very nearly without admixture, among the Syrians. Among the Greek, the
   collection, increased by time, sensibly altered, and became barely
   recognisable. It was quoted as forming part of the Sacred Scriptures,
   although certain reservations always rendered its authenticity
   doubtful. In course of time, liberty was granted to give this
   collection of pretended apostolic writings the form which was
   considered best to strike the faithful and to impress them; the name of
   Clement was always inscribed at the head of these various editions,
   which present besides marks of the strictest relationship with the
   romance of The Confessions. All the pseudo-Clementine literature of the
   second century presents thus the character of a complete unity.

   What characterises it in the highest degree is the spirit of practical
   organisation. Already in the supposed epistle of Clement to James,
   which serves as a preface to The Confessions, Peter, before dying,
   holds a long discourse on the episcopate, its duties, its difficulties,
   its excellence, on the priests, the deacons, the catechists, which is
   like a new edition of the epistles to Titus and Timothy. The Apostolic
   Constitutions were a kind of codification, growing gradually larger, of
   these pastoral precepts. What Rome founded was not dogma; few churches
   were more barren in speculation, less pure as to the question of
   doctrine. Ebionism, Montanism, Artemonism, held the majority there, one
   after the other. What Rome made is discipline, is Catholicism.

   At Rome probably the expression "Catholic Church" was written for the
   first time. Bishop, priest, layman, all these words took a fixed
   meaning in that Hierarchical Church. The church was a ship where each
   dignitary has his function concerning the safety of the passengers.
   Morality was severe and the cloister was already known. The mere liking
   for riches is condemned. The ornamentation of women is nothing but an
   invitation to sin. Woman is responsible for the sins of thought which
   she causes to be committed. Certainly, if she repels advances the evil
   is lessened; but is it nothing to be the cause of perdition to others?
   To live modestly occupied by her duties, to go her own way without
   mixing herself up with the gossiping of the street, to rear her
   children well, to administer frequent corrections to them, to forbid
   them dining in company with persons of their own age, to have them
   married in good time, not to read Pagan books (the Bible is sufficient
   and contains everything), not to take baths oftener than necessary and
   with great precautions, such were the rules for laymen. The bishops,
   the priests, the deacons, the widows, had more complicated duties.
   Besides holiness, they were to bring wisdom and sagacity into these
   functions. They were true magistrates--very superior to profane
   magistrates. Christians brought all their cases before the tribunal of
   the bishop, the dicaster of this last became in fact a civil
   jurisdiction which had its rules and its laws. The household of the
   bishop was already considerable; it came to be supported at the common
   expense of the faithful. The ideas of the ancient law as to the tithe
   and the offerings due to the priests were little by little restored. A
   strong theocracy was becoming established.

   The Church, in fact, absorbed everything; civil society was disparaged
   and despised. To the emperor belonged the census and the official
   salutations, that was all. The Christian constituted thus could only
   live with Christians. He was recommended to attract the heathen by the
   charm of amiable manners, in the hope that they might be converted. But
   beyond this hope the relations with the unbelievers were surrounded
   with such precautions, and implied so much disgust, that those became
   very rare. A mixed society of Pagans and Christians would be
   impossible. It was forbidden to take part in the rejoicings of the
   heathen, to eat or to amuse oneself with them, to be present at their
   spectacles, at their games, or at any of their grand profane re-unions.
   Even the public markets were interdicted, save in what concerned the
   purchase of necessary articles. On the contrary, Christians ought to
   eat together as much as possible, and live together, and form a little
   coterie of saints. In the third century that spirit of recluseness
   shall produce its own results. Roman society will die of exhaustion, a
   concealed cause will keep itself in life. When a considerable portion
   of a state makes a combination apart, and ceases to work for the common
   good, that state is almost ready to die.

   Mutual assistance was the principal duty in that society of the poor,
   administered by its bishops, its deacons, and its widows. The position
   of the rich man in the midst of small citizens and small honourable
   merchants, judging their affairs among themselves, scrupulous as to
   weights and measures, was difficult and embarrassing. The Christian
   life was not made for him. A brother dies, leaving orphans, boys and
   girls, and another brother adopts them, and marries the daughter to his
   son if their ages be suitable. This appeared quite simple. The rich
   people took with difficulty to a system so fraternal: then they were
   threatened with the forfeiture of their possessions, which they could
   not use well, and people applied to them the dictum: "What the saints
   have not eaten the Assyrians eat." The money of the poor was held as a
   sacred thing; those who were in easy circumstances paid a subsidy as
   large as they could; these were called "the contributions of the Lord."

   Delicacy was pushed to such an extent that everybody's money was not
   received in the Church's treasury. They rejected the offerings of
   tavern-keepers and of people who practised shameful trades; especially
   those of the excommunicated, who sought by their generosity to return
   to favour. "These people there would give," it was said, "and if we
   refuse their alms what shall we do to assist our widows, or to nourish
   the poor of the people?" "Better to die of hunger," was the Ebionite
   fanatic's reply, "than be under an obligation to the enemies of God for
   gifts which are an affront in the eyes of His friends. Acceptable
   offerings are those which the workman takes from the fruit of his toil.
   When the priest is obliged to receive the money of the wicked, let him
   use it for the purchase of wood and coal, so that the widow and the
   orphan may not be condemned to live upon polluted money. The presents
   of the wicked are thus food for the fire, not nourishment for
   believers." It is thus seen what a tight chain wound about the
   Christian life. Such an abyss separated, in the mind of those worthy
   sectaries, good and evil, that the conception of a liberal society,
   where each one acts according to his taste, under the regulation of
   civil laws, without giving an account to any or exercising a
   surveillance over others, appeared to them the height of impiety.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI.

  TATIAN--THE TWO SYSTEMS OF APOLOGY.

   Tatian, after Justin's death, remained some years at Rome. He continued
   there his master's school, professing for him always the loftiest
   admiration, but each day deviating more and more from his mind. He had
   some distinguished pupils, among others the Asiatic Rodon, a fertile
   writer who became later on one of the supports of orthodoxy against
   Marcion and Apelles. It was probably in the first year of the reign of
   Marcus-Aurelius that Tatian composed this document, hard and incorrect
   in style, sometimes lively and piquant, which passes rightly for one of
   the most original monuments of the Christian apologetics of the 2nd
   century.

   The work is entitled "Against the Greeks." The hatred of Greece was
   indeed Tatian's dominant sentiment. A true Syrian, he was jealous of
   and hated the arts and literature which had conquered the admiration of
   the human race. The Pagan gods seemed to him the personification of
   immorality. The world of Greek statues he saw at Rome gave him no rest.
   Going over the personages in whose honour they had been erected, he
   found that nearly all, male and female, had been people of evil life.
   The horrors of the amphitheatre revolted him with better reason; but he
   confounded with the Roman cruelties the national games and the theatre
   of the Greeks. Euripides, Menander, appeared to him as masters of
   debauch, and (a desire which was too much listened to!) he wished their
   works to be destroyed.

   Justin had taken as the basis of his apology a very wide sentiment. He
   had dreamed of a reconciliation of the Christian dogmas and Greek
   philosophy. That was assuredly a grand illusion. It did not require
   much effort to see that the Greek philosophy, essentially rational, and
   the new faith, proceeding from the supernatural, were enemies of each
   other, and that only one could remain on the ground. The apologetic
   method of St. Justin is narrow and perilous for the faith. Tatian felt
   that, and it is upon the very ruins of Greek philosophy that he seeks
   to raise the edifice of Christianity. Like his master, Tatian possessed
   a wide Greek erudition; like him he had no critical qualities, and
   mixed up, in the most arbitrary fashion, the authentic and the
   apocryphal, what he knew and what he did not know. Tatian's is a mind
   sombre, heavy, violent, full of wrath against the civilisation and
   against the Greek philosophy, to which he much prefers that of the
   East, what he calls the barbarian philosophy. An erudition of base
   alloy, like that which Josephus had shown in his work against Apion,
   came here to his help. Moses is, according to him, much more ancient
   than Homer. The Greeks have invented nothing of themselves; they have
   taken everything from other nations, notably the Orientals. They only
   excelled in the art of writing; for the foundation of their ideas they
   are as ignorant as other nations. The Grammarians are the cause of the
   whole evil; those are they who by their lies have embellished error and
   created that usurped reputation which is the principal obstacle to the
   triumph of the truth. The Assyrians, Phoenicians, Egyptians --those are
   the true authorities!

   Far from ameliorating men, Greek philosophy has not known how to
   preserve its votaries from the greatest crimes. Diogenes was
   intemperate, Plato a gourmand, Aristotle servile. The philosophers have
   all the vices among them; they are the blind disputing with the deaf.
   The laws of the Greeks were worth no more than their philosophy; they
   differ from each other; whereas the good law ought to be common to all
   men. Among the Christians, on the contrary, there is no disagreement.
   Rich, poor, men and women have the same opinions. By a bitter irony of
   fate, Tatian was to die a heretic, and to prove that Christianity was
   not more sheltered than philosophy was from schisms and party
   divisions.

   Justin and Tatian, although lifelong friends, represented already in
   the most characteristic manner the two opposing attitudes which
   Christian apologists shall take in regard to philosophy. The one class;
   at bottom Greeks, while reproaching Pagan society with the looseness of
   its manners, shall admit its arts, its general culture, its philosophy.
   The other class, Syrians or Africans, shall not see in Hellenism but a
   mass of wickedness and absurdities; they shall much prefer the
   "barbarian" to Greek wisdom; insult and sarcasm shall be their habitual
   arms.

   The moderate school of Justin seemed at first to gain. Some writings
   quite analogous to those of the philosophy of Naplouse, especially the
   Logos paræneticos, the Logos addressed to the Greeks, and the treatise
   On Monarchy, characterised by numerous Pagan Sibylline and
   pseudo-Chaldean quotations, began to group themselves around his
   principal works. They were yet fresh. The unknown author of the Logos
   paræneticos, the tolerant Athenagoras, the clever Minucius Felix,
   Clement of Alexandria, and, up to a certain point, Theophilus of
   Antioch, sought for all their dogmas some rational foundation. Even the
   most mysterious dogmas, the strangest to Greek philosophy, like the
   resurrection of the body, have, for these wide theologians, Greek
   antecedents. Christianity has, according to them, its roots in man's
   heart; it completes what the natural lights have begun; far from
   raising itself upon the ruins of reason, Christianity is only its
   complete development; it is the true philosophy. Everything leads us to
   believe that the lost apology of Melito was conceived in this spirit.
   The more or less Gnostic school of Alexandria, by adhering to this same
   sort of view, shall give it, in the third century, immense celebrity.
   It shall proclaim, like Justin, that the Greek philosophy is the
   preparation for Christianity, the ladder which leads to Christ.
   Platonism especially, by its idealistic tendency, is, for these
   phil-Hellenic Christians, the object of marked favour. Clement of
   Alexandria speaks of the Stoics with nothing but admiration. According
   to him each school of philosophy has laid hold of a particle of the
   truth. He goes so far as to say that, in order to know God, the Jews
   had had the prophets, the Greeks had had philosophy, and some inspired
   beings, such as the Sibyl and Hystaspes, so much so that a third
   Testament had created spiritual knowledge, and reduced the other two
   revelations to the condition of obsolete forms.

   But Christian feeling shall display a lively antipathy to those
   concessions of an apology sacrificing the severity of dogmas to a
   desire to please those whom it wishes to gain. The author of the
   Epistle to Diognetus nearly approaches Tatian in the extreme harshness
   with which he judges Greek philosophy. The Sarcasm of Hermias is
   pitiless. The author of Philosophumena looks upon ancient philosophy as
   the source of all heresies. This method of apology, the only really
   Christian one, to speak the truth, shall be taken up by Tertullian with
   unparalleled talent. The rough African shall oppose to the enervating
   weaknesses of the Hellenic apologists the disdain of Credo quia
   absurdum. He is in this only the interpreter of St. Paul's idea. "They
   are extinguishing Christ," the great apostle would have said in view of
   this soft complaisance. If the philosophers could, by the natural
   progress of their ideas, save the world, why has Christ come? Why has
   he been crucified? Socrates, you say, knew Christ to some extent. It is
   then likewise partly by the merits of Socrates that you are justified!

   The mania for demonological explanations is, with Tatian, pushed to the
   height of absurdity. Among the apologists his is the most barren of the
   philosophic mind. But his vigorous attack upon Paganism did much to
   condone this. The discourse against the Greeks was much praised even by
   men who, like Clement of Alexandria, were far from having any hatred
   against Greece; the charlatan-like scholarship which the author had put
   into his work created a school. Ælius Aristides seems to allude to this
   when, taking exactly the opposite of our author's idea, he represents
   the Jews as a sad race who have created nothing, strangers to
   belles-lettres and philosophy, only knowing how to disparage the
   Hellenic glories, arrogating to themselves the name of "philosophers"
   only by a complete reversal of the sense of the word.

   The heavy paradoxes of Tatian against the ancient civilisation were
   nevertheless to triumph. That civilisation had in fact done great
   injury; it neglected the intellectual education of the people. The
   people, deprived of elementary instruction, were a prey to all the
   surprises of ignorance, and believed every one of the chimeras of which
   they were told with assurance and conviction.

   As to what concerns Tatian, good sense had, at least, its revenge. This
   Lamennais of the second century followed, in many respects, the line of
   the Lamennais of our time. The exaggeration of mind and a kind of
   savageness which shock us in his discourse cast him out of the orthodox
   church. These extreme apologists became almost always an embarrassment
   to the cause they had defended.

   Already, in the discourse against the Greeks, Tatian is moderately
   orthodox. Like Apelles he believes that God, absolute in Himself,
   produces the Word, who created matter and produces the world. Like
   Justin, he declares the soul to be an aggregation of elements; that of
   its essence it is mortal and in darkness; that it is only by its union
   with the Holy Spirit that it becomes luminous and immortal. Then his
   fanatical character threw him into the excess of a hypercriticism on
   nature. By the kind of errors he showed and by his style, at once
   spiritual and rough, Tatian was to be the prototype of Tertullian. He
   wrote with the fulness and enthusiasm of a sincere mind, not quite
   clear. More excitable than Justin, if less regulated by discipline, he
   cannot, like himself, reconcile his liberty with the exigencies of all.
   So long as his master lived he frequented the church, and the church
   upheld him. After Justin's martyrdom, he lived in an isolated manner,
   without connection with the faithful, like a sort of independent
   Christian, making a people quite separate. The desire to have a school
   led him astray, according to Jerome. That which undid him, we believe,
   was rather the desire to be alone.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VII.

  DECADENCE OF GNOSTICISM.

   Christianity, at the point we have arrived at, had, if we may thus
   express it, reached the complete bloom of its youth. Life with it
   abounded, overflowed; no contradiction arrested it; it had
   representatives for all tendencies, advocates for all causes. The
   nucleus of the Catholic Church and orthodoxy was already so strong that
   all sorts of fancies could be found beside her without injuring her.
   Apparently, the sects denounced the Church of Jesus; but these sects
   remained isolated without consistency, and disappeared, for the most
   part, after having satisfied for a moment the needs of the little group
   which had created them. It is not that their action was barren; the
   almost individual secret instructions were at the moment of their
   highest popularity. Heresies almost always triumphed by their very
   condemnation. Gnosticism especially was chased out of the church and it
   was everywhere; the Orthodox Church, by striking at it with its
   anathema, impregnated itself with it. Among the Judeo-Christians,
   Ebionites and Essenes, it flowed along over the banks.

   When a religion begins to count a large number of partisans, it loses
   for a time certain of the advantages which have contributed to found
   it; for man is better pleased and finds more comfort in the little
   gathering than in the numerous church, where he is not known. As the
   public power did not direct its energy in the service of the Orthodox
   Church, the religious situation was that which England and America
   present at this day. The chapels, if one may say so, were multiplied in
   all directions. The chiefs of the sects struggled to obtain influence
   over the faithful, as in our times this is done by the Methodist
   preachers, the innumerable Dissenters of free countries. The faithful
   were a sort of curacy driven off by greedy sectaries, more like hungry
   dogs than pastors. The women especially were the coveted prey; when
   they were widows and in possession of property, they never were but
   surrounded by young and clever directors, who strove by mildness and
   complaisance to monopolise the cure of souls, at once fruitful and
   sweet.

   The Gnostic doctors had, in this hunt for souls, great advantages.
   Affecting a higher intellectual culture and less rigid manners, they
   found a sure clientèle among the richer classes, who desired to be
   distinguished and to escape the common discipline prescribed for the
   poor. Contact with the Pagans, and the perpetual contraventions of
   police rules which a member of the church was led to commit,
   contraventions which exposed him constantly to martyrdom, became
   tremendous difficulties for a Christian occupying a certain social
   position. Far from pressing towards martyrdom, the Gnostics furnished
   means to escape it. Basilides and Heracleon protested against the
   immoderate honours rendered to the martyrs; the Valentinians went
   further: in the time of hot persecution they advised that the faith
   should be denied, alleging that God did not demand from His adorers the
   sacrifice of life, and that it was better to confess Him less before
   men than before the Æons.

   They did not exercise less seduction among rich women, in whom their
   independence inspired the desire for a personal position. The Orthodox
   Church followed the severe rule laid down by St. Paul, which forbade
   all participation by the woman in the exercises of the church. In these
   little sects, on the contrary, women baptized, officiated, presided at
   the liturgy, and prophesied. As opposed as possibly could be in manners
   and mind, the Gnostics and the Montanists had this in common, that, by
   the side of their doctors, a female prophetess was found; Helen beside
   Simon, Philumena beside Apelles, Priscilla and Maximilla beside
   Montanus, and quite a galaxy of women around Markos and Marcion. Fable
   and calumny took possession of a circumstance which lent itself to
   misapprehension. Many of these dependents could only have been
   allegories without reality, or inventions of the orthodox. But
   certainly the modest position which the Catholic Church always imposed
   on women, and which became the cause of their ennoblement, was not
   quite observed in these petty sects, subjected to a less rigorous rule,
   and little accustomed, in spite of their apparent holiness, to practise
   true piety, which is self-denial.

   The three great systems of Christian philosophy which had appeared
   under Hadrian, that of Valentinus, that of Basilides, that of
   Saturninus, were developed without being much improved. The chiefs of
   these systems still lived or had successors. Valentinus, although
   thrice driven from the church, was much sought after. He left Rome to
   return to the East; but his sect continued to flourish in the capital.
   He died about the year 160 in the island of Cyprus. His disciples were
   all over the world. There was a difference between the doctrine of the
   East and that of Italy. The chiefs of the former were Ptolemy and
   Heracleon; Secundus and Theodotus at first, then Axiomicus and
   Bardesanus, directed the Oriental branch. The Valentinian school was
   much the most serious and Christian of all those which bore the general
   name of Gnostics. Heracleon and Ptolemy were learned exegetes in the
   Epistles of Paul, and the Gospel called that of John. Heracleon, in
   particular, was a real Christian doctor, by whom Clement of Alexandria
   and Origen profited a great deal. Clement has preserved to us from him
   one beautiful and elevated page on martyrdom. The writings of Theodotus
   were also habitually in Clement's hand, and some extracts appear to us
   to have come from them into the great mass of notes' made by the
   laborious Stromatist.

   In many points of view, the Valentinians might pass for enlightened and
   moderate Christians, but there was at the bottom of their moderation a
   principle of pride. The Church was not, in their eyes, a depository of
   anything but a minimum of truth, barely sufficient for ordinary men.
   The basis of things was known to them alone. Under the pretext that
   they made part of the psychical world and could not fail to be saved,
   they gave themselves unheard-of liberties, ate of everything without
   distinction, went to Pagan festivals, and even to the cruellest
   spectacles, fled from persecution, and even spoke against martyrdom.
   They were people of the world, free in manners and conversation,
   treating as prudery and bigotry the extreme reserve of the Catholics,
   who feared a light word, even an imprudent thought. The direction of
   women, in such circumstances, presented many dangers. Some of these
   Valentinian pastors were plainly seducers; others affected modesty;
   "but soon," says Irenæus, "the sister became enceinte by the brother."
   They arrogated superior intelligence to themselves, and left to the
   simple faithful the faith, "which is very different." Their exegesis
   was learned but barely safe. When they were pressed with texts of
   Scripture, they said the Scripture had been corrupted. When apostolic
   tradition was contrary to them, they no longer hesitated to reject it.
   They had, it appeared, a gospel which they called "The Gospel of the
   Truth." They really ignored the Gospel of Christ. They substituted for
   salvation by faith or by works a salvation by gnosis, that is to say,
   by the knowledge of a pretended truth. If such a tendency had
   prevailed, Christianity would have ceased to be a moral fact, to become
   a cosmogony and a metaphysic without influence on the general progress
   of humanity.

   It was not, moreover, with impunity that they flashed abstruse formulas
   in the people's eyes, keeping back to themselves the meaning. One
   single Valentinian book remains to us, "The Believer's Wisdom"; and it
   shows us to what a height of extravagance certain speculations had
   arrived--beautiful enough in the mind of their authors when they fell
   upon puerile minds. Jesus, after his resurrection, was reported to have
   passed eleven years on the earth to teach his disciples the highest
   truths. He told them the history of Piste Sophia; how she, enticed by
   her imprudent desire to seize the light she had seen at a distance,
   fell into the material chaos; how she was for a long time persecuted by
   the other Æons, who refused her rank to her; how at length she
   accomplished a series of proofs of repentance, until at last one sent
   from heaven, Jesus, descended for her from the luminous region. Sophia
   is saved by having believed in this Saviour before she had seen him.
   All this is expressed in a prolix style, with the wearisome process of
   amplification and hyperbole of the apocryphal gospels. Mary, Peter,
   Magdalene, Martha, John Parthenos, and the different Gospel personages
   play an almost ludicrous part. But the people, who found dryness in the
   restrained enough circle of the Jewish and Judeo-Christian Scriptures,
   took pleasure in these dreams, and many owed to such readings the
   opportunity of knowing Christ. The mysterious forms of the sect rested
   before everything on oral instruction, and its successive degrees of
   imitation fascinated the imagination and made them hold firmly to the
   revelations which they had obtained in consequence of so many trials.
   After Marcion, Valentinus was the heretic whose colleges were most
   frequented. Bardesanus, at Edessa, succeeded, by inspiring himself with
   it, in creating a large school of Christian instruction, such as had
   never been seen. We shall speak later on of this singular phenomenon.

   Saturninus always had numerous disciples. Basilides had his successor,
   his son Isidore. There wrought, besides, in this world of sects,
   certain fusions and separations, which were often the outcome of the
   vanity of the leaders. Far from lending themselves to the exigencies of
   practical life, the Gnostic system became every day more crude,
   complicated, and chimerical. Every one wished to be the founder of a
   school, to have a church, with its profits; in this some one, clouded
   with doctors, the least Christian of men, sought to surpass the others,
   and added some oddity to the oddities of their predecessors.

   The school of Carpocrates presented an incredible mixture of
   aberrations and of fine criticism. They spoke, as of a miracle of
   learning and eloquence, of the son of Carpocrates, named Epiphanes, a
   sort of infant prodigy, who died at sixteen years of age, after having
   astonished those who knew him by his knowledge of Greek literature, and
   especially by the knowledge he had of Plato's philosophy. It appears
   that they had raised to him a temple and altars at Samos, in the island
   of Cephalonia; an academy was erected in his name; they celebrated his
   birthday like the apotheosis of a god by sacrifices, feasts, and hymns.
   His book "On Justice" was much boasted of; what has been preserved to
   us is a sophistical and rugged discussion which recalls Prudhon and the
   socialists of our days. God, said Epiphanes, is just and good, for
   nature is equality. The light is alike for all, the sky the same to
   all; the sun makes no distinction between poor and rich, nor male nor
   female, nor bond nor free. No one can take from another his share of
   the sun to double his own; it is the sun which nourishes all. Nature,
   in other words, presents to everyone an equal happiness. It is human
   laws which, by violating the divine, have introduced evil; the
   distinction between "mine" and "thine," inequality, antagonism.
   Applying these principles to marriage, Epiphanes denied its justice or
   necessity. The desires which we all hold from nature are our rights,
   and no institution should put any limits to it.

   Epiphanes, to tell the truth, is less a Christian than a Utopian. The
   idea of absolute justice bewitches him. As opposed to the lower world,
   he dreams of a perfect, true world of God, a world founded on the
   doctrine of the sages, Pythagoras, Plato, Jesus, where equality, and
   consequently community of goods, should reign. His mistake was to
   believe that such a world could have a place in reality. Led away by
   the Republic of Plato, which he took quite seriously, he indulged in
   the saddest sophisms, and although he doubtless failed to rebut the
   gross calumnies which they related concerning those festivals where,
   the lights being extinguished, the guests delivered themselves up to a
   hateful promiscuousness, it is difficult not to admit that he produced
   strange follies in that direction. A certain Marcellinus, who came to
   Rome under Anicet, adored the portraits of Jesus Christ, Pythagoras,
   Plato and Aristotle, offering them worship. Prodicus and his disciples,
   named also Adamites, pretended to renew the joys of the earthly
   Paradise by some practices far removed from the primitive innocence.
   Their church called itself Paradise; they heated it, and attended it
   naked. Notwithstanding this they called themselves continent, and made
   the pretension of living in a perfect virginity. In name of a sort of
   divine and natural law all these sects, Prodicians, Eutychites, and
   Adamites, denied the force of the established laws, which they
   qualified by arbitrary rules and pretended laws.

   The numerous conversions of Pagans which had taken place created these
   kinds of scandals. They entered the church, drawn by a certain odour of
   moral purity; but they did not become saints for all that. A painter of
   some talent, named Hermogenes, thus became a Christian, but without
   renouncing the freedom of his pencil or his taste for women, or his
   recollections of Greek philosophy, which became amalgamated, good and
   evil alike, with Christian dogma. He admitted a primary matter, serving
   as a substratum to all God's works, and the cause of the defects
   inherent in creation. They imputed several oddities, and Tertullian,
   with like rigorists, treated him with an extreme brutality.

   The heresies of which we are speaking were all Hellenic. It was the
   Greek philosophy, especially that of Plato, which was the origin of it.
   Markos, whose disciples were called Markosians, left, on the other
   hand, the school of Basilides; the formulas upon the tetrade which he
   pretended were revealed to him by a heavenly woman, who was none other
   than Sige herself, would have been inoffensive had they not been joined
   to magic, thaumaturgical prestiges, philtres and arts capable of
   seducing women. He invented special sacraments, rites, anointings, and
   specially a sort of mass for his own use, which might have been
   imposing enough, had he not mixed with them sleight of hand passes
   analogous to the miracles of St. Januarius. He pretended by virtue of a
   certain formula to really change the water into blood in the chalice.
   By means of a powder, he gave the water a reddish colour. He caused the
   consecration to be made by a woman over a little chalice; then he
   turned the water of the smaller chalice into a large one which he held,
   pronouncing over it these words: "May the infinite and ineffable grace
   which is above all things fill thy internal being, and increase in thee
   its knowledge; shedding the grain of mustard seed upon good soil." The
   liquid was then increased, no doubt the result of some chemical
   reaction, and overflowed in a great stream. The poor woman was
   stupefied, and everyone was struck with wonder.

   The church of Markos was not only a nest of impostors; it passed also
   for a school of debauched and secret infamies. Perhaps this character
   was exaggerated, because in the Markosian cult the women acted as
   priests, and offered the Eucharist. Many Christian ladies they said
   allowed themselves to be bewitched; they put themselves under the
   direction of the sophist, and only came out bathed in tears. Markos
   flattered their vanity, holding towards them a language of equivocal
   mysticism, trampling over their timidity, teaching them to prophesy,
   and imposing on them. Then, when they were fatigued and ruined, they
   returned to the church, confessed their faults, and vowed themselves to
   penitence; weeping and groaning over the misfortune which had happened
   to them. The epidemic of Markos desolated principally the churches of
   Asia. The kind of connection which existed between Asia and Lyons
   brought this dangerous man to the banks of the Rhone. We shall see him
   make many dupes there; some frightful scandals celebrate his arrival in
   that church of saints.

   Colarbasus, according to certain accounts, came very near Markos, but
   we do not know if we have here the name of a real person. It is
   explained by Col arba Qol arba, a Semitic expression for the Markosian
   tetrade. The secret of those bizarre enigmas will probably always
   escape us.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VIII.

  ORIENTAL SYNCRETISM--THE OPHITES--FUTURE APPARITION OF MANICHÆISM.

   We should exceed our limits if we followed the history of those
   chimeras of the 3rd century. In the Greek and Latin world Gnosticism
   had been a fashion, it disappeared just as such with equal rapidity.
   Matters proceeded differently in the East. Gnosticism commenced a
   second life, much more brilliant and comprehensive than the first,
   through the eclecticism of Bardisanus, much more durable by
   Manichaeism. Already, since the 2nd century, the opponents of
   Alexandria were veritable dualists, attributing the origin of good and
   evil to two different gods. Manichæism shall go further; three hundred
   and fifty years before Mahommet, the genius of Persia realises already
   that which the genius of Arabia shall realise more powerfully, a
   religion which aspires to become universal, and to replace the work of
   Jesus, represented as imperfect or corrupted by his disciples.

   The intense confusion of ideas which reigned in the East led to a
   general syncretism of the strangest of these. Some little mystical
   sects from Egypt, Syria, Phrygia, Babylonia, profiting by apparent
   resemblances, pretended to be joined to the body of the Church, and
   sometimes were received. All the religions of antiquity appeared to
   have revived again to anticipate Jesus and to adopt him as one of their
   pupils. The cosmogonies of Assyria, Phoenicia, and Egypt, the doctrines
   of the mysteries of Adonis, Osiris, and Isis, of the great goddess of
   Phrygia, made an invasion into the Church, and continued what might be
   called the Oriental branch--scarcely Christian--of Gnosticism, inasmuch
   as Jehovah, the God of the Jews, was identified with Assyro-Phoenician
   Ialdebaoth, "the Son of Chaos." At other times the old Assyrian IAO,
   which offers with Jehovah some strange traces of family connection, was
   brought into fashion, and approached with its quasi-homonymism in such
   a way that it was difficult to distinguish between the shadow and the
   reality.

   The Ophialatros sects, so numerous in antiquity, lent themselves
   peculiarly to these senseless associations. Under the name of
   Nahassians, or Ophites, certain Pagan serpent-worshippers grouped
   themselves, whom it suited for a certain time to take the name of
   Christians. It is from Assyria that there comes the form of this
   bizarre Church; but Egypt, Phrygia, Phoenicia, and the Orphic mysteries
   have their share in it. Like Alexander of Abonoticos, preacher of his
   serpent-god Glycon, the Ophites had certain tamed serpents
   (agatho-demons) which they kept in cages. At the moment of celebrating
   the mysteries they opened the door to the little god and called upon
   him. The serpent came out, mounted on the table where the loaves were,
   and coiled himself round them. The Eucharist appeared then to the
   sectaries a perfect sacrifice. They broke the bread, distributed it,
   worshipped the agatho-demon, and offered through him, they said, a hymn
   of praise to the Heavenly Father. They sometimes identified their
   little animals with the Christ or with the serpent which taught men the
   knowledge of good and evil.

   The theories of the Ophites upon the Adamas, considered as an Æon, and
   upon the cosmic egg, recall the cosmogonies of Philo of Byblos, and the
   symbols common to all the mysteries of the East. Their rites were more
   analogous to the mysteries of the Great Goddess of Phrygia than to the
   pure assemblies of the believers in Jesus. What was most singular about
   it was that they had their Christian literature, their gospels, and
   their apocryphal traditions, connecting them with James. They used
   principally the gospel of the Egyptians, and that of Thomas. Their
   Christology was that of all the Gnostics. Jesus Christ was according to
   their view composed of two persons, Jesus and Christ--Jesus the son of
   Mary, the most righteous, wisest, and purest of men, who was crucified;
   Christ, the heavenly Æon, who came to unite himself to Jesus, quitted
   him before the passion, sent from Heaven a virtue which made Jesus to
   rise, with a spiritual body, in which he lived eighteen months, giving
   to a small number of chosen disciples a higher instruction.

   Upon these hidden borders of Christianity the most varied dogmas
   blended themselves together. The tolerance of the Gnostics and
   proselytism opened so wide the gates of the Church that everything
   passed through them. Some religions which had nothing in common with
   Christianity, and some Babylonian cults, perhaps some branches of
   Buddhism, were classed and numbered by the heresiologies among
   Christian sects. Such were the Baptists or Sabians, afterwards known
   under the name of Mendaîtes, the Perates, the adherents of a cosmogony
   half Phoenician, half Assyrian; a perfect balderdash, more worthy of
   Byblos, of Maboug, or Babylon, than the Church of Christ; and
   especially the Sethians, a sect in reality Assyrian, and which
   flourished also in Egypt. It was connected by some punsters with the
   patriarch Seth, the supposed father of a vast literature, and sometimes
   identified with Jesus Christ himself. The Sethians arbitrarily combined
   Orphism, Neo-Phoenicianism, and the ancient Semitic cosmogonies, and
   found the whole of this in the Bible. They said that the genealogies of
   Genesis included sublime views, which vulgar minds had looked upon as
   simple family records.

   A certain Justin about this same time, in a work entitled Baruch,
   transformed Judaism into a mythology, and left scarcely any position to
   Jesus. Some exuberant imaginations, nourished by innumerable
   cosmogonies, and strangely placed in the severe régime of the Hebrew
   and gospel literature, could not accommodate themselves to so much
   simplicity. They inflated, if I may venture to say so, the historical
   records, legendary, or evhemeristic of the Bible in order to connect
   them with the genius of the Greek and Oriental fables to which they
   were accustomed.

   It will thus be seen that the whole mythological world of Greece and
   the East was introduced surreptitiously into the religion of Jesus.
   Intelligent men of the Greco-Oriental world felt indeed that one and
   the same spirit animated all the religious creations of humanity. They
   commenced by comprehending Buddhism. Although it was then far from the
   time when the life of Buddha had become the life of a holy Christian,
   they spoke of him with nothing but respect.

   The Babylonian Manichæism, which represented in the third century a
   continuation of Gnosticism, is strongly impregnated with Buddhism. But
   the attempt to introduce all this pantheistic mythology into the
   framework of a Semitic religion was condemned in advance. Philo, the
   Jew, the epistles to the Colossians and the Ephesians, the
   pseudo-Johannine writings, had been under this conviction as long as it
   was possible. The Gnostics marked the true sense of every word by
   pretending that they were Christians.

   The essence of the work of Jesus was the improvement of the soul. Now
   these empty speculations embraced everything in the world except good
   sense and good morals. Even by holding as calumnies what has been said
   of their promiscuous intercourse and licentious habits, one cannot
   doubt that the sects of which we speak had had in common an evil
   tendency to moral indifference, and a dangerous quietism, a world of
   generosity, which led them to proclaim the uselessness of martyrdom.
   Their obstinate Docetism, their system of attributing the two
   Testaments to two different gods, their opposition to marriage, their
   denial of the resurrection and the final judgment, closed to them the
   gates of a church. There the rule of the leaders was always a kind of
   moderation and opposition to excess. Ecclesiastical discipline,
   represented by the episcopate, was the rock against which those
   disorderly attempts all came to be broken.

   We should be afraid by speaking longer of such sects to have the
   appearance of taking too seriously what they did not take so
   themselves. What were they but Phibionites, Barbelonites, or
   Borborians, the stratiotics or soldiers, the Levitics or Codists? The
   fathers of the Church are unanimous in throwing upon all these heresies
   a ridicule which they doubtless deserved, and a hatred which perhaps
   they did not. There was in the whole of them more of charlatanism than
   wickedness.

   With their Hebrew words often taken in an opposite sense, their magic
   formulas, and later on their amulets and their Abracadabras, the
   Gnostics of the lower type merited only to be despised.

   But this contempt ought not to be poured out upon those great men who
   sought in that powerful narcotic the repose or the stupefication of
   their thoughts. Valentinus was in his own way a genius; Carpocrates and
   his son, Epiphanes, were brilliant writers, spoiled by utopia and
   paradox; but sometimes astonishingly profound. Gnosticism had a
   considerable part in the work of the Christian propaganda. Often it was
   the transition by which people passed from Paganism to Christianity.
   The proselytes thus gained became nearly always orthodox; they never
   returned to Paganism.

   It is especially Egypt which preserves from these strange rites an
   ineffaceable impression. Egypt had not had any Judeo-Christianity. A
   remarkable fact is the difference between the Coptic literature and the
   other Christian literature of the East, while the greater number of
   Judeo-Christians are found in Syriac, Arabic, Ethiopic, Armenian;
   Coptic only shows a Gnostic background without anything further. Egypt
   also passes without the intermediary of the Pagan illumination to the
   Christian light. Alexandria was almost entirely converted by the
   Gnostics. Clement of Alexandria was what one would call a moderate
   Gnostic. He quotes with respect Heracleon as a doctor, claiming
   authority from many points of view. He uses in good sense the word
   Gnostic, and regards it as synonymous with Christian. He is far in any
   case from entertaining against the new ideas the hatred of Irenæus, of
   Tertullian, or the author of the Philosophumena. We may say that
   Clement of Alexandria and Origen introduced into Christian science that
   which the too bold attempt of Heracleon and Basilides had of
   acceptability.

   Mixed intimately with all the intellectual movement, the gnosis had a
   decisive influence upon the turn which speculative philosophy took in
   the third century in that city, then become the centre of the human
   intellect. The consequence of these disputes without end was the
   constitution of a sort of Christian academy, a true school of sacred
   letters and exegesis, which Pantænus, Clement, and Origen soon made
   famous. Alexandria became every day more and more the capital of
   Christian theology.

   The effect of the gnosis upon the Pagan school of Alexandria was not
   less. Ammonius Saccas, born of Christian parents, and Plotinus, his
   disciple, were both impregnated with it. The most open minds, such as
   Numenius of Apamea, entered by this path into the knowledge of Jewish
   and Christian doctrines, up till then so rare in the heart of the Pagan
   world. The Alexandrian philosophy of the third, fourth, and fifth
   centuries is full of what may be called the Gnostic spirit, and it
   linked to the Arabian philosophy a germ of mysticism which that should
   develop still more. Judaism on its side shall yield to similar
   influences. The Cabbala is nothing else than the Gnosticism of the
   Jews. The sephiroth are the perfections of Valentinus. Monotheism, to
   create itself a mythology, has only one process, and that is to give
   life to the attributes which it is accustomed to range around the
   throne of the Eternal.

   The world, wearied of an effete polytheism, demanded in the East, and
   especially in Judæa, some divine names less used than those of the
   current mythology. These Oriental names had more weight than the Greek
   names, and a singular reason was given for their theurgic superiority;
   it is that the Divinity having been invoked by the Orientals at a more
   ancient period than by the Greeks, the names of the Oriental theology
   answered better than the Greek names to the nature of the gods, and
   pleased them more. The names of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Solomon
   passed in Egypt for talismans of the first potency. Amulets answering
   to this unruly syncretism covered the whole world. The words IAo,
   ADoNAI, CLBAoTh, eLoAI and the Hebraic formulas in Greek characters
   were mixed up with some Egyptian symbols and with the sacramental
   LBRACAX, equivalent to the number 365. All this is much more
   Judeo-Pagan than Christian, and Gnosticism in Christianity representing
   the aversion to Jehovah pushed even to blasphemy; it is entirely
   inexact to connect with Gnosticism these monuments of absurdity. They
   were the effect of the general turn which the superstition of the time
   had taken, and we believe that at the period we have arrived at,
   Christians of all sects remained indifferent to these little talismans.
   It is from the conversion en masse of the Pagans, in the fourth and
   fifth centuries, that the amulets were introduced into the Church, and
   that some words and symbols decidedly Christian are begun to be met
   with there.

   Orthodoxy was, therefore, ungrateful not to recognise the services
   which these undisciplined sects had rendered her. In dogma they
   provoked nothing but reaction, but their position was more considerable
   in Christian literature and liturgical institutions. They borrowed
   nearly always a good deal from those whom they anathematised. The first
   Christianity, quite Jewish still, was very simple, it was the Gnostics
   who made a religion of it. The sacraments were to a large extent their
   creation; their anointings, especially at the deathbeds of the sick,
   produced a deep impression. The holy chrism confirmation (at first an
   integral part of baptism), the attribution of a supernatural power to
   the sign of the Cross, and many other elements of Christian mysticism
   came from them. A young and active party, the Gnostics wrote much and
   launched boldly into apocrypha. Their books, assailed with discredit at
   first, finished by entering into the orthodox family. The Church soon
   accepted what it had at first inveighed against. A multitude of
   superstitions, festivals, and symbols of Gnostic origin thus became the
   superstitions, festivals, and symbols of Catholicism. Mary the mother
   of Jesus, in particular, with whom the Orthodox Church had little
   concerned itself, owed to these innovators the first development of her
   almost divine position. The apocryphal gospels are fully half at least
   the work of Gnostics. Now the apocryphal gospels have been the source
   of a great number of festivals, and have furnished the most cherished
   subjects for Christian art. The first Christian image, the first
   portraits of Christ, were Gnostic. The strictly orthodox Church would
   have remained iconoclastic if heresy had not penetrated it, or rather
   had not demanded from her, for the necessities of the times, more than
   one concession to Pagan weaknesses.

   Moving from time to time from genius to folly, Gnosticism defies all
   absolute judgments on it. Hegel and Swedenborg, Schelling and
   Cagliostro, elbow each other there. The apparent frivolity of some of
   its theologians should not repel us. Every law which is not the pure
   expression of positive science must submit to the caprices of fashion.
   So Hegel's formula, which in his time had been the most lofty view in
   the world, causes us to smile now. Such a phraseology in which to sum
   up the universe one day shall appear clumsy or weak. To all who make
   shipwreck in the sea of the infinite, indulgence must be given. Good
   sense, which appears at first sight irreconcilable with the chimeras of
   the Gnostics, was not so wanting in them as we might imagine. They did
   not fight against civil society; they did not seek for martyrdom; and
   they held excess of zeal in aversion. They had high wisdom, tolerance,
   and sometimes (can it be believed?) even discreet scepticism. Like all
   religious forms, Gnosticism softened, consoled, and excited the mind.
   Here are the terms in which a Valentinian epitaph, found on the Latin
   Way, tries to sound the abyss of death:--

   "Desirous to see the light of the Father, companion of my blood, of my
   bed, O my wise one, perfumed in the sacred bath, with the incorruptible
   and pure myrrh of the Christ, thou hast hastened to go and contemplate
   the divine faces of the Æons, the great angel of the grand council, the
   true Son, hurried as thou wast from sleeping in the nuptial couch, into
   the bosom of the Æons.

   "This death is not the lot of ordinary human beings. She is dead, and
   she sees and really may see the light incorruptible. To the eyes of the
   living she is living; those who believe her dead are really dead.
   Earth, what shall be said of thy wonders in presence of this new kind
   of manes! What shall be said of thy fear!"
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IX.

  THE RESULT OE MARCIONISM--APELLES.

   Excellent for producing consolation and individual edification,
   Gnosticism was very weak as a church. There could not be drawn from it
   either Presbytery or Episcopacy; ideas so ill-ordered produced only
   dogmatism. Marcion alone succeeded in raising a compact edifice upon
   this fleeting basis. He had a Marcionite church strongly organised.
   Certainly the church was stained by some grave faults which brought it
   under the ban of the Church of Christ. It is not without reason that
   all the founders of Episcopacy shew by one common sentiment aversion to
   Marcion. Metaphysics did not regulate those minds enough to prevent
   them from cherishing a pure theological hatred. But time is a good
   judge. Marcionism continued. It was, like Arianism, one of the grand
   fractions of Christianity, and not, like so many other sects, a bizarre
   and passing meteor.

   Marcion, while remaining quite faithful to certain principles which to
   him constituted the essence of Christianity, changed more than once in
   his theology.

   He does not appear to have imposed on his disciples any very distinct
   creed. After his death the internal dissensions of his sect were
   extreme. Potitus and Basilicus remained faithful to dualism; Synerôs
   held three natures, without it being known rightly how he expressed it;
   Apelles inclined decidedly to monachism. He had at first been
   personally a disciple of Marcion; but he was gifted with too
   independent a spirit to remain a scholar; he broke with his master, and
   quitted his church. These ruptures, outside the Catholic Church, were
   accidents occurring every day. The enemies of Apelles tried to cause it
   to be believed that he had been expelled, and that the cause of his
   excommunication was a freedom of morals which contrasted with the
   severity of his master. There was much said about a virgin, Philumena,
   whose seductions had influenced all his wanderings, and who had played
   to him the rôle of a Priscilla or Maximilla. Nothing is more doubtful.
   Rhodon, his orthodox adversary, who knew him, represents him as an old
   man venerable by the ascetic rule of his life. Rhodon speaks of
   Philumena, and represents her as a virgin "possessed," whose
   inspirations Apelles really looked on as divine. Such accidents of
   credulity befel the most austere doctors, especially Tertullian.

   The symbolic language of the Gnostic doctrines led to grave
   misunderstandings, and often gave place to grave mistakes on the part
   of the orthodox, interested in calumniating such dangerous enemies. It
   was not with impunity that Simon the Magician played on the allegory of
   Helena-Ennoia, Marcion was perhaps the victim of a mistake of the same
   order. Apelles' somewhat variable philosophic imagination might also
   cause it to be said that, pursuing an inconstant love, he quitted the
   truth to run after perilous adventures. We may be allowed to suppose
   that he gave as a framework to his teaching the revelations of a
   symbolic personage whom he called Philumena (the beloved Truth). It is
   certain, at least, that the words attributed by Rhodon to our doctor
   are those of an honest man, of a sincere friend of the truth. After
   having quitted Marcion's school, Apelles went to Alexandria, and
   attempted a sort of eclecticism among the confused ideas that passed
   before him, and then returned to Rome. He did not cease to retouch
   during his whole life his master's theology, and it appears that he
   finished by becoming weary of metaphysical theories which, according to
   our ideas, drew him from the true philosophy.

   The two grand errors of Marcion, as of the greater portion of the first
   Gnostics, were dualism and docetism. By the first, he gave in advance a
   hand to Manichaeism, by the second to Islam. The Marcionite doctors and
   Gnostics of the latter part of the second century generally attempted
   to extenuate these two errors. The last Basilidians arrived by this at
   a pure Pantheism. The author of the pseudo-Clementine romance, in spite
   of his bizarre theology, is a Deist. Hermogenes awkwardly flounders
   about among insoluble questions raised by the doctrine of the
   Incarnation. Apelles, whose ideas sometimes much resemble those of the
   pretended Clement, seeks to escape from the subtleties of the gnosis by
   maintaining with energy the principles of what may be called the
   theology of good sense.

   The absolute unity of God is the fundamental dogma of Apelles. God is
   perfect goodness; the world does not sufficiently reflect this
   goodness, and the world cannot be His work. The true world created by
   God is a higher world, peopled by angels. The chief of these angels is
   the Glorious Angel, a sort of demiurge or created Logos, creator in his
   turn of the visible world; that is but defective imitation of the
   higher world. Apelles shunned thus the dualism of Marcion and placed
   himself in an intermediary situation between Catholicism and the
   gnosis. He corrected really the system of Marcion, and gave to this
   system a certain consequence; but he fell into many other difficulties.
   Human souls, according to Apelles, made part of the higher creation
   from which they had fallen by concupiscence. To bring them back to Him,
   God has sent His Christ into the lower creation. Christ has come thus
   to improve the defective and tyrannical work of the demiurge. Apelles
   re-entered here in the classical doctrine of Marcionism and Gnosticism,
   according to which the essential work of the Christ has been to destroy
   the worship of the demiurge, that is to say, Judaism. The Old Testament
   and the New appear to him two enemies. The God of the Jews, like the
   God of the Catholics (in the eyes of Apelles, these last were
   Judaisers), is a perverse God, author of sin and of the flesh. Jewish
   history is the history of evil; the prophets themselves are inspired
   with the evil spirit. The God of good had not revealed Himself before
   Jesus. Apelles admitted that Jesus had a heavenly elementary body,
   beyond the ordinary physical laws, although endowed with a complete
   reality.

   With different renewals, Apelles appeared to have felt that this
   doctrine of the radical opposition of the two Testaments had something
   too absolute about it, and, as his was not a stubborn mind, he came
   little by little from that to ideas which St. Paul would perhaps not
   have repelled. At certain times, the Old Testament appeared to him
   rather incoherent and contradictory than decidedly bad; so that the
   work of Christ would have been to make the discernment of good and
   evil, conformably to this word so often quoted by the Gnostics: "Be ye
   good trapezites." So, as Marcion had written his Antithesis to show the
   incompatibility of the two Testaments, Apelles wrote his Syllogisms, a
   vast compilation of weak passages from the Pentateuch, destined
   especially to show the variableness of the ancient legislator and his
   small amount of philosophy. Apelles exhibited there a very subtle
   criticism, reminding us occasionally of that of the unbelievers of the
   eighteenth century. The difficulties which the first chapters of
   Genesis present, when mythical explanations were excluded, were
   heightened with much sagacity. His book was considered as a refutation
   of the Bible and repelled as blasphemous.

   Possessed of a mind too just for the sectarian world in which he was
   engaged, Apelles was condemned always to change. To the end of his life
   he was tormented about the Scriptures. Even his fundamental idea of the
   divine unity wavered before him, and he arrived, without doubting, at
   perfect wisdom, that is to say, at a disgust for systems and at good
   sense. Rhodon, his adversary, has given us a conversation which he had
   with him at Rome about 180. "The old Apelles," he says, "conferring
   with us, we showed him that he was deceived in many things, so that he
   was led to say that it was not necessary to examine matters of religion
   so much, that each one might remain in his own belief, and that those
   were saved who trusted in the Crucified, provided they were found good
   men. He confessed that the most obscure point to him was that which
   concerned God. He admitted, like us, but a sole principle. . . . Where
   is the proof of all that,' I asked of him, and how is it that you are
   at liberty to assert that there is but a sole principle?' He confessed
   to me then that the prophecies could teach us nothing true, since they
   contradicted and reversed themselves; that this assertion, There is but
   one principle,' was rather with him the result of instinct than of a
   positive knowledge. Having asked him, upon his oath, to tell the truth,
   he swore to me that he spoke sincerely; that he did not know how there
   was but one God unbegotten, but that he believed it. As to me, I
   reproached him with laughter for giving himself the title of master,'
   without being able to adduce any proof in favour of his doctrine."

   Poor Rhodon! It was the heretic Apelles who, on that day, gave him a
   lesson in good taste, tact, and true Christianity. The pupil of Marcion
   was really cured, since to a clumsy gnosis he preferred Faith, the
   secret instinct of the truth, the love of the good, trust in the
   Crucified.

   What gave a certain force to ideas like those of Apelles is that they
   were only, in many points of view, a return to St. Paul. It was not
   doubtful that St. Paul, had he risen again at the point in Christianity
   at which we have arrived, would have found that Catholicism made too
   many concessions to the Old Testament. He would have protested and
   maintained that they were returning to Judaism, which was called the
   new wine in old bottles, and that they suppressed the difference
   between the Gospel and the Law.

   The teaching of Apelles did not go outside Rome, and barely lasted till
   after his death. Tertullian, nevertheless, felt himself obliged to
   refute it. A certain Lucan or Lucian made, like Apelles, a distinct
   sect in the Marcionite church. It seems that he admitted, like Synerôs,
   three principles, one good, the second bad, and the third just. The
   strictly just principle was represented by the demiurge or creator. In
   his hatred against this last, Lucian forbade marriage. By his
   blasphemies against the creation he appeared to others to approach
   Cerdo.

   Severus appears to have been a later Gnostic more than a Marcionite.
   Prepon, the Assyrian, denied the birth of Christ, and maintained that
   in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Jesus descended from
   heaven in the figure of a completely formed man.

   Marcionism, like Gnosticism, was in the second generation. These two
   sects had not after this time any celebrated doctor. All the grand
   fancies hatched under Hadrian vanished like dreams. The shipwrecked
   from these little adventurous churches hung on greedily to the borders
   of the Catholic Church, and re-entered it. The Church writers had the
   advantage over them that those who do not search and do not doubt have
   over the crowd. Irenaeus, Philip of Gortyne, Modestus, Melito, Rhodon,
   Theophilus of Antioch, Bardesanes, Tertullian, set themselves as a task
   to unmask what they called the infernal tricks of Marcion, and they did
   not restrain their language from any violence.

   Although struck with death, the church of Marcion remained indeed a
   long time a distinct community beside the Catholic Church. During
   several centuries there were in all the provinces of the East some
   Christian communities who were honoured by bearing the name of Marcion,
   and wrote this name on the front of their "synagogues." These churches
   show successions of bishops quite comparable to that in which the
   Catholic Church glories. They had martyrs, virgins, everything that
   constituted sainthood. The faithful led an austere life, braved death,
   wore the monastic sackcloth, imposed on themselves strict fasts, and
   abstained from everything which had had life in it. "There are some
   hornets who imitate the swarms of bees," the orthodox said. "These
   wolves clothe themselves with the skin of the sheep they kill," said
   others. Like the Montanists, the Marcionites fabricated false apostolic
   writings and false psalms. It is needless to say that this heretical
   literature has entirely perished.

   In the fourth and fifth centuries the sect, lively still, was fought
   against with energy, as with an actual flail, by John Chrysostom, St.
   Basil, St. Epiphanes, Theodoret, the Armenian Eznig, the Syrian Boud,
   the Periodoute. But the exaggerations ruined it. A general horror of
   the works of the Creator carried the Marcionites to the most absurd
   abstinences. They were in many points of view pure encratites; they
   forbade wine even in the mysteries. It was said to them that to be
   consistent they should allow themselves to die of hunger. They looked
   on baptism as a means of justification, and permitted women to
   officiate in the churches. Badly protected against superstition, they
   fell into magic and astrology. They became confounded gradually with
   the Manichæans.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER X.

  TATIAN HERETICAL--THE ENCRATITES.

   What shows that the order of ideas which filled the minds of Marcion,
   Apelles, and Lucan came from the theological situation by a kind of
   necessity is that we see the faithful from all parts turning from the
   same side without their antecedents being possibly foreseen. Such was
   in special the fate which was reserved for the disciple of the tolerant
   Justin, for the apologist who had twenty times risked his life for his
   faith--Tatian. At a date which cannot be precisely fixed, Tatian, who
   at bottom was always an Assyrian at heart, and who much preferred the
   East to Rome, returned to Adiabene, where the number of Jews and
   Christians was considerable. There his doctrine altered more and more.
   Cut off from all the churches he remained in his own country what he
   was already in Italy--a sort of solitary Christian, not belonging to
   any one sect, although approaching the Montanists in asceticism, and
   some Marcionites by his doctrine and exegesis. His ardour for work was
   prodigious; his burning brain would not allow him to rest; the Bible,
   which he read without ceasing, inspired him with the most contradictory
   ideas; he wrote on this subject books without end.

   After having been, in his apology, the fanatical admirer of the Hebrews
   against the Greeks, he fell into the opposite extreme. The exaggeration
   of the ideas of St. Paul, which had led Marcion to inveigh against the
   Jewish Bible, led Tatian to sacrifice entirely the Old Testament to the
   New. Like Apelles and the greatest number of the Gnostics, Tatian
   admitted a Creator God subordinate to the Supreme God. In the act of
   creation, by pronouncing the words "Let light be!" the Creator,
   according to him, proceeded, not by command, but by way of prayer. The
   Law was the work of the Creator God, only the Gospel was the work of
   the Supreme God. An exaggerated demand for moral perfection caused
   Tatian, after having repelled the Hellenic antiquity as impure, to
   repel likewise the Biblical antiquity. Hence an exegesis and a
   criticism little different from that of the Marcionites. His Problems,
   like the Antitheses of Marcion and the Syllogisms of Apelles, had
   doubtless for their object to prove the inconsequences of the ancient
   law and the superiority of the new. He presented there, with very lucid
   good sense, the objections which could be made against the Bible, by
   placing himself on the ground of reason. The rationalistic exegesis of
   modern times finds its ancestors in the school of Apelles and Tatian.
   Notwithstanding its injustice to the Law and the Prophets, this school
   was certainly, in exegesis, more sensible than the orthodox doctors
   with their entirely arbitrary allegorical and typical explanations.

   The idea which governed Tatian's mind in the composition of his
   celebrated Diatessaron could not be worthy in the opinion of the
   orthodox. The discordance of the gospels shocked him. Desirous above
   all to meet the objections of reason, he sought at the same time to do
   what would be most for edification. Everything in the life of Jesus
   which according to him brought the God too near the man was mercilessly
   sacrificed. However convenient was this attempt at the fusion of the
   gospels, it was denounced, and the copies of the Diatessaron were
   violently destroyed. The principal adversary of Tatian in this last
   period of his life was his old pupil Rhodon. Taking up one by one the
   Problems of Tatian, this presumptuous exegete set himself to reply to
   all the objections his master had raised. He also wrote a commentary on
   the work of six days. No doubt if we had the work which Rhodon composed
   upon so many delicate questions, we should see that it was less wise
   than that of Apelles or Tatian; those prudently confessed that they did
   not know how to solve them.

   The faith of Tatian varied like his exegesis. Gnosticism, half
   conquered in the West, flourished in the East still. Combining together
   Valentinus, Saturninus, and Marcion (the disciple of St. Justin),
   forgetful of his master, fell into the dreams which he had probably
   refuted at Rome. He became a heresiarch. Full of horror on the matter,
   Tatian could not bear the idea that Christ should have had the least
   contact with it. The sexual relations of man and woman are sinful. In
   the Diatessaron, Jesus had no earthly genealogy. Like some apocryphal
   gospel, Tatian would have said: "In the reign of Tiberius, the Word of
   God was born at Nazareth." He went so far logically as to maintain that
   the flesh of Christ was only an apparition. The use of flesh and wine
   classed a man in his eyes among the impure. In the celebration of the
   mysteries, he wished to be served with nothing but water. He passed
   thus as the head of those numerous sects of encratites or abstinents,
   forbidding marriage, wine and flesh, who arose in all places, and
   pretended to draw this from the rigorous sequence of Christian
   principles. From Mesopotamia these ideas spread to Antioch, Cilicia of
   Pisidia, through all Asia Minor, to Rome and all France. Asia Minor,
   especially Galatia, remained the centre. The same tendencies appeared
   in many places at the same time. Had not Paganism, on its side, the
   maceration of the cynics? A collection of false ideas, much spread, led
   men to believe that, evil arising from concupiscence, the return to
   virtue implied the renunciation of the most lawful desires.

   The distinction between precepts and counsels remained still undecided.
   The Church was looked on as an assembly of saints waiting in prayer and
   in ecstasy the new heaven and new earth; nothing would be too perfect
   for it. The institutions of the religious life shall solve one day all
   these difficulties. The convent shall realise the perfect Christian
   life, a gift which the world has not to bestow. Tatian was not a
   heretic, except that he wished to put upon all as an obligation what
   St. Paul had presented as best.

   Tatian presents, we may see, some likeness to Apelles. Like him, he
   changed much, and never ceased modifying his rule of faith; like him,
   he attacked the Jewish Bible resolutely and made himself the free
   exegete of it. He nearly approached some Protestants of the sixteenth
   century, particularly Calvin. He was in any case one of the most deeply
   Christian men of his century, and, if he fell, it was like Tertullian
   by excess of severity. We could rank among his disciples that Julius
   Cassian, who wrote many books of Exegetica, maintaining, by arguments
   analogous to those of the Discourse against the Greeks, that the
   philosophy of the Hebrews was much more ancient than that of the
   Greeks, pushed Docetism to such excess that he was looked on as the
   head of that heresy, and associated with it a horror of works of the
   flesh, which led him to a sort of nihilism destructive of humanity.
   This advent of the kingdom of God appeared to him like the suppression
   of the sexes and modesty. A certain Severus followed a still freer
   fancy, repelling the Acts of the Apostles, insulting Paul, and taking
   up the old myth of Gnosticism. From shipwreck to shipwreck, he went
   over nearly all the chimeras of the archonites, continuators of the
   follies of Markos. From his name the Encratites were called Severians.

   All the aberrations of the mendicant orders of the middle ages existed
   at this time. There had been, from the first centuries, saccophores or
   sack-carrying brothers; apostles, pretending to reproduce the life of
   the Apostles; angelics, cathares or pure ones, apotactites or
   renouncers, who refused communion and salvation to all those who were
   married and possessed any property. Not being guarded by authority,
   these sects fell into the apocryphal literature. The Gospel of the
   Egyptians, the Acts of St. Andrew, of St. John, and St. Thomas were
   their favourite books. The orthodox pretended that their chastity was
   only apparent, since they drew women into their sect by every means,
   and were continually with them. They formed a sort of community in
   which the two sexes lived together, the women serving the men and
   following them in their travels by the title of companions. This kind
   of life was far from softening them, for they furnished in the
   struggles of martyrdom some athletes who put the executioners to shame.

   The ardour for the faith was such that it was against the excess of
   sanctity that it was necessary to take measures; it was the abuse of
   zeal which needed to be guarded against. Some words which implied
   nothing but what was praiseworthy, such as "abstinent," "apostolic,"
   became the marks of heresy. Christianity had created such an ideal of
   indifference that it recoiled before its own work, and said to the
   faithful: "Do not take me so very seriously, or you will destroy me!"
   They were afraid of the fire they had lit. The love of the two sexes
   had been so terribly abused by the most irreproachable teachers that
   the Christians, who wished to go to the end of their principles, came
   to hold it as sinful, and to banish it utterly. By force of frugality
   they blamed the creation of God, and left useless nearly all His gifts.
   Persecution produced, and up to a certain point excused, these
   unhealthy aspirations. Let us think of the hardness of the times, of
   that preparation for martyrdom which filled up the life of the
   Christian, and made out of it a kind of fascination analogous to that
   of gladiators. Boasting the efficacy of fasting and asceticism
   Tertullian says: "Behold how they endure prison, hunger, thirst,
   privations, and distresses; see how the martyr knows how to come forth
   from the concealment into which he has entered, not to meet there
   unknown pains; not finding there anything but the macerations of every
   day--certain of conquering in the fight, because he has killed the
   flesh, and because in him the torments have no point to seize. His
   dried epidermis will be like a cuirass to him, the iron nails will slip
   there as over a thick horn. Such shall be he who, by fasting, has often
   seen death near him, and has been emptied of his blood--a heavy and
   inconvenient burden from which the impatient soul longs to escape."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XI.

  THE GREAT BISHOPS OF GREECE AND ASIA--MELITO.

   Alongside of moral excesses, the result of a badly regulated feeling,
   and of an exuberant production of legends, children of the Oriental
   fancy, there fortunately was the Episcopate. It was especially in the
   purely Greek portions of the Church that this fine institution
   flourished. Opposed to all aberrations, classic in a way and moderate
   in its tendencies, more busied about the humble path of simple
   believers than the transcendant pretensions of ascetics and
   speculators, the Episcopate became more and more the Church itself, and
   saved the work of Jesus from the inevitable shipwreck it would have
   suffered in the hands of Gnostics, Montanists, and even of Judaisers.
   What doubled the power of the Episcopate was that this sort of federal
   oligarchy had a centre; that centre was Rome. Anicet had seen, during
   the ten or twelve years of his presidency, nearly every movement of
   Christianity concentrate itself around him. His successor, Soter
   (probably a converted Jew, who translated his name Jesus into Greek),
   saw this movement increase still more. The vast correspondence which
   had for so long been established between Rome and the Churches assumed
   a larger scope than ever. A central tribunal of controversies had
   gradually become established.

   Greece and Asia continued to be, with Rome, the theatre of the
   principal incidents of Christian growth. Corinth possessed in its
   Dionysius one of the most respected men of the age. The charity of this
   bishop was not confined even to the Church. From all directions he was
   consulted, and his letters carried nearly as much authority as sacred
   writings. These were called "Catholic," because they were written not
   to individuals, but to churches in a body. Seven of these epistles were
   collected, and venerated as at least equal to the letters of the Roman
   Clement. They were addressed to the believers of Lacedemon, Athens,
   Nicomedia, Cnosse, Gortyne, and other churches of Crete, Amastris, and
   other churches of the West. Soter, according to the custom of the
   Church of Rome, having sent to the Church at Corinth some alms,
   accompanied by a letter full of pious instructions, Dionysius thanked
   him for this kindness.

   "It is to-day the Sabbath," he wrote, "and we have seen your letter,
   and we preserve it to read again, when we desire to listen to salutary
   advices, as we do with those letters which Clement has already written.
   By your exhortation you have drawn tighter the bond between the two
   plantations,' the one by the hand of Peter, the other by that of
   Paul--I mean the Church of Rome and that of Corinth. These two
   apostles, indeed, came into our Corinth, and taught us in common, then
   sailed together towards Italy, to teach there in concert and to suffer
   martyrdom about the same time."

   The Church of Corinth yielded to the tendency of all the churches; it
   wished, like the Church of Rome, to have as its founders the two
   apostles whose union was held as the basis of Christianity. It
   pretended that Peter and Paul, after having passed to Corinth at the
   most brilliant point in their apostolic life, went together to Italy.
   The little agreement which prevailed concerning the history of the
   apostles made such suppositions as these possible, although contrary to
   all likelihood and all truth.

   The writings of Dionysius passed as masterpieces of literary talent and
   zeal. He fought energetically with Marcion. In a letter to a pious
   sister named Chrysophora, he traced with a masterly hand the duties of
   the life consecrated to God. He was no less opposed to the grosser
   exaggerations of Montanism. In his letter to the Amastrians, he
   instructed them at length on marriage and virginity, and commanded them
   to receive joyfully all those who would repent, whether they had fallen
   into heresy or had committed any other sin. Palma, bishop of Amastris,
   fully accepted the right which Dionysius assumed to instruct the
   faithful. Dionysius did not find resistance to this to his taste in the
   case of his admonition to the bishop of Cnosse, Pinytus, an
   enthusiastic rigorist. Dionysius had begged him to consider the
   weakness of certain persons, and not to impose on the faithful
   generally the too heavy burden of chastity. Pinytus, who possessed
   eloquence, and passed for one of the lights of the Church, replied by
   declaring his great esteem and respect for Dionysius; but, in his turn,
   he counselled him to give his people more solid nourishment and
   stronger instruction, lest, always feeding them with the milk of
   toleration, they should insensibly grow old without having ever left in
   mind the weakness of childhood. Pinytus's letter was much admired, and
   considered a model of episcopal ardour. It was confessed that the
   vigour of zeal, when it expresses itself with charity, has rights equal
   to those of prudence and sweetness.

   Dionysius was much opposed to the speculations of the sects. A friend
   to peace and unity, he repelled everything which tended to division.
   Heresies had in him a determined adversary. His authority was such that
   the heretics, "the apostles of the devil," as he calls them, falsified
   his letters, and "sowed them with tares," adding or cutting out what
   they pleased. "What should surprise one," said Dionysius, "if certain
   people have the audacity to falsify the Scriptures of the Lord, since
   they have dared to lay hands on the writings which have not the same
   sacred character?"

   The Church of Athens, always characterised by a sort of frivolous
   lightness, was far from having a basis as assured as that of Corinth.
   Things took place there which did not happen elsewhere. The bishop
   Publius had bravely suffered martyrdom; then there had been a nearly
   general apostasy, a sort of abandonment of religion. A certain
   Quadratus, different doubtless from the apologist, reconstituted the
   Church, and there was something like an awakening of the faith.
   Dionysius wrote to this inconstant Church, not without some bitterness,
   trying to lead it back to the purity of belief and the severity of
   evangelical life. The Church of Athens, like that of Corinth, had its
   legend. It was connected with that Dionysius called the Areopagite, who
   is spoken of in the Acts, and it had made him the first bishop of
   Athens, so much had the episcopate become already the form without
   which one could not conceive of the existence of a Christian community.

   Crete, we have seen, had churches very flourishing, pious, benevolent,
   and generous. The Gnostic heresies, and especially Marcionism, beset
   them without impairing them. Philip, bishop of Gortyne, wrote a fine
   work against Marcion, and was one of the most respected bishops of the
   time of Marcus-Aurelius.

   Proconsular Asia continued to be the first province in Christian
   movement. The great struggle, the great persecutions, the great martyrs
   were there. Nearly all the bishops of the considerable towns were
   saintly men, eloquent, fairly sensible, having received a good Hellenic
   education, and, if one may say so, of very skilful religious politics.
   The bishops were multiplied; but many important families had a sort of
   claim on the episcopate in the small towns. Polycrates of Ephesus, who,
   during thirty years, shall defend so energetically against the bishop
   of Rome the traditions of the churches of Asia, was the eighth bishop
   of his family. The bishops of the large cities had a primacy over the
   others; they were the presidents of the provincial assemblies of
   bishops. The archbishop began to appear, although the word, if one had
   dared to use it, would have been repelled with horror.

   Melito, bishop of Sardis, had, in the midst of those eminent pastors, a
   sort of uncontested superiority. It was unanimously agreed that he had
   the gift of prophecy, and it was believed that he was guided in
   everything by the light of the Holy Spirit. His writings followed each
   other year by year, in the midst of the universal admiration. His
   criticism was that of the time; at least, he was careful that his faith
   should be reasonable and consistent with itself. In many points of view
   he recalls Origen, but he had not to instruct him the facilities which
   were presented to the latter by the schools of Alexandria, Cesarea, and
   Tyre.

   The considerable anxiety which the Christians of St. Paul possessed to
   study the Old Testament, and the weakness of Judaism in the regions of
   Asia at a distance from Ephesus, made it difficult to procure in that
   country distinct ideas as to the Biblical books. Their number and order
   were not exactly known. Melito, impelled by his own curiosity and, as
   it appeared, at the instance of a certain Onesimus, made a journey into
   Palestine to inform himself as to the true state of the canon. He
   brought back a catalogue of books received universally; it was purely
   and simply the Jewish canon, composed of twenty-five books, to the
   exclusion of Esther. The apocrypha, such as the book of Enoch, the
   apocalypse of Esdras, Judith, Tobit, &c., which were not received by
   the Jews, were equally excluded from the list of Melito. Without being
   a Hebraiser, Melito became the careful commentator of these sacred
   writings. At the entreaty of Onesimus, he reunited in six books the
   passages of the Pentateuch and the Prophets which related to Jesus
   Christ, and the other articles of the Christian faith. He worked upon
   the Greek versions, which he compared with the greatest possible
   diligence.

   The exegesis of the Orientals was familiar to him; he discussed it
   point by point. Like the author of what is called the Epistle of
   Barnabas, he seems to have had a marked tendency towards allegorical
   and mystical explanations, and it is not impossible that his lost work,
   entitled The Key, was already one of these repertories of figurative
   explanations, by which it was sought to remove the anthropomorphising
   from the biblical text, and to substitute for meanings too simple
   meanings more lofty.

   Among the scriptures of the New Testament, Melito only seems to have
   commented on the Apocalypse. He liked its sombre pictures; for we see
   that he himself announces that the final conflagration is at hand, that
   after the deluge of wind and the deluge of water shall come the deluge
   of fire which shall consume the earth, idols, and idolaters; the
   righteous only shall be saved, as they were formerly in the Ark. These
   strange beliefs did not prevent Melito from being, in his way, a
   cultured man. Familiar with the study of philosophy, he sought, in a
   series of works which unfortunately have been nearly all lost to us, to
   explain by rational psychology the mysteries of Christian dogma. He
   wrote besides some treatises where the preoccupation of Montanism seems
   to rule his thought, without its being possible to say whether he was
   its adversary or partly favourable to it. Such were the book on the
   Rule of life and the prophets, on the Church, on the Day of the
   Sabbath, on the Obedience which the senses owe to the Faith, on the
   Soul and the Body, or on Understanding, on Baptism, on the Creation and
   the Birth of Christ, on Hospitality, on Prophecy, on the Devil and the
   Apocalypse of John, on the Incarnate God, on the Incarnation of Christ,
   against Marcion. We can believe that there also was a book of
   prophecies which he composed.

   Melito passed indeed for a prophet; but it is not certain that his
   prophecies formed a separate work. Admitting the prolongation of the
   gift of prophecy up to his time, he could not repulse à priori the
   Montanists of Phrygia. His life, besides, resembled theirs in a sort of
   asceticism. Only he did not recognise the revelations of the saints of
   Pepuza, otherwise certainly orthodoxy would have cast him from her
   arms.

   One of these treatises, that which he entitled On the Truth, seems to
   have come down to us. The scoffs of monotheism against idolatry are
   full of bitterness, and hatred of idols has never been expressed with
   more force. Truth, according to the author, reveals itself to man, and,
   if he cannot see it, it is his fault. To deceive himself with the
   multitude is no excuse; error is multiplied only more fatally. God is
   an unchangeable, uncreated being; to confound Him with such or such an
   element is a crime, "especially now that the revelation of the truth
   has been spread through all the world." The Sibyl had already said,
   "Idols are only the images of dead kings, who cause themselves to be
   worshipped." People considered a discovered fragment of Philo of
   Byblos, exposing to us the old Phoenician Evemerism of Sanchoniathon,
   that curious page where Melito, taking up handfuls of the most singular
   and bizarre fables of Greek and Syrian mythology, seeks to prove to us
   that the gods are personages quite real, who have been deified because
   of the service they have rendered to certain countries, or the terror
   they have inspired. The worship of the Cæsars seemed to him the
   continuation of this practice.

   "Do we not see still in our days," says he, "the images of the Cæsars
   and their family more respected than those of the ancient gods, and
   those gods themselves paying homage to Cæsar as to a god greater than
   themselves? and truly, if death were the punishment for despisers of
   the gods, they would say that it was because they deprived the Treasury
   of a revenue. It is the same in those countries where the worshippers
   in certain temples pay a fixed sum to the Treasury. The great
   misfortune of the world is that those who adore inanimate gods, and of
   that number is the greatest number of the wise, whether by love of
   lucre or love of vainglory, or by the taste for power, not only adore
   them, but, besides, constrain simple minds to adore them also.

   "Such a prince might perhaps say, I am not free to do good. Being head,
   I am obliged to conform myself to the will of the majority.' He who
   speaks so is to be laughed at. Why should the sovereign not have the
   initiative in everything that is good? Why should he not compel the
   people who are under him to act rightly, to know God according to the
   truth? and why should he not present in himself an example of all good
   actions? Who more properly? It is an absurd thing that a prince should
   conduct himself wrongly, and nevertheless be a judge, condemning those
   who commit evil deeds. As for myself, I think that a State can never be
   so well governed as when the sovereign, knowing and fearing the true
   God, judges everything as a man who knows he shall be in his turn
   judged before God, and when his subjects, on their side fearing God,
   should be careful not to give offence to their sovereign, as he is to
   them. Thus, thanks to the knowledge and the fear of God, all evil could
   be suppressed by the State.

   "If the sovereign, in fact, does not act unjustly towards his subjects,
   or they towards him, it is clear that the whole country will live in
   peace, and the greatest good will result; for necessarily the name of
   God will be praised among them all. The first duty of the sovereign,
   and that which is most pleasing to God, is therefore to free from error
   the people who are under him. All evils indeed proceed from error, and
   the grand error is not to know God, and to adore in His stead that
   which is not God."

   We see how Melito is far removed from the dangerous principles which
   ruled at the end of the fourth century, and made the Christian empire.
   The sovereign erected into a protector of the truth, employing all
   means to make truth triumph, that is the ideal which was dreamt of. We
   shall find the same ideas in the apology addressed to Marcus-Aurelius.
   The dogmatic intolerance, the idea that it is culpable and displeasing
   to God to be ignorant of certain dogmas, is frankly avowed. Melito
   admits of no excuse for idolatry. And those who say that the honour
   rendered to idols in connection with the persons they represent, and
   those who content themselves with saying "It is the worship of our
   fathers," are equally to blame.

   "Ah, what! are those to whom our fathers have left poverty forbidden to
   become rich? Are those whose parents have not instructed them condemned
   to remain ignorant of what their fathers did not know? Are the sons of
   the blind not to see, and the sons of the lame not to walk? . . . .
   Before imitating thy father, see if he has been in a good path. If he
   has been in a bad one, take the good, so that thy children may follow
   thee in their turn. Weep over thy father, who is following the path of
   evil, perhaps thy sorrow may save him yet. As to thy children, say to
   them: There is but one God, father of all, who had no beginning, who
   has not been created, and who makes all things subsist by His own
   will.'"

   We shall soon see the part which Melito took in the controversy as to
   Easter, and the kind of way which so many distinguished minds took to
   present some apologetic writings to Marcus-Aurelius. His tomb is shown
   at Sardis as one of the just and the most certain to rise at the call
   of heaven. His name remained much respected among the Catholics, who
   considered him one of the first authorities of his age. His eloquence
   especially was boasted of, and the remains of him we have are, indeed,
   quite brilliant. A theology like his, where Jesus is at once God and
   man, was a protest against Marcion, and ought at the same time to
   please the adversaries of Artemon and Theodotus "the currier." He knew
   the Gospel called St. John's, and identified Christos with the Logos,
   putting him in the second rank behind the one God, before and above
   all. His treatise where Christ is presented as a created being might
   surprise; but no doubt it was little read, and this offensive title was
   changed in good time. In the fourth century, when orthodoxy had become
   more suspicious, these writings, so much admired two hundred years
   before, were no longer copied. Many passages doubtless appeared little
   conformed to the creed of Nicea. Melito's fortune was that of Papias,
   and of so many other doctors of the second century, true founders, the
   first fathers in reality, and who had no other fault than not having
   divined beforehand what one day would be revealed by the councils.

   Claudius Apollinaris, or Apollinarus, maintained the fame of the Church
   of Hierapolis, and, like Melito, joined literary culture and philosophy
   with sanctity. His style passed as excellent, and his doctrine for the
   purest. By his distance from Judeo-Christianity and his taste for the
   Gospel of John, he belonged to the party of movement rather than to
   that of tradition. As this was the movement which triumphed, his
   adversaries were behind from that time. We see him, nearly at the same
   period as Melito, presenting an apology to Marcus-Aurelius. He wrote
   five books addressed to the Pagans, two against the Jews, two on the
   Truth, and one on Piety, without mentioning many other works which did
   not obtain a great publicity, but were much esteemed by all who read
   them. Apollinaris fought energetically with Montanism, and was perhaps
   the bishop who contributed most to save the Church from the dangers
   into which those preachers had made her run. Towards the excesses of
   the Encratites also he was very severe. An astonishing mixture of good
   sense and literature, of fanaticism and moderation, characterised those
   extraordinary men, true ancestors of the lettered bishop, clever
   politicians, always having the appearance of hearing nothing but the
   inspiration of heaven, opposed to the violent while quite violent
   themselves. Thanks to the mendacious softness of a liberal language,
   these anticipative Dupanloups proved that the most refined worldly
   calculations do not exclude the most odd illuminism, and that with
   perfect honesty they could unite in their person all the appearance of
   reasonable men and all the rapture of enthusiasts.

   Miltiades, like Apollinaris, the great adversary of the Montanists, was
   also a fertile writer. He composed two books against the Pagans, two
   books against the Jews, not forgetting an apology addressed to the
   Roman authorities. Musanus fought with the Encratites, the disciples of
   Tatian. Modestus set himself especially to unveil the tricks and errors
   of Marcion. Polycrates, who, later on, was to preside in a manner over
   the Church of Asia, already shone by his writings. A crowd of books
   were produced on all sides. Never perhaps has Christianity written more
   than during the second century in Asia. Literary culture was widely
   spread in this province; the art of writing was very common, and
   Christianity profited by this. The literature of the fathers of the
   Church began. The following centuries never surpassed these first
   essays of Christian eloquence; but from the orthodox point of view, the
   books of these fathers of the second century presented rather a
   stumbling block. The reading of them became suspected; they were copied
   less and less, and thus nearly all these fine writings disappeared, to
   give place to the classical writers, after the council of Nicea,
   writers more correct as to doctrine, but, in general, less original
   than those of the second century.

   A certain Papirius, whose episcopal seat is unknown, was extremely
   esteemed. Thraseas, bishop of Eumenia, in the region of the high
   Meander, had the most envied glory, that of martyrdom. He probably
   suffered at Smyrna, since it is there that his tomb is honoured.
   Sagaris, bishop of Laodicea, on the Lycus, had the same honour under
   the pro-consulate of L. Sergius Paullus about the year 165. Laodicea
   preserved most preciously his remains. His name remained so much the
   more fixed in the remembrance of the churches, as his death was the
   occasion of an important episode connecting itself with one of the
   gravest questions of the period.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XII.

  THE QUESTION OF EASTER.

   Chance decreed that the execution of Sagaris coincided nearly with the
   festival of Easter. Now the fixing of that festival gave place to
   difficulties without end. Deprived of its pastor, the Church of
   Laodicea fell into unsolvable controversies. These controversies
   belonged to the very essence of the development of Christianity and
   could not be avoided. By force of a reciprocal charity, a veil had been
   thrown over the deep difference between the two Christianities--on one
   side, the Christianity which appeared like a sequence of Judaism; on
   the other side, the Christianity which appeared like the destruction of
   Judaism. But the reality was less flexible than the spirit. The day of
   Easter was among the Christian churches a cause of much discord. They
   could not fast, they could not pray the same day. The one class was
   still in tears while the other was singing songs of triumph. Even the
   churches which no question of principles separated were embarrassed.
   The Passover cycle was so badly fixed that some neighbouring churches,
   like those of Alexandria and Palestine, wrote that in the spring they
   celebrated the feast the same day and in full sympathy.

   What could be more shocking indeed than to see such a Church plunged in
   grief, attenuated by fasting, while just such another was already
   floating in the joys of the Resurrection? The fasts which preceded
   Easter, and which gave Lent its origin, were also practised with the
   greatest diversities.

   It was Asia which was most agitated by these controversies. We have
   already seen the question treated of, ten or twelve years back, between
   Polycarp and Anicet. Nearly all the Christian churches, having the
   Church of Rome at their head, had misplaced the Passover, observing
   that festival on the Sunday which came before the fourteenth Nisan, and
   identifying it with the festival of the Resurrection. Asia had not
   followed the movement; on this point, if one may so speak, it had
   remained behind. The majority of the bishops of Asia, faithful to the
   tradition of the old Gospels, and appealing especially to Matthew,
   would have it that Jesus, before dying, had eaten the Passover with His
   disciples on the fourteenth of Nisan; they celebrated this festival on
   the same day as the Jews, on whichever day of the week it fell. They
   advanced in favour of their opinion the Gospel, the authority of their
   predecessors, the prescriptions of the law, the canon of the faith and
   especially the authority of the apostles John and Philip, who had lived
   among them, without looking for a single contradiction from John. It is
   more than probable indeed that the apostle John celebrated Easter all
   his life on the fourteenth Nisan; but in the Gospel which is attributed
   to him, he appears to point to quite another doctrine, treats
   disdainfully the ancient Jewish Passover festival, and makes Jesus die
   the same day as that on which they ate the lamb, as if to indicate thus
   the substitution of a new Paschal lamb for the old.

   Polycarpus, we have seen, followed the tradition of John and Philip. It
   was so with Thraseas, Sagaris, Papirius, and Melito. The Montanists
   were also doubtless of the same opinion. But the opinion of the
   Universal Church became each day more imperious and embarrassing for
   these determined persons. Apollinaris of Hierapolis was, as it would
   appear, converted to the Roman practice. He repelled the Easter of the
   fourteenth Nisan as a remnant of Judaism, and advanced to maintain his
   opinion the Gospel of John. Melito, seeing the embarrassment of the
   faithful of Laodicea, deprived of their pastor, wrote for them his work
   on Easter, in which he maintains the tradition of the fourteenth Nisan.
   Apollinaris preserves a moderation which was not always imitated. The
   universal opinion of Asia remained faithful to the Judaising tradition;
   the controversy of Laodicea and the manifestation of Apollinaris had
   not any immediate consequences. The remote parts of Syria, and with
   greater reason the Judeo-Christians and Ebionites, remained equally
   faithful to the Jewish observance. As to the rest of the Christian
   world, carried away by the example of the Church of Rome, it adopted
   the anti-Jewish usage. Even the churches of Gaul of Asiatic origin,
   which at first had doubtless celebrated Easter on the fourteenth Nisan,
   conformed themselves speedily to the universal calendar, which was the
   truly Christian calendar. The remembrance of the Resurrection replaced
   all at once that of the exodus from Egypt, as the exodus from Egypt had
   replaced the purely naturalistic meaning of the ancient Semitic paskh,
   the Spring festival.

   About the year 196 the question came up more freshly than ever. The
   churches of Asia persisted in their old usage. Rome, always ardent for
   unity, wished to compel them. On the invitation of the Pope Victor,
   assemblies of bishops were held; a vast correspondence was exchanged.
   Eusebius had in his hands the synodal epistle of the council of
   Palestine, presided over by Theophilus of Cesarea and Narcissus of
   Jerusalem, the letter of the Synod of Rome, countersigned by Victor,
   the letters of the bishops of the West, over whom Palma presided as
   being the oldest, the letter from the churches of France, of which
   Irenæus was bishop, and finally those of the churches of Osrhoêne,
   without speaking of individual letters from many bishops, notably from
   Bachylles of Corinth. They were found unanimous for the translation of
   Easter to Sunday. But the bishops of Asia, strong in the tradition of
   the two apostles and of so many illustrious men, would not yield. Old
   Polycrates, bishop of Ephesus, wrote in their name a letter bitter
   enough to Victor and to the Church of Rome.

   "It is we who are faithful to tradition, without adding anything to it,
   without giving up anything. It is in Asia that these great foundation
   men repose, who will arise on the day of the Lord's appearing, in that
   day when He shall come from heaven with glory to raise all the saints:
   Philip, he who was one of the twelve apostles, who is buried at
   Hierapolis, also his two daughters who grow old in virginity, not to
   speak of another daughter who observed during her life the rule of the
   Holy Spirit, and who reposes at Ephesus; then John, he whose head
   reclined on the bosom of the Lord, who was pontiff carrying thepetalon,
   and martyr, and doctor, who also is interred at Ephesus; then
   Polycarpus, he who was bishop and martyr at Smyrna; then Thraseas, at
   once bishop and martyr of Eumenia, who is buried at Smyrna. Why speak
   of Sagaris, bishop and martyr, who is buried at Laodicea, of the
   blessed Papirius, and of Melito, the holy eunuch, who observed in
   everything the rule of the Holy Spirit, and rests at Sardis, waiting
   the heavenly call which shall make him rise among the dead? All these
   men celebrated Easter on the fourteenth day, according to the Gospel,
   without innovation of any kind, following the rule of the faith. And I
   also, I have done so likewise, I, Polycrates, the least of you all,
   agreeably to the tradition of my relatives, of whom some have been my
   teachers (for there have been seven bishops in my family: I am the
   eighth); and all my revered relatives observed the day when the people
   began to purge out the leaven. I then, my brethren, who reckon
   sixty-five years in the Lord, who have conversed with the brethren from
   the whole world, who have read from one end to the other the Holy
   Scripture, I shall not lose my head, whatever they may do to terrify
   me. Greater people than I have said: It is better to obey God rather
   than man.' I could quote the bishops here present, whom, upon your
   demand, I have convoked; if I wrote their names the list would be long.
   All having come to see me, poor wretch as I am, have given their
   adhesion to my letter, knowing well that it is not for nothing that I
   carry white hairs, and being assured that all I do I do in the Lord
   Jesus."

   What proves that the Papacy was already born, and well born, is the
   incredible design which the somewhat bitter terms of this letter
   inspired in Victor. He pretended to excommunicate, to separate from the
   Church universal, the most illustrious, because it would not yield its
   traditions before the Roman discipline. He published a decree in virtue
   of which the churches of Asia were placed under the ban of Christian
   communion. But the other bishops were opposed to this violent measure,
   and recalled Victor to charity. Irenæus of Lyons, in particular, who,
   by necessity of the society in which he found himself placed, had
   accepted for himself and for the Gallic churches the Western custom,
   could not endure the thought that the mother churches of Asia, to which
   he felt himself bound by the bowels of his love, should be separated
   from the body of the Church universal. He energetically dissuaded
   Victor from excommunicating churches which held by the tradition of
   their fathers, and recalled the examples of his most tolerant
   predecessors.

   "Yes, the ancients who presided before Soter in the Church which thou
   now leadest, we speak of Pius, Hyginus, Telesophorus, Xystus, did not
   observe the Jewish Passover, and did not permit any around them to
   observe it; but, while not observing it, they did not preserve the less
   peace with the members of churches who did observe it, when those came
   to them; although this observance, in the midst of people who did not
   observe it, rendered the contrast more striking. Never was any one
   repelled for this reason; on the contrary, the elders who have preceded
   thee, who, I repeat, did not observe, sent the Eucharist to the
   ancients of the Church who observed it. And when the blessed Polycarp
   came to Rome under Anicet, both of them gave each other first the kiss
   of peace; they had between them some small matters of difficulty: as to
   this point they did not make it the subject of a discussion. For
   neither did Anicet seek to persuade Polycarpus to abandon a practice
   which he had always kept and which he held from his association with
   John, the disciple of the Lord, and with the other apostles, nor did
   Polycarp try to persuade Anicet, he saying that he would keep the
   customs of the ancients who had gone before him. In this state of
   things they communicated with each other, and in the Church Anicet
   yielded to Polycarp the eucharistic consecration, to do him honour, and
   they separated from each other in perfect peace; and it was evident
   that the observants, as well as the nonobservants, each on their own
   side, were in accord with the Church universal."

   This act of rare good sense, which opened so gloriously the annals of
   the Gallican Church, kept the schism of the East and West from taking
   place from the second century. Irenæus wrote on all hands to the
   bishops, and the question remained open in the churches of Asia.
   Naturally, Rome continued its propaganda against the Easter of the 14th
   Nisan. A Roman priest, Blastus, who sought to establish the Asiatic
   custom at Rome, was excommunicated. Irenæus disputed with him; the
   usage was not forbidden by apocryphal documents. The Roman practice
   gained day by day.

   The question was not determined except by the Council of Nicæa. From
   thenceforth it was considered heretical to follow the tradition of
   John, Philip, Polycarp, and Melito. It happened as it had happened so
   many times. The defenders of the ancient tradition found themselves by
   their fidelity put outside the Church, and were no more than heretics,
   the quartodecimans.

   The Jewish calendar presented some difficulties, and in the countries
   where there were no Jews they would have been embarrassed to determine
   the 14th Nisan. They declared that the Sunday of the Resurrection
   should be the Sunday which corresponds to or succeeds the first full
   moon after the spring equinox. The Friday preceding became naturally
   the memorial day of the Passion; the Thursday that of the institution
   of the Supper. Holy Week thus was established according to the
   tradition of the ancient gospels, not after the Gospel called St.
   John's. Pentecost, become the festival of the Holy Spirit, fell on the
   seventh Sunday after Easter, and the cycle of the movable feasts of the
   Christian year was held to be fixed uniformly for all the Churches
   until the Gregorian reform.

   The practice which caused this debate had more importance than the
   debate itself. In connection with this difference, indeed, the Church
   was led to a clearer idea of its organisation. And first, it was plain
   that the laity were nothing. Only the bishops intervened in the
   question, circulating an opinion. The bishops were gathered together in
   provincial synods, presided over by the bishop of the capital of the
   province (the archbishop of the future), sometimes by the oldest. The
   synodal assembly met by a letter which was sent to the other churches.
   It was, therefore, like a rudiment of federal organisation, an attempt
   to resolve questions by means of provincial assemblies, presided over
   by the bishops and corresponding to them. It was attempted later, in
   parts of this great ecclesiastical struggle, to find precedents for the
   question of presiding at synods and the hierarchy of the churches.
   Among all the churches, that of Rome appeared to have a special right
   to the initiative. This initiative was exercised especially in view of
   bringing the churches into unity, even at the risk of the gravest
   schisms. The bishop of Rome claimed for himself the exorbitant right of
   driving from the Church every fraction which maintained its own
   traditions. From the year 196 this exaggerated desire for unity
   necessarily led to the schisms which took place later on. But a great
   bishop, animated by the true spirit of Jesus, prevailed on the pope at
   this time. Irenaeus protested, undertook a mission of peace, and
   succeeded in correcting the harm which Romish ambition had done. The
   infallibility of the bishop of Rome was still far from being believed
   in; for Eusebius declares that he read the letters in which the bishops
   forcibly blamed Victor's conduct.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIII.

  LAST RECRUDESCENCE OF MILLENARIANISM AND PROPHETISM--THE MONTANISTS.

   The great day, in spite of the affirmations of Jesus and of prophets
   inspired by him, refused to come. The Christ was slow in showing
   himself; the ardent piety of the first days, which had for its
   mainspring the belief in this approaching appearance, had grown cold
   among many. It was on such a world as this, in the very bosom of that
   Roman society, so corrupted but so preoccupied by reform and progress,
   that people dreamed of founding the Kingdom of God. Christian morals,
   from the moment they aspired to be those of a complete society, began
   to relax themselves in many points from their primitive severity. Men
   did not become more Christian, as in the first ages, under the force of
   a strong personal impression; many were born Christians. The contrast
   became each day less decided between the Church and the surrounding
   world. It was inevitable that some rigorists should be found who would
   sink into the mire of the most dangerous worldliness, and that there
   should arise a party of pietists to fight with the general coldness, to
   continue the supernatural gifts of the Apostolic Church, and to prepare
   humanity, by a redoubling of austerities, with proofs of the last days.

   Already we have seen the pious author of the Hermas weeping over the
   decay of his time, and calling by his vows for a reform which should
   make the Church a convent of holy men and women.

   There was, in fact, something rather inconsistent in the kind of
   quietude in which the orthodox Church slumbered, in that tranquil
   morality to which the work of Jesus was more and more reduced. People
   neglected the very precise predictions of the founder as to the end of
   the present world and on the Messianic reign which should follow. The
   speedy appearance in the clouds was nearly forgotten. The desire for
   martyrdom, the taste for celibacy, results of such a belief, grew weak.
   People accepted relations with an impure world, condemned soon to end;
   they temporised with persecution and sought to escape from it by the
   price of money. It was inevitable that the ideas which formed the basis
   of budding Christianity should reappear from time to time, in the midst
   of this general depression, in the shape of what was severe and
   terrifying. Fanaticism, which softened good orthodox judgment, made
   some kinds of eruption, like a slumbering volcano.

   The most remarkable of these very natural returns to the apostolic
   spirit was that which was produced in Phrygia, under Marcus-Aurelius.
   It was something quite analogous to what we have seen in our time in
   England and America among the Irvingites and the Latter Day Saints.
   Some simple and enthusiastic minds believe themselves called to renew
   the prodigies of individual inspiration, beyond those already heavy
   chains of the Church and the episcopate. A doctrine for a long time
   spread through Asia Minor, that of a Paraclete who should come to
   complete the work of Jesus, or, to speak more correctly, to take up the
   teaching of Jesus, to establish it in truth, to purge out the
   alterations which the apostles and bishops had introduced into it; such
   a doctrine, I say, opened the door to all innovations. The Church of
   the saints was conceived of as always progressive and as destined to
   run through successive degrees of perfection. Prophetism passed for the
   most natural thing in the world. The Sibyllists, the prophets of every
   kind, ran through the streets, and in spite of their gross artifices
   found credence and acceptance.

   Some little towns of the poorest districts of Phrygia, Brûlée, Tymium,
   and Pepuza, whose site even is unknown, were the theatre of this late
   enthusiasm. Phrygia was one of the countries of antiquity the most
   carried away by religious dreams. The Phrygians were generally looked
   on as silly and simple. Christianity had among them, from its origin, a
   mystic and ascetic character. Already in the Epistle to the Colossians
   Paul fights with errors, where the precursory signs of Gnosticism and
   the excesses of a badly understood asceticism seemed to be mixed up.
   Nearly everywhere else Christianity was a religion of the large cities;
   here, as in Syria or beyond the Jordan, it was a religion of clowns and
   countrymen. A certain Montanus, of the town of Ardaban, in Mysia, on
   the confines of Phrygia, contrived to give to these pious follies a
   contagious character which they did not possess till then.

   Doubtless imitation of the Jewish prophets, and of those who had
   produced the new law at the beginning of the apostolic age, was the
   principal element of this re-birth of prophetism. There was mixed with
   it also perhaps an orgiastic or corybantic element, peculiar to the
   country, and entirely outside the regulated habits of ecclesiastical
   prophecy, already subjected to a tradition. All this credulous world
   was of the Phrygian race, and spoke Phrygian. In the most orthodox
   parts of Christendom, besides, the miraculous passed for quite a simple
   thing. Revelation was not closed; it was the life of the Church. The
   spiritual gifts, the apostolic charismas, were continued in many
   communities; they were cited in proof of the truth. They quoted Agabas,
   Judas, Silas, the daughters of Philip, Ammias of Philadelphia, and
   Quadratus, as having been favoured by the prophetic spirit. They
   declared from the first that the prophetic charisma would remain in the
   Church by an uninterrupted succession until the coming of Christ. The
   belief in a Paraclete, conceivedly as a source of permanent inspiration
   for the faithful, kept up these ideas. Who cannot see how full of
   dangers such a belief was? Thus the spirit of wisdom which directed the
   Church tended more and more to subordinate the exercise of its
   supernatural gifts to the authority of the presbyterate. The bishops
   were credited with the discernment of spirits, the right to approve
   some and to exorcise others. This time it was a prophetism quite
   popular which arose without the permission of the clergy, and sought to
   govern the Church outside of the hierarchy. The question of
   ecclesiastical authority and of individual inspiration, which fills up
   all the history of the Church, especially since the sixteenth century,
   took up its position from that time with distinctness. Between the
   believer and God is there or is there not an intermediary? Montanus
   said no, without hesitation. "Man, said the Paraclete, in an oracle of
   Montanus, is the lyre, and I fly like the bow; man sleeps, and I
   awake."

   Montanus justified no doubt by some superiority this pretension of
   being the elect of the Spirit. We willingly credit his adversaries when
   they tell us that he was a believer of recent date; we even admit that
   the desire of the primacy was no stranger to his singularities. As to
   the debauches and the shameful end they say he had, they were the
   ordinary calumnies which were never wanting under the pen of orthodox
   writers when the blackening of dissentients was concerned. The
   admiration which he excited in Phrygia was extraordinary. Some of his
   disciples pretended to have learned more from his books than from the
   law, the prophets, and the reunited evangelists. It was believed that
   he had received the fulness of the Paraclete; sometimes they took him
   for the Paraclete himself, that is to say, for this Messiah, in some
   things superior to Jesus, whom the churches of Asia Minor believed to
   have been promised by Jesus himself. They went so far as to say, "The
   Paraclete has revealed the greatest things by Montanus, as Christ by
   the Gospel." The law and the prophets were considered as the infancy of
   religion; the Gospel was its youth; the coming of the Paraclete was
   considered to be the sign of its maturity.

   Montanus, like all the prophets of the new alliance, was full of curses
   against the age and against the Roman empire. Even the seer of 69 was
   surpassed. Neither hatred of the world nor the desire of seeing Pagan
   society destroyed had yet been expressed with such a distinct fury. The
   only theme of the Phrygian prophets was the approaching judgment of
   God, the punishment of persecutors, the destruction of the profane
   world, the reign of the thousand years and its joys. Martyrdom was
   praised as the highest perfection; to die in one's bed seemed unworthy
   of a Christian. The Encratites, condemning sexual connection,
   recognised in it importance from the natural point of view; Montanus
   did not even take the trouble to forbid an act become absolutely
   insignificant, from the moment that its humanness came to an end.

   The gate was thus opened to the debauch, at the same time as it closed
   to the pleasantest duties. By the side of Montanus appeared two women,
   the one called sometimes Prisca, sometimes Priscilla, sometimes
   Quintilla, and the other Maximilla. These two women, who, from what
   appeared, had all quitted the state of marriage to embrace the
   prophetic career, entered into their position with an extreme boldness
   and a complete misunderstanding of the hierarchy. In spite of the wise
   prohibitions of Paul against women taking part in the prophetic and
   ecstatic exercises of the Church, Priscilla and Maximilla did not draw
   back before the brilliancy of a public ministry. It seems that
   individual inspiration had had, this time as usual, licence and
   boldness. Priscilla had some features which made her like St. Catharine
   of Sienna and Maria Alacoque. One day, at Pepuza, she slept and saw
   Christ come towards her, clothed in a shining robe and having the
   appearance of a woman. Christ was asleep by her side, and, in this
   mysterious embracing, inoculated her with all wisdom. He revealed to
   her especially the sacredness of the town of Pepuza. This privileged
   spot was the site where the heavenly Jerusalem, in descending from
   heaven, would be placed. Maximilla preached in the same way, announcing
   fearful wars, catastrophes, and persecutions. She survived Priscilla,
   and died maintaining that after her there would be no other prophesy
   till the end of time.

   It was not only prophecy, it was all the functions of the clergy, which
   this bizarre Christianity claimed to belong to women. The Presbyterate,
   the Episcopate, the charge of the Church in all degrees devolved on
   them. To justify this pretension they instanced Miriam, the sister of
   Moses, the four daughters of Philip, and even Eve, for whom they
   pleaded extenuating circumstances, and of whom they made a saint. What
   was strange in the worship of the sect was the ceremony of the weepers
   or virgin lampadophores, who recalled in many points of view the
   Protestant "revivals" of America. Seven virgins, bearing torches and
   clothed in white, entered the church, uttering penitential groans,
   pouring forth torrents of tears and deploring by expressive gestures
   the wretchedness of human life. Then began the scenes of illuminism. In
   the midst of the people the virgins were seized with enthusiasm,
   preached, prophesied, and fell into ecstasies. The audience sobbed and
   went forth penetrated by compunction.

   The influence these women exercised over the crowds, and even over a
   portion of the clergy, was extraordinary. They went so far as to prefer
   the prophetesses of Pepuza to the apostles, and even to Christ. The
   most moderate saw in them those prophets foretold by Jesus as coming to
   finish his work. All Asia Minor was troubled. From neighbouring
   countries people came to see these ecstatic phenomena, and to give an
   opinion on the new prophetism. The feeling was so much the greater that
   no one rejected à priori the possibility of prophecy. The only question
   was whether it was real. The most distant churches, those of Lyons and
   Vienne, wrote to Asia to be informed on the subject. Many bishops,
   especially Ælius Publius Julius of Debeltus, and Sotas of Anchiale in
   Thrace, came forward as witnesses. All Christendom was set in motion by
   these miracles, which appeared to bring back the Christianity of a
   hundred and thirty years before, in the days of its first appearance.

   The greater number of the bishops, Apollinaris of Hierapolis, Zoticus
   of Comane, Julian of Apamia, Miltiades the famous ecclesiastical
   writer, a certain Aurelius of Cyrene, described as "martyr" by his
   life, and the two bishops of Thrace, refused to look seriously upon the
   enlightened of Pepuza. Nearly all of them declared individual
   prophesying to be subversive of the Church, and treated Priscilla as
   "possessed." Some orthodox bishops, in particular Sotas of Anchiale and
   Zoticus of Comane, wished even to exorcise her; but the Phrygians would
   not allow it. Some notables, moreover, such as Themison, Theodotus,
   Alcibiades, and Proclus, yielded to the general enthusiasm and betook
   themselves to prophesying in their turn. Theodotus, especially, was the
   chief of the sect after Montanus and his principal zealot. As to the
   simple people they were all enchanted. The dark oracles of the
   prophetesses were carried away and commented on. A real Church formed
   itself around them. All the gifts of the apostolic age, especially the
   gift of tongues and the ecstasies, renewed themselves. They allowed
   themselves to go too easily into this dangerous reasoning: "Why should
   that which had a place not have place still? The present generation is
   not more disinherited than the others. The Paraclete, representing
   Christ, is he not an external source of revelation?" Innumerable little
   books spread these chimeras to a distance. Good people who read these
   found them finer than the Bible. The new exercises appeared to them
   superior to the charismas of the Apostles, and many dared to say that
   something greater than Jesus had appeared. All Phrygia became nearly
   mad; ordinary ecclesiastical life was as if suspended.

   A life of lofty asceticism was the consequence of this burning faith in
   the approaching advent of God to the earth. The prayers of the saints
   at Phrygia were unceasing. They wore from affectation a sad air, and
   they were very bigoted. Their habit of holding the index finger against
   the nose while in prayer, to give themselves a contrite appearance,
   obtained for them the nickname of "nose-pegs" (in Phrygian
   tascodrugites). Fasts, austerities, rigorous xerophagy, abstinence from
   wine, absolute reprobation of marriage, such was the morale which
   logically imposed itself on these pious people in retreat in the hope
   of the last day. Even for the Supper they only used, like certain
   Ebionites, bread and water, cheese and salt. Austere disciplines are
   always contagious in crowds incapable of high spirituality; for they
   bring certain salvation at a good price, and they are easy for simple
   people (who have only good intentions) to practise. On all sides these
   habits spread about; they penetrated even into Gaul with the Asiatics,
   who numbered so many adherents in the valley of the Rhone. One of the
   Lyons martyrs in 177 showed himself attached to them even in prison,
   and it required either good Gallic sense or, as one may believe, a
   direct revelation from God, to make him renounce them.

   What was most troublesome, indeed, in the excesses of zeal of these
   ardent ascetics was that they showed themselves intractable against all
   those who did not share their affectations. They spoke only of the
   general falling away. Like the flagellants of the middle ages, they
   found in their exterior practices a principle of foolish pride and
   rebellion against the clergy. They dared to say that, since Jesus, at
   least since the Apostles, the Church had lost its time, and that it
   only required a little time to sanctify humanity and to prepare it for
   the Messianic reign. The Church of the whole world, according to them,
   was no better than Pagan society. It sought to form within the general
   church a spiritual church, a nucleus of saints, of which Pepuza should
   be the centre. These elect ones showed themselves supercilious towards
   the simple believers. Themison declared that the Catholic Church had
   lost all its glory, and obeyed Satan. A church of saints, that was
   their ideal, very little different from that of the pseudo-Hermas. He
   who is not a saint does not belong to the Church. The Church, they
   said, is the totality of saints, not the number of bishops.

   Nothing was further, it may be seen, from the idea of Catholicity,
   whose tendency was prevalent and whose essence consisted in opening the
   doors to all. The Catholics took the Church as it was, with its
   imperfections; one could not, according to them, be a sinner without
   ceasing to be a Christian. As to the Montanists, these two terms were
   irreconcilable. The Church should be as chaste as a virgin; the sinner
   is excluded from it by his very sin, and loses from that time all hope
   of re-entering it. The absolution of the Church is of no value. Holy
   things ought to be administered by the saints. The bishops have no
   privilege in what concerns spiritual gifts. Only the prophets, organs
   of the Spirit, can assure that God forgives.

   Thanks to the extraordinary manifestations of an external and barely
   discreet pietism, Pepuza and Tynium became indeed a kind of holy towns.
   They were called Jerusalem, and the sectaries wished them to be the
   centre of the world. People came there from all directions, and many
   maintained that, conformably to the prediction of Priscilla, the ideal
   Sion was already created. Was not ecstasy the provisional realisation
   of the kingdom of God, begun by Jesus? Women quitted their husbands, as
   if at the end of human affairs. Every day they believed they should see
   the clouds open and the New Jerusalem appear in the blue heavens.

   The orthodox, and especially the clergy, sought naturally to prove that
   the attraction which drew these Puritans to eternal things did not
   detach them altogether from the world. The sect had a central treasury
   for their propaganda. Collectors went out in all directions to seek
   offerings. The preachers received a salary; the prophetesses, in return
   for interviews they gave or audiences they vouchsafed, received money,
   dresses, and handsome presents. We can see what a handle this would
   give against the pretended saints. They had their confession and their
   martyrs, and this was what annoyed the orthodox most; for these would
   have desired that martyrdom should be considered the criterion of the
   true Church. Thus they spread slanders to lessen the merits of those
   sectarian martyrs. Themison having been arrested escaped, this being
   followed up by the payment of money. One Alexander was also imprisoned,
   and the orthodox had no peace till he was represented as a thief who
   perfectly deserved his lot, and had a judicial sentence against him in
   the archives of the province of Asia.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIV.

  RESISTANCE OF THE ORTHODOX CHURCH.

   The struggle lasted more than half a century; but the victory was never
   doubtful. The Phrygians, as they were called, had but one fault; it was
   grave; it was to do what the apostles did; and that when, for a hundred
   years back, the freedom of the charismas had been nothing but an
   inconvenience. The Church was already too strongly constituted for the
   undisciplined character of the Phrygians to do her real harm. While
   admiring the saints who produced this grand school of asceticism, the
   immense majority of the faithful refused to leave their pastors to
   follow wandering masters. Montanus, Priscilla, and Maximilla died
   without leaving any successors. What assured the triumph of the
   orthodox Church was the talent of its polemics. Apollinaris of
   Hierapolis led all who were not blinded by fanaticism. Miltiades
   developed the theory that "a prophet ought not to speak in ecstasy of a
   book which was held to be one of the bases of Christian theology."
   Serapion of Antioch collected, about 195, the evidences which condemned
   the innovators. Clement of Alexandria betook himself to refute them.

   The most complete among the works which kept up the controversy was
   that of a certain Apollonius, unknown elsewhere, who wrote forty years
   after the appearance of Montanus (that is to say between 200 and 400).
   It is by extracts from this that Eusebius has preserved to us what we
   know of the origins of the sect. Another bishop, whose name has not
   been preserved to us, composed a kind of history of this singular
   movement, fifteen years after the death of Maximilla, under the
   Severuses. To the same literature probably belongs the writing of which
   the fragment known under the name of the Canon of Muratori makes a
   part, directed at the same time, it would appear, against the Gnostic
   dreams. The Montanists, indeed, could not look for less than to have
   admitted to the body of the New Testament the prophecies of Montanus,
   Priscilla, and Maximilla. The conference which took place about 210
   between Proclus, become the chief of the sect, and the Roman priest
   Caïus, turned on this point. Generally, the Church of Rome, up to
   Zephyrin, held very strongly against these innovations.

   Animosity was great on both sides; they excommunicated each other
   reciprocally. When the confessors of the two parties were drawn
   together by martyrdom, they separated from each other, and would have
   nothing in common. The orthodox redoubled calumnies and sophistries to
   prove that the Montanist martyrs (and no church had more) were all
   miscreants or impostors, and especially to establish that the authors
   of this sect had perished miserably, by suicide, as madmen, out of
   their minds, having become the dupes or the prey of the devil.

   The infatuation of certain towns in Asia Minor for these pious follies
   knew no bounds. The Church of Ancyra, at a special moment, was quite
   drawn with its elders towards the dangerous novelties. It needed the
   close reasoning of the nameless bishop and of Zoticus of Otre to open
   their eyes, and even their conversion was not lasting. Ancyra, in the
   fourth century, continued to be the scene of the same aberrations. The
   Church of Thyatira was attacked in a still deeper manner. Phrygianism
   had established its stronghold there, and for a long time this old
   church was considered lost to Christendom. The councils of Iconium and
   of Synnade, about 231, realised the evil without being able to cure it.
   The extreme credulity of these honest populations of the centre of Asia
   Minor, Phrygians, Galatians, &c., had been the cause of their prompt
   conversion to Christianity, and now this credulity placed them at the
   mercy of all illusions. Phrygian became nearly synonymous with heretic.
   About 235, a new prophetess rose from the fields of Cappadocia, going
   with naked feet among the mountains, announcing the end of the world,
   administering the sacraments and desiring to draw her disciples to
   Jerusalem. Under Decius, the Montanists furnished a considerable
   contingent to martyrdom.

   We shall see the perplexity of conscience which the sectaries of
   Phrygia will cause to the confessors of Lyons, in the very height of
   their struggle. Divided between admiration for so much holiness and the
   astonishment which these oddities caused to their right minds, our
   heroic and sensible compatriots tried in vain to stifle the discussion.
   For a moment even the Church of Rome was surprised. Bishop Zephyrin had
   already almost recognised the prophecies of Montanus, Priscilla, and
   Maximilla, when an ardent Asian, a confessor of the faith, Epigones,
   called Praxeas, who knew the sectaries better than the elders at Rome,
   unveiled the weaknesses of the pretended prophets, and showed the pope
   that he could not approve of these dreams without giving the lie to his
   predecessors who had condemned them.

   The debate complicated the question of penitence and reconciliation.
   The bishops claimed the right to absolve, and used it with a freedom
   which offended the Puritans. The illuminated pretended that they alone
   could replace the soul into favour with God, and they showed themselves
   as very severe. Every mortal sin (homicide, idolatry, blasphemy,
   adultery, fornication) shut, according to them, the avenue to
   repentance. If these extraordinary principles had remained confined in
   the remote provinces of Catacecaumena, the evil would have been a small
   matter. Unfortunately, the little sect of Phrygia served as the nucleus
   to a considerable party, who presented some real dangers, since it was
   capable of drawing away from the orthodox Church its most illustrious
   apologist, Tertullian.

   This party, which dreamed of an immaculate Church, and only obtained a
   strict conventicle, succeeded, in spite of its very exaggerations, in
   recruiting from the Church all the austere and excessive. It had so
   much of the logic of Christianity. We have already seen the same thing
   happen in the case of the Encratites and Tatian. With its unnatural
   abstinences, its disesteem of marriage, its condemnation of second
   marriage, Montanism was nothing else than a consequent millenarianism,
   and millenarianism was Christianity itself. "Who would mix up," said
   Tertullian, "cares of nurselings with the last judgment? It will be
   beautiful to see flowing bosoms, the nauseas of an accouched woman, and
   squalling brats mingled with the appearance of the Judge and the sounds
   of the trumpet. Oh! good, wise women--the executioners of the
   Antichrist!" The enthusiasts related how, during forty years, they had
   seen every morning, hanging in the sky in Judea, a city which vanished
   when one drew near it. They invoked, to prove the reality of this
   vision, the evidence of the Pagans, and each one imagined the delights
   he should enjoy in this heavenly dwelling as compensation for the
   sacrifices he had made here below.

   Africa especially, by its ardour and harshness, fell into this snare.
   Montanists, Novatianists, Donatists, innumerable are the different
   names under which was produced the spirit of undiscipline, the
   unhealthy ardour of the martyr, hatred to the Episcopate, millenarian
   dreams, which always were classic ground to the Berber races. These
   rigorists who revolted against being called a sect, but who in every
   church gave themselves out as the elect, as Christian souls worthy of
   that name, these Puritans, implacable towards those who wished to
   repent, became the worst scourge of Christianity. Tertullian treats the
   general church as a cave of adulterers and prostitutes. The bishops,
   not having either the gift of prophecy nor of miracles, would, in the
   eyes of the enthusiasts, be lower than pneumatics. It is by them, and
   not by the official hierarchy, that the transmission of the sacramental
   graces, the movement of the Church and progress are accomplished. The
   true Christian, only living in prospect of the last judgment and of
   martyrdom, passes his life in contemplation. Not only should he not
   flee from persecution, but he is commanded to seek it. He must prepare
   without ceasing for martyrdom as for a necessary complement of the
   Christian life. The natural end of the Christian is to die in torture.
   An unbridled credulousness, a faith to the uttermost in the
   spiritualistic charismas, made of Montanism one of the most
   extraordinary types of fanaticism which the history of humanity
   records.

   What it has of weight about it is that this frightful dream seduced the
   imagination of the only man of grand literary talent whom the Church
   had counted in its bosom for three centuries. An incorrect writer, but
   with a strong energy, an ardent sophist, wielding by turns irony,
   blame, the lowest triviality, the plaything of an ardent conviction
   even in his most manifest contradictions, Tertullian found means to
   give some chefs d'oeuvres to the half-dead Latin tongue, by applying to
   this wild idea an eloquence which had hitherto remained unknown to the
   ascetic bigots of Phrygia.

   The victory of the Episcopate was, in these circumstances, the victory
   of leniency and humanity. With rare good sense the general church
   looked on the exaggerated abstinences as a sort of partial anathema
   cast on the creation and as an injury to the work of God. The question
   of the admission of women to ecclesiastical functions and to the
   administration of the sacraments, a question that certain precedents of
   the apostolic history left undecided, were determined for ever. The
   bold pretence of the sectaries of Phrygia to insert some new prophecies
   into the biblical canon led the Church to declare, more distinctly than
   she had ever done before, the New Bible closed for ever. Finally the
   rash seeking for martyrdom became a sort of offence, and alongside the
   legend which exalted the true martyr there was the legend intended to
   show that he was culpable who anticipated penalties, and infringed
   without being compelled the laws of his country.

   The flock of believers, necessarily of average virtue, followed the
   pastors. Mediocrity founded authority. Catholicity began. For it the
   future! The principle of a kind of Christian yoguism is suppressed for
   a time. There was here the first victory of the Episcopate, and perhaps
   the most important; for it was obtained over a sincere piety. The
   ecstasies, the prophecy, the speaking with tongues had texts and
   history for them. But they had become a danger; the Episcopate put them
   in good order; it suppressed all these manifestations of individual
   faith. How far are we from the time so much admired by the author of
   the Acts? Already in the bosom of Christianity existed this party of
   moderate good sense, who have always gained in the struggles of Church
   history. The hierarchical authority, at its origin, was strong enough
   to quell the enthusiasm of the undisciplined, to put the laity into
   guardianship, and to cause this principle to triumph, that the bishops
   alone are concerned in theology and are the sole judges of revelations.
   It was, indeed, the death of Christianity, by the destruction of the
   Episcopate, which these good fools of Phrygia devised. If individual
   inspiration, the doctrine of individual revelation and of its change as
   to permanence had been carried, Christianity would have perished in
   little conventicles of epileptics! Those puerile macerations which
   could not be suitable for the wide world would have arrested the
   propaganda. All the faithful, having the same right to the priesthood,
   to spiritual gifts, and power to administer the sacraments, would have
   fallen into a complete anarchy. The charisma would have abolished the
   sacrament; the sacrament gained the day, and the foundation-stone of
   Catholicism was irrevocably established.

   In fact, the triumph of the ecclesiastical hierarchy was complete.
   Under Callixtus (217-222) moderate maxims prevailed in the Church of
   Rome, to the great scandal of the rigorists, who revenged themselves by
   atrocious calumnies. The council of Iconium closed the debate for the
   Church without bringing back the wanderers. The sect died, but very
   slowly; it continued up to the fourth century in the condition of
   Christian democracy, especially in Asia Minor, under the names of
   Phrygians, Phrygasts, Cataphryges, Pepuzians, Tascodrugites,
   Quintellians, Priscillians, and Artotyrites. They called themselves the
   pure ones or spiritualists. For some centuries Phrygia and Galatia were
   devoured by certain pietistic and Gnostic heresies, dreaming of clouds
   and angels and Æons. Pepuza was destroyed; we do not know in what
   circumstances or at what date, but the district remained sacred. This
   desert became a place of pilgrimage. The initiated gathered from all
   Asia Minor and celebrated there secret worship, as to which popular
   rumour had fine scope for exercise. They affirmed positively that it
   was there the celestial vision was to be revealed. They remained there
   for days and nights in a mystic waiting, and at the end of that time
   they saw Christ personally coming to respond to the ardour which
   consumed them.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XV.

  COMPLETE TRIUMPH OF THE EPISCOPATE--RESULTS ON MONTANISM.

   Thus, thanks to the Episcopate, reputed representative of the tradition
   of the twelve apostles, the Church wrought out, without weakening
   herself, the most difficult of transformations. She passed from the
   conventual state, if I may say so, to the laic condition--from the
   condition of a little chapel of visionaries to the state of the Church
   opened to all, and, consequently, exposed to imperfections. What seemed
   destined never to be anything but a dream of fanatics had become a
   durable religion. To become a Christian, whatever Hermas and the
   Montanists said, one doesn't need to be a saint. Obedience to
   ecclesiastical authority is now what makes the Christian, much more
   than spiritual gifts. These spiritual gifts shall be even suspected
   henceforth, and shall frequently expose the most favoured by grace to
   become heretics. Schism is the ecclesiastical crime par excellence. For
   dogma, again, the Christian Church possessed already a centre of
   orthodoxy which called heresy everything that leaves the received type;
   it had also an average morality which could be that of all the world,
   and not draw people forcibly, as that of the abstinents did, to the end
   of the world. In repulsing the Gnostics the Church had repulsed the
   refinements of dogma; in rejecting the Montanists it rejected the
   refinements of holiness. The excesses of those who dreamed of a
   spiritual church, a transcendant perfection, struck against common
   sense and the established Church. The masses, already considerable, who
   entered the Church and constituted the majority, brought down the moral
   temperature to the lowest possible level. In politics the question was
   in the same position. The exaggerations of the Montanists, their
   furious declamations against the Roman Empire, their hatred against
   Pagan society, could not be the act of everyone. The empire of
   Marcus-Aurelius was very different from that of Nero. With him there
   had been no reconciliation to hope for; with the former, one might
   expect it. The Church and Marcus-Aurelius pursued, in many points of
   view, the same end. It is clear that the bishops would have abandoned
   to the secular arm all the saints of Phrygia, if such a sacrifice had
   been the price of the alliance which would have put into their hands
   the spiritual direction of the world.

   Charismas, indeed, and other supernatural exercises, excellent for
   maintaining the fervour of little congregations of the illuminated,
   became impracticable in the large churches. Extreme severity as to the
   rules of penitence was an absurdity and a meaningless thing, if one
   aspired to nothing else than a conventicle of so-called pure ones. A
   people is never made up of the spotless, and the simple believer needed
   to be admitted to repentance more than once. It was therefore admitted
   that one might be a member of the Church without being either a hero or
   an ascetic; it was sufficient for this that one was submissive to his
   bishop. The saints implored; the struggle between individual holiness
   and that of the hierarchy is not finished yet, but the middle view
   shall gain; it will be possible to sin without ceasing to be a
   Christian. The hierarchy shall prefer even the sinner who employs the
   ordinary means of reconciliation to the proud ascetic who justifies
   himself, or who believes that he has no need of justification.

   It never will be given to either of these two principles to annihilate
   the other. Alongside the Church of all there will be the Church of the
   saints; alongside of the age there will be the convent; alongside the
   simple believer there will be the "religious." The kingdom of God, such
   as Jesus has preached it, being impossible in the world as it is, and
   the world being determined not to change, what must be done then, if
   not to found little kingdoms of God, a kind of islets in an
   irremediably perverse ocean, where the application of the Gospel is
   made to the letter, and where that distinction between precepts and
   some counsels which serve, in the worldly Church, as a valve to escape
   from impossibilities? The religious life is one in some sort logically
   necessary in Christianity. A grand organism finds it the means of
   developing all that exists in its bosom in germ. The ideal of
   perfection which lies at the base of the Galilean preaching of Jesus,
   and which some true disciples always will determinedly maintain, cannot
   exist in the world; it is needful, therefore, to create, that this idea
   may be realisable, some enclosed worlds, monasteries, where poverty,
   self-denial and reciprocal correction, obedience and chastity should be
   rigorously practised. The Gospel is really rather the Enchiridion of a
   convent than a code of morality; it is the essential rule of all
   monastic order; the perfect Christian is a monk; the monk is
   consequently a Christian; the convent is the place where the Gospel,
   always Utopian elsewhere, becomes a reality. The code which claims to
   teach the imitation of Jesus Christ is a book for the cloister.
   Satisfied to know that the morality preached by Jesus is practised
   somewhere, the laity will console itself with its mundane connections,
   and will easily become used to believe that such lofty maxims are not
   made for it. Buddhism has resolved the question in another way. Every
   one is a monk there a part of his life. Christianity is content if it
   has some part in the places where true Christianity is practised; the
   Buddhist is content provided that at one point of his life he has been
   a perfect Buddhist.

   Montanism was an exaggeration; it could not but perish. But, like all
   exaggerations, it left deep traces. The Roman Christian was in part its
   work. Its two great enthusiasms, chastity and martyrdom, remained the
   two fundamental elements of Christian literature. It was Montanism
   which invented this strange association of ideas, created the martyr
   Virgin, and, introducing the female charm into the most gloomy accounts
   of sufferings, inaugurated that bizarre literature from which Christian
   imagination to the beginning of the fourth century could not release
   itself. The Montanist Acts of St. Perpetua and the martyrs of Africa,
   breathing forth their faith in charismas, full of an extreme rigorism
   and a burning ardour, impregnated with a strong savour of slave love,
   mixing the finished images of a skilful æsthetic with the most
   fanatical dreams, opened the series of these works of austere
   voluptuousness. The search for martyrdom became a fever impossible to
   govern. The circumcellious, running through the country in mad bands
   seeking death, forcing people to martyr them, making this access of
   gloomy hysteria become an epidemic.

   Chastity in marriage remained one of the bases in the interest of Roman
   Christians. Now there was there another Montanist idea. Like the false
   Hermas, the Montanists stirred unceasingly the dangerous ember which
   they might well have allowed to sleep with its concealed fires, but
   that it was imprudent to extinguish it violently. The precautions they
   took in this matter evidence a certain preoccupation, more lascivious
   at bottom than the liberty of the man of the world; in any case these
   precautions are such as aggravate the evil, or at least betray it,
   bringing it to life. An excessive tenderness in regard to temptation we
   must gather from this exaggerated apprehension of beauty, from those
   interdicts against the toilette of women and especially on dressing
   their hair, which are found in every page of the Montanist writings.
   The woman who, by the most innocent turn given to her hair, seeks to
   please and conveys the conviction that she is pretty, becomes, in the
   speech of these bitter sectaries, as culpable as she who excites to
   lewdness. The demon of the hair will be charged with her punishment.
   Aversion to marriage came from motives which must be sought for there.
   The pretended chastity of the Encratites was often only an unconscious
   deception.

   A romance which was certainly of Montanist origin, since we find in it
   arguments to prove that women have the right to instruct and to
   administer the sacraments, turns entirely on this rather dangerous
   ambiguity. We speak of Thécla. However rough and provoking is the
   romance of the saints Nerea and Achilea, nothing could be more
   voluptuously chaste; marriage has never been treated with a more naïve
   immodesty. Let one read in Gregory of Tours the delicious legend of the
   "Two Lovers of Auvergne," in the Acts of John the piquant story of
   "Drusiana," in the Acts of Thomas the tale of "The Betrothed Spouses of
   India," in St. Ambrose the story of the Virgin of Antioch with the
   adulterer; and then one can understand how the ages which nourished
   such recitals can, without merit, be described as having renounced
   profane love. One of the mysteries most profoundly held by the founders
   of Christianity is that chastity is a pleasure, and that modesty is one
   of the forms of love. The people who are afraid of women are generally
   those who love them most. How often may it be said with justice to the
   ascetic: Fallit te incautum pietas tua. In certain portions of the
   Christian community there was seen appearing, at different times, the
   idea that women ought never to be seen, that the life which befits them
   is a life of seclusion, according to the habit which has prevailed in
   the Mussulman East. It is easy to see to what a degree, if such a
   thought had prevailed, the character of the Church would have been
   changed. What, in fact, distinguishes the church from the mosque and
   even from the synagogue is, that the woman enters freely there and on
   the same footing as the man, although separated or even veiled. It
   appears as if their Christianity would have been, as Islamism was later
   on, a religion for men, from which the woman is almost altogether
   excluded. The Catholic Church took care not to commit this fault. Women
   had the functions of the diaconate in the Church, and were engaged in
   it with man in subordinate but frequent affairs. Baptism, the
   eucharistic communion, and works of charity took them apart from the
   customs of the East. Here again the Catholic Church formed the medium
   among the exaggerations of the different sects with a rare sense of
   tact.

   Thus is explained that singular mixture of timid modesty and soft
   abandon which characterise moral sentiment in the primitive churches.
   Away with the vile suspicions of vulgar debauches, incapable of
   understanding such innocence! Everything was pure in these holy
   freedoms; but it was necessary also to be pure to be able to enjoy it.
   Legend shows us the Pagans jealous of the privilege which the priest
   has of perceiving one moment in baptismal nudity her who, by the holy
   immersion, becomes his spiritual sister. What should be said of the
   "holy kiss" which was the ambrosia of these chaste generations, of that
   kiss which, like the consolamentum of the Cathares, was a sacrament of
   strength and love, and whose remembrance, mingled with the most solemn
   impressions of the Eucharistic act, was sufficient for days to fill the
   soul with a kind of perfume? Why was the Church so beloved, that to
   re-enter it when they had left it men went anticipating death? Because
   it was a school of infinite joys. Jesus was really in the midst of his
   own. More than a hundred years after his death, he was still the master
   of learned pleasures, the initiator into transcendant secrets.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVI.

  MARCUS-AURELIUS AMONG THE QUADES--THE BOOK OF THOUGHTS.

   Too little concerned about what passed in the rest of the world, the
   government of Marcus-Aurelius seemed to exist only for home progress.
   The only great organised empire which touched the Roman frontier, that
   of the Parthians, yielded before the legions. Lucius Verus and Aridius
   Cassius conquered some provinces which Trajan had only shortly
   occupied: Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Adiabene. The real danger was
   beyond the Rhine and the Danube. There lived in a threatening obscurity
   some energetic people, for the most part Germans in race, whom the
   Romans scarcely knew save by the handsome and faithful body-guard (the
   Swiss of that age), which certain emperors loved to keep, or by the
   superb gladiators who, unveiling all at once in the amphitheatre the
   beauty of their naked forms, called forth the intense admiration of the
   audience.

   To conquer step by step this impenetrable world, to make the limits of
   civilisation extend league after league: to establish itself strongly
   in Bohemia, in the central quadrilateral of Europe, where there might
   still be a considerable nucleus of Celtic Boïans; from thence to
   advance like the backwoodsman of America to destroy tree after tree of
   the Hercynian forest, to substitute colonies for these tribes without
   association with the soil, to fix and civilise those peoples full of a
   future, to cause the empire to be benefited by their rare qualities,
   their solidity, their corporeal force, their energy; to extend the true
   frontiers of the empire, on one side to the Oder or the Vistula, on the
   other to the Pruth or the Dneister, and to give thus to the Latin
   portion of the empire a decided preponderance, which should prevent the
   schism of the Greek or Oriental portion; instead of building that fatal
   Constantinople, to place the second capital at Bâle or Constance, and
   to secure thus for the great good of the empire to the Celto-German
   peoples, the political beginning which they might conquer later on upon
   the ruins of the empire--this would have been the programme of the
   enlightened Romans, if they had been better informed as to the state of
   Europe and Asia, geography and comparative ethnography.

   The badly-arranged expedition of Varus (year 10 of J. C.) and the
   eternal breach it left in the number of the legions were like a fan
   which turned Roman thought from the great Germany. Tacitus alone saw
   the importance of this region as the equilibrium of the world. But the
   state of division in which the Germanic tribes were, lulled to sleep
   the disquietude which sagacious minds ought to have felt. Indeed, while
   those people, more concerned with local independence than
   centralisation, did not form a military aggregation, they gave little
   cause for fear. But their confederations were very great. Men knew what
   result that had which was formed in the third century on the right bank
   of the Rhone under the name of France. About the year 166, a powerful
   league was formed in Bohemia, Moravia and the north of the present
   Hungary. The names of a multitude of nations, which were later on to
   fill the world, were heard for the first time. The great advance of the
   barbarians commenced; the Germans, up till now unassailable, attacked.
   The banks of the Danube were burst in the region of Austria and
   Hungary, towards Presbourg, Comorn and Gran. All the German and Slav
   peoples, from France to the Danube, Marcomans, Quades, Narisques,
   Hermunduri, Suevi, Sarmatians, Victovales, Roxolans, Bastarnes,
   Costoboques, Alaris, Pencins, Vandals and Jazyges, assembled with one
   accord to force the frontier and inundate the empire. Pressure came
   from the farthest point. Reinforced by some septentrional barbarians,
   probably the Goths, the whole Slav and Germanic mass appeared in
   motion; these barbarians, with their wives and children, wished to be
   received into the empire, seeking for some land and money, offering in
   return their arms for any kind of military service. It was a veritable
   human cataclysm. The line of the Danube was broken. The Vandals and
   Marcomans established themselves in Pannonia; Dacia was trampled over
   by twenty peoples; the Costoboques advanced as far as Greece; Rhetia
   and Norica were overrun; the Marcomans crossed the Julian Alps, took up
   their position before Aquiba, pillaging everything up to Pavia. Before
   this fearful shock the Roman army yielded; the number of captives taken
   by the barbarians was enormous; the alarm was great in Italy; it was
   declared that, since the tithe of the Carthaginian wars, Rome had never
   had to meet such a furious attack.

   It is a well-authenticated truth that the philosophical progress of the
   laws does not correspond always to a progress in the power of the
   State. War is a brutal thing; it has brutal desires; often it thus
   happens that moral and social improvements bring with them military
   weakness. The army is a remnant of barbarism, which the man of progress
   preserves as a necessary evil; and it is rarely that one does with
   success what is done as a last shift. Antoninus had already a strong
   dislike to the use of arms; under his reign the manners of the field
   were much softened. One cannot deny that the Roman army had not lost,
   under Marcus-Aurelius, a part of its discipline and vigour. Recruiting
   had become difficult; the replacing and enrolment of the barbarians had
   entirely changed the character of the legion; doubtless Christianity
   had already drained the best of the State's strength. When one thinks
   that by the side of this decrepitude there were acting bands of men
   without country, engaged in the working of the ground, not caring but
   to kill, seeking nothing but war, should this be even against their own
   relatives, it was clear that a great substitution of races would ensue.
   Civilised humanity had not as yet so subdued evil as to be able to
   abandon itself to the dream of progress through peace and morality.

   Marcus-Aurelius, before this colossal assault of the whole barbarian
   world, was truly admirable. He did not like war, and never engaged in
   it but against his desire; but when he did it, he did it thoroughly; he
   made a great captain through duty. A terrific pestilence was joined to
   the war. Thus tried, Roman society appealed to all its traditions and
   rites; and there was, as is common in the time of such a scourge, a
   reaction in favour of the national religion. Marcus-Aurelius lent
   himself to this. We see the good emperor presiding himself in his
   quality as grand pontiff at the sacrifices, taking the blade of a
   javelin in the temple of Mars, plunging it into the blood, and throwing
   it towards the direction of heaven in which the enemy was. Everybody
   was armed, slaves, gladiators, bandits, diogmites (police agents); some
   German troops were levied against the Germans; money was coined out of
   precious objects in the imperial property, to save the establishment of
   new taxes.

   The life of Marcus-Aurelius was henceforth almost entirely passed in
   the region of the Danube at Carnoute, near Vienna, or at Vienna itself
   upon the banks of the Gran in Hungary, sometimes at Sirmium. His ennui
   was tremendous; but he knew how to conquer it. Those tasteless
   campaigns against the Quades and the Marcomans were very well
   conducted; the disgust he felt for them did not prevent him from
   putting into them the most conscientious application. The army loved
   him, and did its duty thoroughly. Moderate even towards his enemies, he
   preferred a plan of campaign long but sure to dashing blows; he
   delivered Pannonia completely, repulsed all the barbarians on the left
   bank of the Danube, made even great points beyond that river, and
   prudently practised the tactics, which have been abused at a later day,
   of opposing barbarians to barbarians.

   Paternal and philosophic towards these hordes of half-savages, he was
   determined, out of respect to himself, to preserve towards them
   considerations which they could not understand, in the same way as a
   gentleman who, by force of his own personal dignity, behaves towards
   Red-skins as to well-educated people. He preached artlessly to them of
   reason and justice, and he finished by inspiring them with respect.
   Perhaps, but for the revolt of Aridius Cassius, he would have succeeded
   in making a province of Marcomania (Bohemia), another of Sarmatia
   (Galicia), and so have saved the future. He admitted the German
   soldiers to his legions on a large scale; he gave lands in Dacia,
   Pannonia, and Media, in Roman Germany, to those who wished to work, but
   maintained very firmly the military boundary, established a rigorous
   police on the Danube, and did not allow the prestige of the empire to
   suffer a single time from the concessions which policy and humanity
   drew from him.

   It was in the course of one of these expeditions that, encamped on the
   banks of the Gran, in the midst of the monotonous plains of Hungary, he
   wrote the finest pages of the exquisite work which has revealed his
   whole soul. What cost Marcus-Aurelius most in these distant wars was
   his being deprived of the ordinary society of learned men and
   philosophers. Nearly all had drawn back before the fatigues, and
   remained at Rome. Occupied the whole day in military exercises, he
   passed the evenings in his tent alone with himself. There he
   disembarrassed himself of all the constraint which his duties imposed
   on him; he made his examination of his conscience, and thought of the
   nobleness of the struggle he so valiantly maintained. Sceptical as to
   war, even while he made it, and diving into the contemplation of
   universal vanity, he doubts the lawfulness of his own victories: "The
   spider is proud when it seizes a fly," he wrote; "another is proud when
   he takes a leveret; a third when he takes a pilchard; another when he
   takes a wild boar; and another still when he takes some Sarmatians.
   Looked at from real principles they are brigands." The Conversations of
   Epictetes, by Arrien, was the favourite book of the emperor; he read
   these with delight, and, without intending it, he was led to imitate
   them. Such was the origin of these detached thoughts, forming twelve
   books, which were collected after his death under the title of On the
   subject of Himself.

   It is probable that for a good while Marcus kept a journal special to
   his mental condition. He wrote there in Greek the maxims to which he
   betook himself for strength, reminiscences of his favourite authors,
   passages from the moralists who struck him most, the principles which
   during the day had sustained him, sometimes reproaches which his
   scrupulous conscience thought should be addressed to himself.

   "We seek for solitary retreats, rustic cottages, the sea shore,
   mountains; like others, thou lovest to dream of all this. What
   childishness, since every hour thou art allowed to retire into thine
   own soul! No part of man has a more peaceful retreat, especially if it
   possesses in itself some of those things whose contemplation suffices
   to bring it calmness. Learn then to enjoy this retreat, and renew .thy
   strength there. Have there these short fundamental maxims, which will
   at once bring serenity to thy soul, and send thee back in a condition
   to support with resignation the world to which thou must needs return."

   During the gloomy winters of the north this consolation became still
   more necessary. He was more than fifty; old age came on him
   pre-maturely. One evening all the images of his pious youth came back
   to his memory, and he passed some delightful hours in reckoning what he
   owed to each of the good beings who had surrounded him.

   "Examples from my ancestor Verus; sweetness of manner, and unalterable
   patience.

   "Qualities which have been taken from my father--the remembrance he has
   left me--modesty and a manly character.

   " Souvenir of my mother: her piety, her kindness; purity of soul, which
   went so far as to abstain, not only from doing evil, but even from
   conceiving the thought of it; a frugal life, and what resembles so
   little the luxury of the rich."

   Then there appeared to him in his turn Diognetes, who inspired him with
   the taste for philosophy, rendering the pallet so pleasant in his eyes,
   its coverlet consisting of a simple skin and the apparatus of Hellenic
   discipline; Junius Rusticus, who taught him to shun all affectation of
   elegance in style, and lent him the Conversations of Epictetes;
   Apollonius of Chalcis, who realised the stoic ideal of extreme firmness
   and perfect sweetness; Sextus of Cheroneus, so grave and so good;
   Alexander of Cotia, who showed such refined politeness; Fronton, "who
   taught him what there was of envy, duplicity and hypocrisy in a tyrant,
   and what hardness there may be in the heart of a patrician;" his
   brother, Severus, who caused him to know Thrasea Helvidius; Cato;
   Brutus, who gave him the idea of what a free State is, where the rule
   is the natural equality of the citizens and the equality of their laws,
   of a monarchy which respects before all the liberty of the citizens;
   and, dominating all the others with his pure greatness, Antoninus, his
   father by adoption, whose portrait he traces for us with a
   reduplication of gratitude and love.

   "I thank the gods," he says in closing, "for having given me good
   ancestors, good parents, a good sister, good teachers, and in my
   household, in my neighbours, in my friends, people nearly all moved by
   kindness. Never do I allow myself to act with any want of respect
   towards them; by my natural disposition, I might have on some occasion
   committed an irreverence; but the goodness of the gods has not
   permitted that to arise. I owe likewise to the gods my having preserved
   pure the flower of my youth; having not having been made a man of
   before the age, of having even delayed that; having been educated under
   the law of a prince and a father, who separated my mind from all the
   smoke of pride, and made me understand that it is possible--while
   living in a palace, surrounded by guards, by splendid dresses, by
   torches and statues --that a prince can compress his life within the
   limits of that of a simple citizen, without showing with all that less
   nobleness or strength when he is to act as emperor and treat of State
   affairs. They have vouchsafed to me likewise to meet a brother whose
   manners were a continual exhortation to watch over myself, at the same
   time that his deference and attachment made the joy of my heart.
   . . . . If I have had the good fortune to raise those who have guided
   my education to the honours they seemed to desire; if I have known
   Apollonius, Rusticus, Maximus; if often there has been presented to me,
   surrounded with so much light, the image of a life conformed to nature
   (I remained on this side of that goal it is true--but it is my own
   fault); if anybody has resisted till this hour the rough life I lead;
   if I have not touched either Benedicta nor Theodotus; if, in spite of
   my frequent anger against Rusticus, I have never passed the bounds, nor
   done anything I have had cause to repent of; if my mother, who died
   young, was able to pass near me her last years; if, every time I have
   wished to come to the help of some poor or afflicted person, I have
   never had to say that gold or silver were wanting; if I myself have not
   needed to receive anything from anyone; if fate has given me a wife so
   complaisant and so guileless; if I have found so many people capable of
   educating my children; if, at the outset of my passion for philosophy,
   I did not become the prey of some sophist;--it is to the gods I owe it
   all. Yes; such good things cannot but be the effect which the help of
   the gods and a happy fortune have rendered me."

   This divine candour breathes through every page. Never has one written
   more simply for himself, for the sale end of emptying his heart, with
   no other witness than God. Not a shadow of system here!
   Marcus-Aurelius, to speak properly, has no philosophy; although he owes
   nearly everything to Stoicism, transformed by the Roman mind, he is of
   no school. According to our taste he has too little curiosity, for he
   does not know all that a contemporary of Ptolemy and Gallien could
   learn; he has on the system of the world some opinions which were not
   on a level with the loftiest science of his time. But his moral
   thought, thus set free from every tie to any system, gains by that a
   peculiar elevation. The author of the book of The Imitation himself,
   although much drawn away from the quarrels of the schools, does not
   reach so far; for his manner of feeling is essentially Christian;
   putting away Christian dogmas, his book loses more than a part of its
   charm. The work of Marcus-Aurelius, not having any dogmatic basis,
   shall eternally preserve its freshness. Everyone, from the atheist, or
   he who believes himself to be such, to the man most absorbed in the
   special belief of each cult, can find there some edifying truths. It is
   the most purely human book there is. He does not trench upon any
   controverted question. In theology, Marcus-Aurelius floats between pure
   Deism, Polytheism understood in a physical sense after the manner of
   the Stoics, and a sort of cosmic Pantheism. He does not hold more to
   the one hypothesis than the other, and he uses indifferently three
   vocabularies, the Deistic, Polytheistic, and Pantheistic. His
   considerations have always two faces, according as God and the soul
   have or have not reality. "To quit the society of men has nothing very
   terrible, if there are gods; and if there are no gods, or if they are
   not occupied with human things, what is the use of living in a world
   empty of gods and empty of providence; But certainly there are gods,
   and they have human affairs at heart."

   It is the dilemma we feel every hour; for if it is materialism the most
   complete which is right, we who have believed in the true and the good
   shall be no more duped than others. If idealism is right, we shall have
   been the true sages, and we shall have been in the only position which
   we ought to have taken, that is to say, without any interested hope,
   without having reckoned on any remuneration.

   Marcus-Aurelius is not therefore a freethinker; he is even scarcely a
   philosopher, in the special sense of the word. Like Jesus, he has no
   speculative philosophy; his theology is entirely contradictory; he has
   no fixed idea on the soul and immortality. How profoundly moral was he
   without the beliefs which are regarded to-day as the foundations of
   morality! How eminently religious was he without having professed any
   of the dogmas of what is called natural religion! It is that which it
   is useful to seek for here.

   The doubts which, from the point of view of speculative reason, soar
   over the truths of natural religion, are not, as Kant has admirably
   shown, accidental doubts, susceptible of being removed, belonging, as
   has sometimes been imagined, to certain conditions of the human mind.
   These doubts are inherent in the very nature of the truths, and one can
   say without paradox that, if they were removed, the truths which they
   attack would disappear at the same blow. Let us suppose, indeed, a
   direct proof, positive, evident to all, of future reward and
   punishment, where should be the merit of doing good? Only fools would
   they be who, in the gaiety of their heart, would run to their own
   damnation. A multitude of base souls would lay their salvation cards on
   the table; they would in some sense "force the hand" of the Deity. Who
   would see in such a system either morality or religion? In moral and
   religious matters, it is indispensable to believe without
   demonstration; certainty is not concerned, but faith. See what a
   certain Deism forgets, with its habits of intemperate affirmation. It
   forgets that too precise beliefs upon human destiny take away all moral
   merit. For our part, if men would set forth a peremptory argument of
   this sort, we should do as St. Louis did, when they spoke to him about
   the miraculous wafer; we should refuse to go to look! What need have we
   of these vulgar proofs, which have no application except in the gross
   order of facts, and which would annoy our freedom? We should fear to be
   likened to those speculators on virtue or those timorous vulgarians,
   who import into the things of the soul the gross egotism of practical
   life. In the first days which followed the establishment of the belief
   in the resurrection of Jesus, this sentiment was produced in the most
   touching way. The true friends of the heart, the tender one loved
   better to believe without proof than to see him. "Blessed are those who
   have not seen and yet have believed!" became the "word" of the
   situation. Charming word! Eternal symbol of tender and generous
   idealism, which is horrified to touch with its hands what should not be
   seen except with the heart!

   Our good Marcus-Aurelius, on this point as on all others, anticipated
   the ages. Never does he care to put himself in sympathy with himself as
   to God and as to the soul. As if he had read the Kritik of Pure Reason,
   he sees well enough that, since the infinite is in question, no formula
   is absolute, and that in such a matter there is no chance of having
   perceived the truth once in one's life if it has been much disproved.
   He separates widely moral beauty from all received theology; he does
   not allow the right of resting any metaphysical opinion on the first
   cause. Never was the intimate union with the hidden God pushed to more
   unheard-of refinements.

   "Offer to the government of God him who is in himself a manly being,
   ripe in age, a friend of the public good, a Roman, an emperor, a
   soldier at his post, waiting the signal of the trumpet, a man ready to
   quit life without regret. There are some grains of incense destined for
   the same altar; the one falls sooner, the other later into the fire;
   but the difference is nothing. Man ought to live according to nature
   during the few days which are given to him on earth, and, when the
   moment of his withdrawal is come, to submit himself with sweetness, as
   an olive which, in falling, blesses the tree which has produced it, and
   renders thanks to the branch which bore it. All that is arranged for
   thee arrange for me, O cosmos. Nothing is to me premature or late of
   what in thy view comes in season. I take my fruit of what thy seasons
   bring, O Nature! From thee comes everything: in thee is everything:
   towards thee goes everything.

   City of Cecrops, how I love thee!'

   said the poet; why not say:

   City of Jupiter, how I love thee!'

   "O man! thou hast been a citizen in a great city; what does it matter
   whether it has been three or five years? What is conformable to the
   laws is not unjust to any one. What, then, is very vexatious in being
   sent from the city not by a tyrant, not by an unjust judge, but by that
   nature itself which brought thee into it? It is as if a comedian were
   dismissed from the theatre by the same manager who has engaged him.
   But,' thou wilt say, I have not played out the five acts; I have only
   played three.' You answer rightly; but in life three acts are
   sufficient to make up the whole piece. He who scores up the end is he
   who after having been the cause of the combination of the elements is
   now the cause of their dissolution; thou art nothing in the one or
   other of these facts.

   "Go therefore content; for he who dismisses thee is without wrath."

   Do we say that he is not revolted sometimes by the strange lot which is
   pleased to leave man alone face to face, with his eternal wants of
   devotion, sacrifice, heroism, and nature, with his transcendent
   immorality, its supreme disdain for virtue? No. Once, with less
   absurdity, the colossal injustice of death strikes him. But soon his
   temperament, completely mortified, reveals and calms itself.

   "How is it that the gods who have ordered all things so well and with
   so much love for man should have neglected a single point, viz., that
   men of approved virtue, who have had during their lifetime a sort of
   fellowship with the Deity, who are beloved by him because of their
   pious actions and sacrifices, should not revive after death, but are
   blotted out for ever? Since the matter is so, learn that, if it ought
   to have been otherwise, it would have been so; for if that had been
   just it would have been possible; if that had been agreeable to nature,
   nature would have carried it out. Therefore, from this which is not so,
   strengthen thyself by this consideration, that it was necessary that it
   should not be so. Thou seest for thyself that how to make such a search
   is to dispute with God as to his right. Now we should not dispute thus
   against the gods, if they were not sovereignly good and just; and if
   they are so, they have not allowed anything to take place in the
   ordering of the world which is contrary to justice or reason."

   Ah, this is too much resignation, dear master! If it were truly thus we
   have the right to complain. To say, that if this world has not its
   counterpart, the man who is sacrificed for good or for the truth should
   quit contentedly and absolve the gods, is too guileless! No, he has a
   right to blaspheme them! For indeed, why should they so abuse his
   credulity? Why have put in him those deceptive instincts, of which he
   has been the honest dupe? Why this premium given to the frivolous or
   wicked man? Is it then not he who is not deceived who is the prudent
   man? . . . . But then cursed be the gods who placed their preferences
   so badly! I wish the future were an enigma; but if there be no future
   this world is a frightful ambuscade. Remark, indeed, that our desire is
   not that of the gross vulgarian. What we wish is not to see the
   punishment of the guilty, nor to touch the interests of our virtue.
   What we desire has nothing egotistical in it; it is simply to be, to
   remain in connection with the light, to continue our thought begun, to
   know more of it, to enjoy one day that truth which we seek with so much
   labour, to see the triumph of the good we have loved. Nothing more
   legitimate. The worthy emperor, besides, felt this well. "What! The
   light of a lamp shines up to the moment when it is extinguished, and
   loses nothing of its brightness; and truth, justice, temperance, which
   are in thee, shall go out with thee!" All his life was passed in this
   noble hesitation. If he sinned, it was from too much piety. Less
   resigned, he would have been more just; for surely, to demand that he
   should be a close and sympathetic spectator with struggles for the good
   and true, that would not have been to ask too much.

   It is possible also, that if his philosophy had been less exclusively
   moral, if it had implied a more curious study of history and the
   universe, it would have escaped certain excesses of rigour. Like the
   ascetic Christians, Marcus-Aurelius sometimes pushed this renunciation
   even to dryness and subtilty. This calm which never leaves him, we
   feel, is obtained by an immense effort. Certainly, evil had never any
   attraction for him; he had not to fight with any passion: "Let them do
   and say what they will," he writes, "I must be a good man, as the
   emerald might say, Let them do or say what they like, I must be an
   emerald and keep my colour.'" But to keep himself always on the icy
   summit of Stoicism, it was needful that he should do cruel violence to
   nature and cut out more than one noble part of it. That perpetual
   repetition of the same reasonings, those thousand images under which he
   sought to represent the vanity of everything, those often artless
   proofs of universal frivolity, evidence the combats which he had to
   fight to extinguish in him all desire. Sometimes the result of it is
   something bitter and gloomy; the reading of Marcus-Aurelius fortifies,
   but does not comfort; it leaves in the soul a void, at once delicious
   and cruel, which one would not exchange for full satisfaction.
   Humility, renunciation, severity over self have never been pushed
   further. Glory, that last illusion of great souls, is reduced to
   nothing. He can do good without disquieting himself, if no one knows of
   it. It is clear that history will speak of him; but how unworthily will
   it speak? Absolute mortification, when it was reached, had extinguished
   self-love within him to the last shred. One might even say that this
   excess of virtue has injured him. Historians have taken him at his
   word. Few great reigns have been worse treated by the historiographer.
   Marius Maximus and Dion Cassius speak of Marcus with affection but
   without talent; their works, besides, do not reach us but in scraps,
   and we do not know the life of the illustrious sovereign except by the
   mediocre biography of Jules Capitolin, written a hundred years after
   his death, thanks to the admiration which the emperor Diocletian had
   devoted to him.

   Fortunately the little casket which enclosed the thoughts by the banks
   of the Gran and the philosophy of Carmoute was saved. It came forth
   from this incomparable book, in which Epictetes was surpassed, this
   manual of resigned life, this Gospel for those who do not believe in
   the supernatural, which could not have been better understood than it
   may in our days. A veritable eternal Gospel, the book of the Thoughts
   will never grow old; for it affirms no dogma. The Gospel has aged in
   some portions; science does not permit any longer the admission of the
   artless conception of the supernatural which makes its basis. The
   supernatural is not in the Thoughts, except a little insignificant spot
   which does not mar the marvellous beauty of the whole. Science may
   destroy God and the soul, while the book of the Thoughts remains young
   yet in life and truth. The religion of Marcus-Aurelius, as was
   occasionally that of Jesus, is the absolute religion--that which
   results from the simple fact of a high moral conscience placed face to
   face with the universe. It is neither of one race nor of one country.
   No revolution, no advance, no discovery, can change it.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVII.

  THE LEGIO FULMINATA--APOLOGIES OF APOLLINARIS, MILTIADES, AND MELITO.

   An incident of the campaign against the Quades put Marcus-Aurelius and
   the Christians face to face in some sort, and caused, at least among
   the latter, a lively prepossession. The Romans were engaged in the
   interior of the country; the heats of summer had succeeded a long
   winter without transition. The Quades found a means of cutting off the
   invaders' supplies of water. The army was devoured by thirst, worn out
   by fatigues, shut in an enclosed spot, where the barbarians attacked it
   with every advantage. The Romans replied feebly to the blows of the
   enemy, and one would have feared a disaster, when all at once a
   terrible storm took place. A tremendous rain fell on the Romans and
   refreshed them. It was claimed, on the contrary, that the thunder and
   hail were turned against the Quades and frightened them, so that a part
   of them threw themselves in desperation into the ranks of the Romans.

   Everybody believed it was a miracle. Jupiter had plainly pronounced for
   the Latin race. Most people attributed the prodigy to the prayers of
   Marcus-Aurelius. They made pictures, in which were seen the pious
   emperor supplicating the gods and saying, "Jupiter, I raise towards
   thee that hand which has never caused bloodshed." The Antonine column
   is consecrated to this event. Jupiter Pluvius is shown there under the
   figure of a winged old man, whose hair, beard, and arms allow torrents
   of water to escape from them, which the Romans are receiving in their
   helmets and bucklers, while the barbarians are struck and overturned by
   the lightning. Some believed in the intervention of an Egyptian
   magician, named Arnonphix, who followed the army, and whose
   incantations, it was supposed, had made the gods intervene, especially
   the aerial Hermes.

   The legion which had received this mark of heavenly favour took, at
   least used it for a time, the name of Fulminata. Such an epithet had
   nothing new about it. Every place touched by lightning was sacred among
   the Romans; the legion whose encampments had been struck by the
   celestial bolts came to be looked on as having received a sort of
   baptism of fire. Fulminata became for it a title of honour. One legion,
   the twelfth, which, after the siege of Jerusalem, in which it took
   part, was stationed at Melitene, near the Euphrates, in little Armenia,
   bore this title from the time of Augustus, without doubt because of
   some physical accident which made this to he substituted for the
   surname Antigua which it had borne till then.

   There were some Christians around Marcus-Aurelius; there were probably
   some in the legion engaged against the Quades. This prodigy, admitted
   by all, excited them. A good miracle could not but be the work of the
   true God. What a triumph, what an argument to make persecution cease,
   if the emperor could be persuaded that this miracle came from the
   believers! For some days after the incident occurred a version of it
   circulated, according to which the storm favourable to the Romans was
   the result of the prayers of the Christians. It was while kneeling,
   according to the custom of the Church, that the pious soldiers had
   obtained from heaven this mark of protection, which flattered from two
   points of view the Christian pretensions; first, by showing what might
   come from heaven at the request of a handful of believers; and also by
   showing that the God of the Christians had some favour for the Roman
   Empire. Let the empire cease to persecute the saints, and they would
   see what favour they would obtain from heaven. God, to become the
   protector of the empire against the barbarians, waited for only one
   thing, and that was that the empire should cease to show itself
   pitiless towards a chosen people who were in the world as the leaven of
   all good.

   This manner of representing the facts was very quickly accepted, and
   went the round of the churches. To each process to each opponent they
   had this reply to make to the authorities: "We have saved you." This
   reply gained a new force when, at the end of the campaign,
   Marcus-Aurelius received his seventh imperial salutation, and the
   column, which may be seen to-day in Rome, was raised, by order of the
   Senate and the people, bearing among its reliefs the representation of
   the miracle. Occasion was even taken to fabricate an official letter
   from Marcus-Aurelius to the Senate, in which he forbade the persecution
   of the Christians, and made their denunciation punishable by death. Not
   only is the fact of such a letter inadmissible, but it is very probable
   that Marcus-Aurelius did not know of the claim which the Christians had
   raised as to being the authors of the miracle. In certain countries, in
   Egypt for example, the Christian fable does not appear to have been
   known. Otherwise it did nothing but add to the dangerous reputation for
   magic which began to attach itself to the Christians.

   The legion of the Danube, if it for a while took the name of Fulminata,
   did not keep it officially. As the twelfth legion resident at Melitene
   was always designated by this title, and as moreover the legion of
   Melitene shone soon by its Christian ardour, it wrought confusion, and
   we might suppose it was this last legion which, transported out of all
   likelihood from the Euphrates to the Danube, obtained the miracle and
   received the name of Fulminata; it would need to be forgotten that the
   legion had borne the name two centuries before.

   What is in any case certain is that the conduct of Marcus-Aurelius
   towards the Christians was in no way modified. It has been supposed
   that the revolt of Avidius Cassius, supported by the sympathy of all
   Syria, especially Antioch, inclined the emperor against the numerous
   Christians in these places. This is not very probable. The revolt of
   Avidius took place in 172, and the breaking out of persecution is
   specially observable about 176. The Christians held themselves apart
   from all politics; moreover, as to Avidius, his pardon came from the
   loving heart of Marcus-Aurelius. The number of the martyrs meanwhile
   only increased; in three or four years the persecution reached the
   highest degree of fury which it had known before Decius. In Africa,
   Vigellius Saturinus drew the sword, and God knows when it was put back
   into the scabbard. Sardinia was filled with the transported, who were
   recalled under Commodus by the influence of Marcia. Byzantine saw some
   horrors. Nearly the whole community was arrested, put to the torture,
   led to death. Byzantine having been ravaged some years after by
   Septimus Severus (in 196), the governor, Cæcilius Capella, cried out
   "What a splendid day for the Christians!"

   It was still graver in Asia. Asia was the province in which
   Christianity had affected social order most deeply. Thus, the
   proconsuls of Asia were those who, of all provincial governors, were
   the most bitter in the persecution. Without the emperor having issued
   new edicts, they alleged certain instructions which obliged them to
   proceed with severity. They applied without mercy a law which,
   according to its interpretation, might be atrocious or inoffensive.
   These repeated punishments were a bloody contradiction to an age of
   humanity. The fanatics, whose gloomy dreams these violences confirmed,
   did not protest; often they rejoiced. But the moderate bishops dreamed
   of the possibility of obtaining from the emperor the end of such
   injustices. Marcus-Aurelius received all the requests, and was supposed
   to have read them. His reputation as a philosopher and as a Hellenist
   suggested to those who felt any facility for writing in Greek to
   address themselves thus to him. The incident of the war of the Quades
   offered a way of putting the question more clearly than could have been
   done by Aristides, Quadratus, or St. Justin.

   There was produced a series of new apologies, composed by some bishops
   and writers of Asia, which unfortunately have not been preserved.
   Claudius Apollinaris, bishop of Hierapolis, shone in the first rank in
   this campaign. The miracle of Jupiter Pluvius had had so much publicity
   that Apollinaris dared to recall it to the emperor, connecting the
   divine intervention with the prayers of the Christians. Miltiades
   addressed himself also to the Roman authorities, doubtless to the
   proconsuls of Asia, to defend "his philosophy" against the unjust
   reproaches which had been addressed to him. Those who could read his
   apology had not sufficient eulogium for the talent and knowledge he
   displayed.

   Much the most remarkable work which this literary movement produced was
   the Apology of Melito. The author addressed himself to Marcus-Aurelius
   in the tongue which the emperor loved: "What has never been seen, the
   race of pious men in Asia is persecuted and hunted in Asia, in the name
   of new edicts. Some imprudent sycophants, greedy of the spoils of
   others, making a pretext of the existing legislation, exercise their
   brigandage before all, watching night and day, to have them seized,
   people who have done no harm. . . . If all this is executed by thine
   order, it is well; for a just prince cannot order any unjust thing;
   willingly then should we accept such a death as the fate we have
   deserved. We only address to thee one request; it is that, after having
   examined thyself the case of those whom they represent to thee as
   seditious, thou wouldest judge if they deserve death, or if they are
   not rather worthy to live in peace under the protection of the law. But
   if this new edict and these measures which are not allowed against the
   most barbarous enemies do not come from thee, we implore thee, as
   earnestly as we can, not to abandon us henceforth to such a public
   brigandage."

   We have already seen Melito make in the empire the most singular
   advances, in the case where he wished to become the protector of the
   truth. In the Apology these advances were still more accentuated.
   Melito sets himself to show that Christianity contents itself with the
   common law, and that it has something in it to make it dear to the
   heart of a true Roman.

   "Yes, it is true our philosophy first took birth among the barbarians;
   but the moment it commenced to flourish among the peoples of thy State,
   having coincided with the great reign of Augustus, thy ancestor, that
   was a happy augury for the empire. It is from that moment, in fact,
   that is dated the colossal development of that brilliant Roman power of
   which thou art, and wilt be with thy son, the applauded inheritor of
   our vows, provided thou wilt well protect this philosophy which has in
   some sense been the foster-sister of the empire, since it was born with
   its founder, and since thy ancestors have honoured it as the equal of
   other cults. And what proves that our doctrine has been destined to
   flourish parallel to the progress of your glorious empire, is that from
   its appearance everything has succeeded with you to a wonderful degree.
   Nero and Domitian only, deceived by some calumniators, have shown
   themselves malevolent to our religion; and these calumnies, as
   ordinarily happens, were accepted at once without examination. But
   their error has been corrected by thy pious parents, who, in frequent
   rescripts, repressed the zeal of those who wished to enter into ways of
   severity against us. Thus, Hadrian, thy ancestor, wrote of it on
   various occasions, and especially to the proconsul Fundanus, governor
   of Asia. And thy father, at the period in which thou wast associated
   with him in the administration, wrote to the cities to do nothing new
   as to us, especially to the Lariseans, the Thessalonians, the
   Athenians, and all the Greeks. As to thee, who hast not for us the same
   sentiments, with a still more elevated degree of philanthropy and
   philosophy, we are sure that thou wilt do what we ask."

   The system of the apologists, so warmly maintained by Tertullian,
   according to whom the good emperors have favoured Christianity and the
   bad emperors have persecuted it, was already completely begun. Born
   together, Christianity and Rome had grown greater together, prospered
   together. Their interests, their sufferings, their fortune, their
   future, all were in common. The apologists are advocates, and the
   advocates of all causes are like each other. They have arguments for
   all occasions and for all tastes. A hundred and fifty years would roll
   away before these gentle and moderately sincere invitations should be
   listened to. But the simple fact that they were presented under
   Marcus-Aurelius to the mind of one of the most enlightened leaders of
   the Church is a prognostic of the future. Christianity and the empire
   were reconciled; they were made for each other. The shade of Melito
   might tremble with joy when the empire shall become Christian, and the
   emperor shall take in hand the cause "of the truth."

   Thus the Church took already more than one step towards the empire.
   Through politeness no doubt, but also by a consequence quite just from
   its principle, Melito did not admit that an emperor can make an unjust
   order. It might be easily believed that certain emperors had not been
   absolutely hostile to Christianity; people liked to tell how Tiberius
   had proposed in the Senate to put Jesus into the rank of the gods; it
   was the Senate who would not have it. The decided preference which
   Christianity shall show for power, when it can hope for favour, may be
   imagined by anticipation. They betook themselves to show, against all
   the facts, that Hadrian and Antoninus had sought to repair the evil
   caused by Nero and Domitian. Tertullian and his generation will say the
   same thing of Marcus-Aurelius. Tertullian shall doubt, it is true, if
   one can at the same time be Cæsar and a Christian; but that
   incompatibility a century after his time shall strike no one, and
   Constantine shall charge himself with proving that Melito of Sardis was
   a very sagacious man the day when he pointed out so well, 132 years in
   advance, through proconsular persecutions, the possibility of a
   Christian empire.

   A voyage to Greece, to Asia and the East, which the emperor made at
   that time, did not change his ideas. He went smiling, but without any
   internal irony, through this world of sophists of Athens and Smyrna,
   listened to all the celebrated professors, founded a great number of
   new chairs at Athens, saw especially Herod Atticus, Ælius Aristides,
   and Hadrian of Tyre. At Eleusis he entered alone into the most secret
   parts of the temple. In Palestine the remnants of the Jewish and
   Samaritan peoples, plunged into distress by the last revolts, received
   him with acclamations, and doubtless with complaints. A fetid odour of
   misery reigned throughout all the land. These unruly crowds from which
   a stench came forth put his patience to the proof. Once, pushed into a
   corner, he cried, "O Marcomans, O Quades, O Sarmatians, I have found
   people at last who are more beastly than you!"

   Philosophy, according to Marcus-Aurelius, had all disappeared, except
   the Roman. He had against Jewish and Syrian piety instinctive
   prejudices. The Christians, nevertheless, were very near him. His
   nephew, Ummidius Quadratus, had in his household a eunuch named
   Hyacinthus, who was an elder of the Church of Rome. To this eunuch was
   confided the care of a young girl named Marcia, of ravishing beauty,
   whom Ummidius made his concubine. Later, in 183, Ummidius having been
   put to death, in connection with the conspiracy of Lucillus, Commodus
   found this pearl among his spoils. He appropriated her. Eclectos, the
   attendant, followed the fate of his mistress. By yielding to the
   caprices of Commodus, sometimes by knowing how to command them, Marcia
   exercised over him a boundless power. It is not probable that she was
   baptized, but the eunuch, Hyacinthus, had inspired her with a tender
   sentiment for the faith. He continued to be near her, and he drew
   greater favours from her, in particular for the confessors condemned to
   the mines. Later on, pushed to the point by the monster, Marcia was at
   the head of the plot which took the empire from Commodus. Eclectos was
   still found at her side at that time. By a singular coincidence,
   Christianity was mixed up very closely in the final tragedy of the
   Antonine house, as a hundred years before it was by a Christian medium
   that the plot was arranged which put an end to the tyranny of the last
   of the Flavii.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVIII.

  THE GNOSTICS AND THE MONTANISTS AT LYONS.

   For nearly twenty years the Asiatic colony of Lyons and Vienne,
   notwithstanding more than one internal trial, prospered in all the
   works of Christ. Thanks to her, the evangelical preaching already lit
   up the valley of the Saône. The Church of Autun especially was, in many
   points of view, a daughter of the Graeco-Asiatic Church of Lyons. Greek
   had been for a long time the language of mysteries, and held there
   during some centuries a certain liturgical importance. Then there
   appeared, in a sort of matinal and uncertain penumbra, Tourners,
   Chalon, Dijon, Langres, whose apostles and martyrs were connected with
   the Greek colony of Lyons, and not with the great Latin evangelisation
   of Gaul in the third and fourth centuries.

   Thus, from Smyrna even to the inaccessible parts of Gaul, there
   stretched a ridge of strong Christian activity. The Lugduno-Viennese
   community was connected by an active correspondence with the mother
   churches of Asia and Phrygia. The facilities offered by the navigation
   of the Rhone served for the speedy importation of all novelties; such a
   Gospel of recent manufacture, such a system newly drawn by
   Alexandrinian subtlety, such a charisma set in fashion by the sectaries
   of Asia Minor were known at Lyons or at Vienne nearly the next day
   after their appearance. The lively imagination of the inhabitants was a
   more powerful vehicle still. An exalted mysticism, a delicacy of nerves
   approaching hysteria, a warmth of heart capable of making all
   sacrifices, but susceptible also of being led in all directions, were
   the character of this Gallo-Grecian Christianity. The venerable Pothin,
   more than ninety years of age, had the most difficult task of governing
   these souls, more ardent than submissive, and who sought in their
   submission even something else than the austere charm of accomplished
   duty.

   Irenæus had become the right hand of Pothin, his coadjutor, if one
   might express it so, his designated successor. An abundant writer and a
   finished controversialist, he began, on his arrival at Lyons, to write
   in Greek against all the different Christian tendencies, in particular
   against Blastus, who wished to return to Judaism, and against Florin,
   who admitted with the Gnostics a god of good and a god of evil. The
   teachings of Valentinus, by their breadth and philosophical appearance,
   gained many adherents among the Lyonese population. Irenæus made
   himself a kind of speciality in combating them. No orthodox polemic,
   before him, had at this point comprehended the depth of the Gnosis and
   its anti-Christian character.

   Valentine was a fine kind of spirit, who certainly never would have
   succeeded either in replacing the Catholic Church nor seizing the
   direction of it. Gnosticism reached the Rhone in the person of a doctor
   much more dangerous. I mean Markus, who seduced women by the strange
   manner in which he celebrated the Eucharist, and by the audacity with
   which he made them believe that they had the gift of prophecy. His
   style of administering the sacraments brought with it the most
   dangerous familiarities. Feigning to be the dispenser of the grace, he
   persuaded women that he was in the secret of their guardian angels,
   that they were destined to an eminent rank in his church, and ordered
   them to prepare a mystical union with him. "From me and through me,' he
   said to them, "thou wilt receive the grace. Place thyself as a
   betrothed receives her fiancé, that thou mayest be what I am and I what
   you are. Prepare thy bed to receive the seed of light. Behold the grace
   is descending on thee. Open thy mouth and prophesy." "But I have never
   prophesied, and I don't know how to prophesy." He redoubled his
   invocation, terrifying and stupefying his victim. "Open thy mouth, I
   tell thee, and speak: everything thou utterest will be prophecy." The
   heart of the initiated beat hard; the waiting, the embarrassment, the
   idea that perhaps she was about to prophesy made her lose her head; she
   raved at hazard. It was represented to her afterwards that she had
   spoken full and sublime sense. The unfortunate one, from that moment,
   was lost. She thanked Markos for the gift he had communicated, asked
   what she could do in return, and, recognising that the giving up of all
   her goods in his favour was a small matter, she offered herself to him
   if he would condescend to accept her. Often the best and most
   distinguished were thus surprised; for on all sides already there was a
   talk of penitents vowed to mourning for the rest of their life, who,
   after having received from the seducer the prophetic communion and
   initiation, recoiled in horror, and came to the orthodox asking pardon
   and forgetfulness.

   Such a man was particularly dangerous at Lyons. The mystic and
   impassioned character of the Lyonese, their somewhat material piety,
   their taste for the bizarre and for sensible emotions, exposed them to
   all sorts of falls. What goes on to-day in the feminine public in the
   towns in the South of France on the arrival of a fashionable preacher
   took place then. The new fashion in preaching was much liked. The
   richest ladies, those who were distinguished by a beautiful border of
   purple on their robes, were the most curious and the most imprudent.
   The Christians thus seduced were not slow to be disabused. Their
   conscience burned them: their life henceforth was blasted. Some
   confessed their sin in public and re-entered the Church; others, out of
   shame, did not dare to do this, and remained in the most false
   position, neither in nor out. Others, falling into despair, went far
   away from the Church, and concealed themselves "with the fruit they had
   drawn from their connection with the sons of Gnosis," adds Irenæus
   maliciously.

   The ravages which this gloomy seducer made in souls was terrible.
   People spoke of philtres, of poisons. The penitents confessed that he
   had completely exhausted them, that they had loved him with a love
   superhuman and fatal, which imposed itself on them. They told above all
   of the abominable conduct of Markos towards a deacon of Asia, who
   received him into his house with a thorough Christian affection. The
   deacon had a wife of rare beauty. She allowed herself to be won over by
   this dangerous guest, and lost the purity of the faith at the same time
   as the honour of her body. From that time Markos took her everywhere
   about with him, to the great scandal of the churches. The good brothers
   had pity on her, and spoke to her with sadness to lead her back: they
   succeeded not without difficulty. She was converted, confessed her
   faults and misfortunes, and passed the rest of her life in a perpetual
   confession and penitence, telling in humility everything she had
   suffered by the magician.

   What was worse than this was that Markos made some pupils, like him,
   great corrupters of women, giving themselves the title of "perfect,"
   claiming transcendent knowledge, pretending that "they alone had drunk
   the fulness of the Gnosis of the ineffable Virtue," and that this
   knowledge raised them high above all power, so that they could do
   freely what they wished. It was claimed that the mode of their
   initiation was most abominable. They dressed up a cabinet like a
   nuptial couch; then, with a solemnity of doubtful mysticism and some
   cabalistic words, they feigned to proceed to their spiritual nuptials,
   copied from those of the superior syziges. Thanks to their rites and
   the use of certain invocations to Sophia, the Markosians believed they
   could obtain a sort of invisibility which made them escape, in their
   nuptial chapels, the eyes of the Sovereign Judge. Like all the
   Gnostics, they abused the anointings with oil and balm; they made up
   all sorts of sacraments, apolytroses or redemptions, replacing even
   baptism. Their extreme unction over the dying had something touching in
   it, and has alone remained in use.

   Pothin and Irenæus energetically resisted these perverse guides.
   Irenæus threw into the struggle the idea of his great work, Against
   Heresies, a vast arsenal of arguments against all the varieties of
   Gnosticism. His correct and moderate judgment, the philosophical basis
   which he gave to Christianity, his clear and purely deistic ideas on
   the relations between God and man, his intellectual mediocrity itself,
   preserved him from the aberrations of an intemperate speculation. The
   fall of his friends Blastus and Florinus was an example to him. He saw
   salvation only in the middle path represented by the universal Church.
   The authority and catholicity of that Church appeared to him the unique
   criterion of truth.

   Gnosticism in fact disappeared from Gaul, both by the violent antipathy
   which it inspired among the orthodox, and by a gentle transformation
   which allowed nothing of its theories to remain but an inoffensive
   mysticism. A marble of the third century found at Autun preserves to us
   a little poem presenting, like the eighth book of the Sibylline
   oracles, the acrostic IChThUS. The pious Valentinians and the orthodox
   could both equally enjoy the singular style of this strange piece.

   "O divine race of the heavenly IChThUS, receive with a heart full of
   respect immortal life among mortals; rejuvenate thy soul among the
   divine waters, by the eternal waves of the Sophia which gives its
   treasures. Receive sweet nourishment like the honey of the Saviour of
   the holy; eat in thy hunger and drink in thy thirst; thou holdest
   IChThUS in the palms of thy hands."

   Montanism, like Gnosticism, visited the Rhone Valley and obtained great
   successes. Even during the life of Montanus, Priscilla and Maximilla
   the Lyonese heard with admiration of their prophesies and supernatural
   gifts. Coming forth from a world closely bordering on Montanism, the
   Church of Lyons could not remain indifferent to a movement which
   carried away Phrygia and troubled all Asia Minor. The terrible oracles
   of the new prophets, the pious practices of the saints at Pepuza, their
   brilliant charismas, this return of the supernatural phenomena of the
   apostolic age--such were the tidings which came one by one after each
   other from Asia, and which struck with stupor the whole Christian
   world, and they could not but move them peculiarly. It was almost
   themselves they beheld in these ascetics. Their Vettius Epagathuses,
   were they not called so because of their austerities, the most famous
   nazirs? The majority found it easy to believe that the fountain of
   God's gifts had not been dried up. Many distinguished members of the
   Lyonese Church, and a certain Alexander, a physician by profession, who
   had lived in Gaul for many years, came from that country. This
   Alexander, who astonished everybody by his love of God and his boldness
   and preaching, appeared favoured with all the apostolic graces.

   The Lyonese, at a distance, give us therefore the impression of
   belonging with many relationships to the pietistic circle of Asia
   Minor. They sought for martyrdom, they had visions, practised
   charismas, enjoyed communications with the Holy Spirit or Paraclete,
   looking on the Church as a virgin. An ardent millenarianism, a constant
   expectation of anti-Christ and the end of the world were in some sort
   the common ground from which these great enthusiasts drew their vigour.
   But a touching docility, joined to rare practical good sense, made the
   majority of the faithful suspicious of the evil spirit who was hidden
   frequently under these proud peculiarities.

   Sometimes, indeed, certain bizarre results came from Phrygia,
   evidencing a Christian effervescence which no reason could guide. A
   certain Alcibiades, who came from this country to settle in Lyons,
   astonished the Church by his exaggerated macerations. He practised all
   the austerities of the saints of Pepuza, absolute poverty, excessive
   abstinences. Nearly the whole creation he repelled as impure, and
   people asked how he could live while refusing the most evident
   necessaries of life. The pious Lyonese saw in this at first nothing
   save what was praiseworthy; but the arbitrary manner in which the
   Phrygian understood things disquieted them. Alcibiades had sometimes
   the appearance of a madman. He seemed, like Tatian and many others, to
   condemn in principle an entire class of God's creatures, and he
   offended many brethren by the manner in which he guided his kind of
   life in the outset. It was still worse when, arrested with the others,
   he determined to continue his abstinences. A heavenly revelation was
   required to restore him to reason, as we shall soon see.

   Irenæus, so firm on the question of Marcionism and Gnosticism, was, in
   regard to Montanism, much more undecided. The holiness of the Phrygian
   ascetics could not but affect him; but he saw too plainly into
   Christian theology not to perceive the danger of the new doctrines as
   to prophecy and the Paraclete. He does not mention the Montanists among
   the heretics with whom he fights. He energetically blames certain
   subversive pretensions, without once naming their authors, and the
   precautions which he took show that he did not wish to put the Phrygian
   pietists in the same rank as the schismatic sects. A man of order and
   hierarchy beyond everything, he ended, it would seem, by seeing in them
   false prophets; but he hesitated for a long time before arriving at
   this severe opinion. All the Lyonese were in the same perplexity as he.
   In their embarrassment they thought of consulting Eleutherus, who a
   short time back had succeeded Soter in the Roman see. Already the
   Bishop of Rome was the authority from whom the solution of difficult
   cases was demanded, who counselled the various churches, and was the
   centre of concord and unity.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIX.

  THE MARTYRS OF LYONS.

   Lyons and Vienne were counted among the most brilliant centres in the
   Church of Christ, when a frightful storm fell upon these young churches
   and put "in evidence" the gifts of force and faith which they contained
   in their bosom.

   It was the seventeenth year of the reign of Marcus-Aurelius; the
   emperor had not changed, but opinions annoyed him. The scourges which
   desolated, the dangers which menaced the empire, were considered as
   having for their cause the impiety of the Christians. On all sides the
   people adjured the authorities to maintain the national worship, and to
   punish the despisers of the gods. Unhappily the authorities yielded.
   The two or three last years of the reign of Marcus-Aurelius were
   saddened by spectacles quite unworthy of such a perfect sovereign.

   At Lyons popular clamour grew into rage. Lyons was the centre of that
   great cult of Rome and of Augustus, which was the cement of Gallic
   unity and the mark of its communion with the empire. Around the
   celebrated altar situated at the confluence of the Rhone and the Saone
   was grouped a federal town composed of permanent delegates from sixty
   peoples of Gaul, a town rich and powerful, strongly attached to the
   religion which was its raison d'être. Every year on the first of
   August, the great day of the Gallic fairs, and the anniversary of the
   consecration of the altar, deputies from the whole of Gaul met together
   there. It was this they called the Concilium Galliaruin, an assembly
   without great political weight, but of high social and religious
   importance. Fetes were celebrated, which consisted in contests of Greek
   and Latin eloquence, and in bloody games.

   All these institutions gave much strength to the national cult. The
   Christians who did not practise this worship appeared atheists and
   impious. The fables universally admitted concerning them were repeated
   and empoisoned. They practised, it was said, certain festivals of
   Thyeste, certain incests in the fashion of OEdipus. No absurdity was
   too great; there were alleged against them enormities impossible to
   describe, crimes which had never existed. In all ages secret societies
   which affect mystery have provoked such suspicions. Let us add that the
   disorders of certain Gnostics, especially the Markosians, might give
   such an appearance; and that was not one of the smallest reasons for
   which the orthodox disliked those sectaries who compromised them in
   public opinion.

   Before going as far as punishments, malevolence expressed itself in
   quarrels and vexations every day. This cursed people, to whom were
   attributed all misfortunes, were put in quarantine. .It was forbidden
   to Christians to appear at the baths, in the forum, or to show
   themselves in public or even in private houses. If one of them happened
   to be seen, wild clamours arose, he was beaten, pulled about, struck by
   blows of stone, and he was forced to barricade himself in. Vettius
   Epagathus alone by his social position escaped these insults, but his
   credit was not sufficient to preserve from the popular fury his
   co-religionists.

   The authority did intervene only as slowly as it could, and partly to
   put an end to these intolerable disorders. One day, nearly all the
   people known as Christians were arrested, led to the forum by the
   tribune, and by the duumvirs of the city interrogated before the
   people. All Confessed themselves Christians. The imperial legate pro
   prætore was absent; the criminated, while waiting for him, were
   subjected to the sufferings of a rude prison.

   The imperial legate having arrived, the case began. The preliminary
   "question" was applied with extreme cruelty. The young and noble
   Vettius Epagathus, who had till now escaped the severities which his
   co-religionists had suffered, could not bear this. He presented himself
   at the tribunal, and demanded to defend the accused, and at least to
   show that they did not deserve the accusation of atheism and impiety. A
   frightful cry arose. That people of the lower regions, Phrygians and
   Asiatics, should be given to certain perverse superstitions, that
   appeared simple enough; but that a man of consideration, an inhabitant
   of the "high town," a noble of the country, should become an advocate
   of such follies, that appeared altogether unbearable. The imperial
   legate repulsed roughly the just request of Vettius. "And thou also,
   art thou a Christian?" he asked of him. "I am," replied Vettius, with a
   distinct voice. They did not arrest him nevertheless; doubtless in that
   town, where the condition of persons was very different, some immunity
   sheltered him.

   The interrogation was long and cruel. Those who had not been arrested,
   and who continued in the town to be the butt of the most cruel
   treatments, did not quit the confessors; by paying they obtained leave
   to serve them and to encourage them. The great misery of the accused
   was not the punishment, it was the fear that some, less well prepared
   than others for these terrible struggles, would allow themselves to
   deny Christ. The trial in fact proved too strong for about a dozen of
   the unfortunates who renounced their faith with their lips. The grief
   which these acts of weakness caused the prisoners and the brethren who
   surrounded them was great. What consoled them was that the arrests
   continued daily; other believers more worthy of martyrdom filled up the
   blanks which apostasy had left in the ranks of the elect phalanx.
   Persecution reached soon to the Church of Vienne, which it appears then
   had been scattered at first. The élite of the two churches, nearly all
   the founders of Gallo-Grecian Christianity found themselves together in
   the prisons of Lyons, ready for the assault which was about to be made
   upon them. Irenaeus did not suffer arrest; he was one of those who
   surrounded the confessors, who witnessed all the particulars of their
   struggle, and it is perhaps to him that we owe the account of them. Old
   Pothin, on the contrary, was soon, if not at the very beginning, among
   his faithful followers; he followed day by day their sufferings, and,
   almost dying as he was, he did not cease to instruct and encourage
   them.

   According to custom in the great criminal investigations the slaves
   were arrested at the same time as their masters; now many of these
   slaves were Pagans. The tortures which they saw inflicted on their
   masters frightened them; the soldiers of the officium whispered to them
   what it was necessary for them to say in order to escape the torture.
   They declared that the infanticides, repasts of human flesh, were
   realities, as well as that the monstrous stories which they told
   concerning Christian immorality had not been exaggerated.

   The indignation of the public was then at its height. Up till then the
   believers who had remained free had found some communication with their
   relations, their neighbours, and their friends; now everybody showed
   nothing but contempt for them. It was resolved to push the art of
   torture to its last refinements, to obtain from the faithful the avowal
   of the crimes which would place Christianity among the monstrosities
   for ever cursed and forgotten.

   The executioners actually surpassed themselves, but they could not
   subdue the heroism of the victims. The exaltation and joy of suffering
   together put them into a state of "quasi-anæsthesis." They imagined
   themselves but as a divine water flowing from the side of Jesus.
   Publicity sustained them. What glory to confess before all people, his
   Word and his Faith. This became a pledge and very few yielded. It is
   proved that self-love often suffices to sustain an apparent heroism
   when publicity is added to it. The Pagan actors submitted, without
   flinching, to the most cruel punishments. The gladiators made a good
   figure before approaching death, not to confess to weakness under the
   eyes of an assembled crowd; what otherwise was vanity, brought into the
   heart of a little group of men and women imprisoned together, became a
   pious intoxication and a sensible joy. The idea that Christ suffered in
   them filled them with pride, and of poor weak creatures made a kind of
   supernatural beings.

   The deacon Sanctus, of Vienne, shone among the most courageous. As the
   Pagans knew him to be the depository of the secrets of the Church, they
   sought to draw from him some word which should give a ground to the
   infamous accusations against the community. They did not succeed in
   making him tell his name, nor the name of his people, nor the name of
   the town from which he came, nor whether he was bond or free. To
   everything they asked of him he replied in Latin Christianus sum. There
   was in that his name, his country, his race, his all. The Pagans could
   draw from his mouth no other avowal than that. This obstinacy only
   redoubled the fury of the legate and the torturers. Having expended all
   their means without conquering him, they took the idea that they would
   apply the copper-plates at a white heat upon the most sensitive organs.
   Sanctus during this time remained inflexible, never leaving his
   obstinate confession Christianus sum. His body was nothing but a sore,
   a mass bloody, torn, convulsed, contracted, presenting no longer a
   human appearance. The faithful triumphed, saying that Christ knew how
   to make his own people insensible, and put himself in their place when
   they were in torture, that he might suffer in their stead. What was
   most terrible was that some days after they re-commenced the torture of
   Sanctus. The state of the confessor was such that when they touched his
   hand they made him leap with pain. The executioners took one after the
   other the inflamed sores, they renewed each one of his wounds, they
   repeated upon each of his organs the frightful experiences of the first
   day; they hoped to conquer him or to see him die in torments, so that
   the others might be terrified. It was not so, however; Sanctus resisted
   so well that his companions believed in a miracle, and pretended that
   this second torture, having upon him the effect of a cure, had
   straightened his limbs again and given back to his body the human
   appearance which it had lost.

   Maturus, who was only a neophyte, behaved himself like a valiant
   soldier of Christ. As to the slave, Blandina, she showed that a
   revolution was accomplished. Blandina belonged to a Christian lady,
   who, doubtless, had her initiated in the faith of Christ. The feeling
   of her low social position only excited her to equal her masters. The
   true emancipation of the slave, the emancipation through heroism, was
   mainly her work. The Pagan slave was supposed to be bad and immoral.
   What could be a better manner of rehabilitating them, and allowing them
   to show themselves capable of the same virtues and the same sacrifices
   as the free man? How could one treat with disdain those women they saw
   in the amphitheatre even more sublime than their mistresses? The good
   Lyonese slave had been told that the judgments of God are the reverse
   of human appearances, that God is often pleased to choose the most
   humble, the most uncomely, the most despised, and confound that which
   appears most beautiful and strong. Penetrated by a sense of her own
   position she called for the torturers and longed to suffer. She was
   little, weak in body, so much so that the faithful feared she should
   not be able to resist the torments. Her mistress especially, who was of
   the number of the accused, feared that this weak and delicate being
   would not be capable of affirming her faith. Blandina had prodigious
   energy and boldness. She exhausted the brigades of executioners who
   exercised themselves on her from morning to night; the conquered
   torturers confessed that they had no more punishment for her, and
   declared that they could not understand how she could still breathe
   with a body so dislocated and transpierced; they declared that only one
   of the tortures they had applied to her ought to have been sufficient
   to make her die. The blessed one, like a generous athlete, gained new
   strength in the act of confessing Christ. It was for her a strengthener
   and an anaesthetic to say, "I am a Christian, nothing evil is done
   among us." Scarcely had she uttered these words when she appeared to
   recover all her vigour, presenting herself refreshed for new struggles.
   This heroic resistance irritated the Roman authorities; to the tortures
   of "the question" they added that of lying in a prison which was made
   the most horrible that could be. They put the confessors into obscure
   and unbearable holes, they put their feet in the stocks, stretching
   them out to the fifth hole, they spared them none of the cruelties
   which the jailers had to cause their victims to suffer. Many died
   asphyxiated in the dungeons. Those who had been tortured resisted
   amazingly. Their sores were so frightful that people could not
   understand how they survived. Entirely occupied in encouraging the
   others, they appeared to be themselves animated by a divine strength.
   They were like veteran athletes hardened to everything. On the
   contrary, the last arrested, who had not yet suffered "the question,"
   nearly all died shortly after their imprisonment. They might be
   compared to novices half-trained, whose bodies, little accustomed to
   tortures, could not support the trial of the dungeon. Martyrdom would
   appear more and more as a kind of gymnastics, or school of gladiators,
   in which a long preparation was necessary, and a sort of preliminary
   asceticism.

   Although isolated from the rest of the world, the pious confessors
   lived in the life of the universal Church with a singular intensity.
   Par from feeling separated from their brethren they were interested in
   everything which occupied Catholicism. The appearance of Montanism was
   the great matter of the period. People spoke only of the prophecies of
   Montanus, Theodotus, and of Alcibiades. The Lyonese interested
   themselves in these all the more that they shared in many of the
   Phrygian ideas, and that many of them, such as Alexander the physician,
   Alcibiades the ascetic, were at least the admirers and partly the
   votaries of the movement begun at Pepuza. The report of the dissensions
   which these novelties excited reached even them. They had no other
   subject, and they occupied the intervals between one torture and
   another in discussing these phenomena, which, without doubt, they would
   have desired to find true. Strong in the authority which the title of
   "prisoner of Jesus Christ" gave to the confessors, they wrote upon this
   delicate subject many letters full of tolerance and charity. It was
   admitted that the prisoners of the faith had, in their last days, a
   sort of mission to settle the differences of the churches, and to solve
   the questions that were in suspense; they attributed to them, in this
   point of view, a state of grace and a special privilege.

   The majority of the letters written by the confessors were addressed to
   the churches of Asia and Phrygia, with whom the faithful Lyonese had
   many spiritual ties; one of these was addressed to Pope Eleutherus, and
   it was conveyed by Irenæus. The martyrs made thus the warmest eulogium
   on this young priest.

   "We wish thee joy in God for everything, Father Eleutherus. We have
   charged to carry these letters our brother and companion Irenæus, and
   we pray thee to receive him in great honour, imitator as he is of the
   Testament of Christ. If we believed that the position of the people is
   what it ought to be by their deserts, we should have recommended him to
   thee as a priest of our Church, a title which he really possesses."

   Irenæus did not leave at once; one may suppose that Pothin's death,
   which soon followed, prevented him from setting out immediately. The
   letters of the martyrs were sent to their addresses later on, with the
   epistle which contained the recital of their heroic struggles. The old
   Bishop Pothin had spent his life; age and prison sapped it; only the
   desire of martyrdom sustained him. He breathed with difficulty on the
   day on which he was to appear before the tribunal; he had scarcely
   enough breath left to confess Christ worthily. We can see indeed, from
   the respect by which the faithful surrounded him, that he was their
   religious chief--a great curiosity attached itself to him in passing
   from the prison to the tribunal; the authorities of the town followed
   him; the squad of soldiers who surrounded him with difficulty drew him
   from the press; the most diverse cries were heard. As the Christians
   were sometimes called the disciples of Pothin, sometimes the disciples
   of Christos, many demanded if it was the old man who was Christos. The
   legate put the question to him: "Who is the God of the Christians?"
   "Thou should'st know that if thou wert worthy," replied Pothin. They
   drew him about brutally; they struck him blows; without regard to his
   great age, those who were near him buffeted him with their fists and
   feet; those who were at a distance from him threw at him whatever came
   to their hands; everyone would have been believed guilty of the crime
   of impiety if he had not done what he could to cover him with insults;
   they believed that they would revenge thus the injury done to their
   gods. They put the old man back into prison half dead. At the end of
   two days he yielded up his last sigh. What made a strange contrast, and
   rendered the situation tragical in the highest degree, was the attitude
   of those whom the force of torture had conquered, and who had denied
   Christ. They had not been released for that; the fact that they had
   been Christians implied the avowal of crimes for which they were
   persecuted even after their apostasy. They were not separated from
   their brethren who remained faithful, and all the aggravations of the
   prison rule by which the confessors suffered were applied to them. But
   how different was their condition! Not only did the renegades find that
   they had drawn no advantage from an act which had been painful to them;
   but their position was in some sort worse than that of the faithful.
   Those indeed were only persecuted for bearing the name of Christians,
   without formulating any special crime against them; the others were, by
   their own avowal, under accusations of homicide and monstrous
   prevarication. Thus their look was pitiable. The joy of martyrdom, the
   hope of promised blessedness, the love of Christ, the Spirit sent from
   the Father, made everything light to the confessors. The apostates, on
   the contrary, appeared to be torn by remorse. It was especially in
   going from the prison to the tribunal that one could see the
   difference. The confessors advanced with a calm and radiant air; a sort
   of sweet majesty and grace shone upon their faces. Their chains
   appeared to be the ornament of brides adorned in all their finery; the
   Christians believed they could feel around them what they called the
   perfume of Christ; some pretended indeed that an exquisite odour was
   exhaled from their bodies. Very different were the poor renegades.
   Ashamed, and with their heads lowered, without grace and without
   dignity, they marched like common criminals; the Pagans even treated
   them as dastards and ignoble murderers convicted by their own speech;
   the fine name of Christian, which rendered so proud those who paid for
   it with their life, belonged to them no longer. This difference of gait
   made the strongest impression. Thus the Christians were often seen to
   make their confession as soon as possible, so that they might deprive
   themselves of all possibility of recalling it.

   Pardon was sometimes indulgent to those unfortunates who expiated so
   dearly a moment of surprise. A poor Syrian woman of fragile frame,
   originally from Byblos, in Phoenicia, had denied the name of Christ.
   She was again put to the question; they hoped to draw from her weakness
   and her timidity an avowal of the secret monstrosities with which they
   reproached the Christians. She came to herself again somewhat upon the
   wooden horse, and, as if awakening from a profound sleep, she denied
   energetically all the calumnious assertions. "How can you think," she
   said, "that people to whom it is forbidden to eat the blood of beasts
   should eat children?" From that moment she avowed herself a Christian,
   and followed the fate of other martyrs.

   The day of glory at length came for a portion of these veteran
   combatants who founded by their faith the faith of the future. The
   legate gave expressly one of those hideous fetes, consisting in
   exhibitions of punishments and in fights with beasts which, in spite of
   the most humane of emperors, were more in vogue than ever. These
   horrible spectacles were put down for fixed dates; but it was not rare
   for extraordinary executions to take place, when they had beasts to
   exhibit to the people as well as unfortunates to deliver to them.

   The festival was probably given in the amphitheatre of Lyons, that is
   to say, of the colony which was ranged under the roof of Fouriviers.
   This amphitheatre was, as it appears, situated at the base of a hill,
   near the present Place de Jean, near the cathedral. The Rue Tramassac
   marks nearly the grand axis. One could believe that it had been made
   five years previously. An exasperated crowd covered the benches and
   called for the Christians with loud cries. Maturus, Sanctus, Blandina,
   and Attalus were chosen for that day. They were quite nude; there had
   not been that day any of those spectacles by gladiators whose variety
   had such an attraction for the people.

   Maturus and Sanctus traversed anew in the amphitheatre the whole series
   of punishments as if they had never before suffered anything. Men
   compared them to athletes, who, after having conquered in many separate
   combats, were reserved for a last struggle which carried with it the
   final crown. The instruments of these tortures were arranged for the
   distance of a spina, and transformed the arena into a representation of
   hell. Nothing was spared the victims. They began, according to custom,
   by a hideous procession, in which the condemned, filing naked before
   the squad of soldiers, received each one dreadful blow on the back.
   Then they let loose the beasts. It was the most terrible moment of the
   day. The beasts did not devour the victims all at once; they bit them,
   they drew them about, their fangs were stuck into the naked flesh, in
   which they left bloody traces. At these moments the spectators became
   mad with delight. The summons crossed the seats of the amphitheatre.
   What in fact made the interest of the ancient spectacle was that the
   public intervened there. As in the bull-fights of Spain, the audience
   commanded, ruled the incidents, ordered the blows, judged the incidents
   of death or life. The exasperation against the Christians was such that
   they called aloud against them for more terrible punishments.

   The red-hot iron chair was the most infernal thing that the art of the
   executioner had invented. Maturus and Sanctus were seated there; a
   repulsive odour of roasted flesh filled the amphitheatre, and only
   further intoxicated these furious savages. The firmness of the two
   martyrs was admirable. They could draw from Sanctus only one word, ever
   the same, "I am a Christian." It appeared as if the two martyrs could
   not die. The beasts on the other hand appeared to shun them. They were
   obliged to finish them, to put them out of their misery, as in the case
   of the beasts and gladiators.

   Blandina during all this time was fixed to a stake and exposed to the
   beasts whom they urged on to devour her; she did not cease to pray, her
   eyes raised to heaven. No beast that day would touch her. That poor
   naked body exposed to those thousands of spectators, whose curiosity
   was restrained only by the close band which the law ordered to be worn
   by actresses and condemned women, did not excite any pity from the
   audience; but it presented to the other martyrs a mystic signification.
   Blandina's stake appeared to them as the cross of Jesus. The body of
   their friend shining by its whiteness to the other extremity of the
   amphitheatre recalled to their minds that of Christ crucified. The joy
   of thus seeing this image of the sweet Lamb of God rendered them
   insensible. Blandina from that moment was Jesus to them. From that
   moment, in their cruellest sufferings, a look cast upon their sister on
   the cross filled them with joy and ardour.

   Attalus was known throughout the whole town, thus the crowd called
   eagerly for him. They compelled him to make the tour of the
   amphitheatre, having borne before him a tablet inscribed HIC EST
   ATTALIS CHRISTIANUS. He walked with firm step, with the peace of a
   sound conscience. The people called for the most cruel punishments for
   him. But the imperial legate, having learned that he was a Roman
   citizen, made them cease, and ordered him back to prison. Thus ended
   the day.

   Blandina, attached to a stake, waited in vain for the teeth of some
   beast. They unloosed her hands, and led her back to the depot, that she
   might serve again for the amusement of the people.

   The case of Attalus was not isolated; the number of accused increased
   daily. The legate felt himself compelled to write to the emperor, who
   about the middle of the year 177 A.D. was, it appears, at Rome. Some
   weeks had to pass before a reply. During this interval the prisoners
   abounded in mystic joys. The example of the martyrs was contagious, all
   those who had denied returned to repentance, and demanded to be
   interrogated anew. Many Christians doubted the validity of such
   conversions, but the martyrs settled the question by stretching out
   their hands to the renegades, and communicating to them some of the
   grace that was in them. They declared that the living in such a case
   could revivify the dead; that in the great community of the Church
   those who had too much could give to those who had not enough; that he
   who had been rejected from the bosom of the Church, like an abortion,
   could in some manner re-enter it; to be connected a second time with
   the virginal bosom, to be placed in communication with the sources of
   life. The true martyr was thus looked upon as having the power of
   forcing the devil to vomit from his maw those whom he had already
   devoured. His privilege became a privilege of indulgence, grace and
   charity.

   That which was admirable among the Lyonese confessors is that glory did
   not fascinate them, their humility equalled their courage and their
   holy liberty. Those heroes who had proclaimed their faith in Christ two
   or three times, who had faced the beasts, whose bodies were covered
   with scars, with stripes, dared not claim the title of martyr, nor were
   they allowed to attribute such a name to themselves. If any one of the
   faithful, by letter or the living voice, called them so, they quickly
   rejected the title; they reserved the title of martyr first for Christ,
   "the faithful and true witness, the first begotten again from the
   dead," the imitator of the life of God, then to those who had already
   obtained by dying, while confessing their faith, and whose title was in
   a manner sealed and ratified; as to themselves they were only modest
   and humble confessors, and they asked only from their brethren to pray
   for them without ceasing that they might make a good end. Far from
   showing themselves proud, haughty, or hard upon the poor apostates as
   pure Montanists did, and as certain martyrs of the third century did,
   they had for them the bowels of a mother, and poured out for their
   establishment continual tears; they did not accuse anyone; they prayed
   for their executioners, and found extenuating circumstances for all
   their faults; they absolved, and did not condemn them. Some rigorist
   found them too indulgent to the renegades; they quoted for example St.
   Stephen, saying, "If he prayed for those who stoned him, would he not
   have been permitted to pray for his brethren?" Good minds on the
   contrary said with justice that it was the love of the accused that
   made their strength and secured their triumph. Their perpetual desire
   was peace and concord; thus there were left after them, not like
   certain confessors, courageous besides, some discords and disputes
   among their brethren, but an exquisite souvenir of joy and perfect
   love.

   The good sense of the confessors was not less remarkable than their
   courage and love. Montanism, by its enthusiasm and ardour for martyrdom
   which it inspired, could not all at once displease them, but they saw
   excess in it. This Alcibiades, who lived on nothing but bread and
   water, was among the confessors; he wished to carry out this régime in
   the prison. The confessors looked with an evil eye upon these
   peculiarities. Attalus, after the first combat which he had in the
   amphitheatre, had a vision on this matter; it was revealed to him that
   the way of Alcibiades was not good; that he had the fault of avoiding
   systematically the use of things created by God, and caused thus a
   scandal to his brethren.

   Alcibiades allowed himself to be persuaded, and ate henceforth all
   foods without distinction, giving thanks to God for them.

   The accused, thus believed also that they possessed in their bosom a
   permanent fire of inspiration, and received direct counsels from the
   Holy Spirit. But that which in Phrygia raised nothing but abuse was
   here a principle of heroism. Montanists, by the ardour of martyrdom,
   the Lyonese, by the absence of all pride, were profoundly Catholic.

   The imperial reply arrived at last; it was hard and cruel. All those
   who persevered in their confession were to be put to death, all the
   renegades were to be released. The great annual festival which was
   celebrated at the altar of Augustus, and when all the peoples of Gaul
   were represented, was commencing. The affair of the Christians occurred
   to increase the interest in it.

   So as to strike the people, a sort of theatrical audience was
   organised, where all the accused were pompously paraded. They were
   asked simply if they were Christians. Upon an affirmative reply, they
   beheaded those who appeared to have the right of Roman citizenship, and
   reserved the others for the beasts. Pardon was also extended to
   several. Not a single confessor was weak, as might have been expected.
   The Pagans hoped that those who had formerly apostatised would renew
   their anti-Christian declaration. They questioned them separately, in
   order to exclude them from the influence of the others. They showed
   them that immediate liberty would be given as the result of their
   denial. There was here, in some sense, the decisive moment, the crisis
   of the struggle. The hearts of the faithful who remained free, and who
   witnessed this scene, beat with anguish. Alexander the Phrygian, who
   knew them all as a physician, and whose zeal knew no bounds, kept
   himself as near the tribunals as possible, and made the most energetic
   signs with the head to those who were interrogated to make them
   confess. The Pagans took him for one that was "possessed." The
   Christians saw in his contortions something which recalled to them the
   convulsions of child-birth. The act by which the apostate re-entered
   the Church seemed to them a second birth. Alexander and grace
   fascinated them.

   Apart from a little number of unfortunates whom punishments had
   frightened, the apostates retracted and avowed themselves Christians.
   The anger of the Pagans was extreme. They accused Alexander of being
   the cause of these culpable retractations. They stopped him and
   presented him to the legate. "Who art thou?" asked he. "A Christian,"
   replied Alexander. The enraged legate condemned him to the beasts. The
   execution was fixed for the next day.

   Such was the enthusiasm of the faithful band that they cared much less
   for the frightful death which they had before their eyes than for the
   torture of the apostates. The horror which the martyrs conceived
   against those who relapsed was extreme. They treated them as sons of
   perdition, wretches who covered their Church with shame; people in whom
   remained no longer a trace of faith, nor of respect for their nuptial
   robe, nor fear of God. On the contrary, those who had repaired their
   first fault were reunited to the Church, and fully reconciled.

   On the first of August, in the morning, in the presence of all Gaul
   assembled in the amphitheatre, the horrible spectacle began. The people
   thought much of the punishment of Attalus, after Pothin the true head
   of Lyonese Christianity. We cannot see how the legate, who once had
   snatched him from the beasts because he was a Roman citizen, could give
   him up this time; but the fact is certain; it is probable that the
   title of Attalus to Roman citizenship was not found sufficient. Attalus
   and Alexander entered first into the sandy and carefully raked arena.
   They passed like heroes all the instruments of punishment with which
   the arrangements were made. Alexander did not pronounce one word, did
   not utter a cry; collecting himself he communed with God. When they
   seated Attalus in the red-hot iron chair, and his body, burned on all
   sides, exhaled an abominable odour and smoke, he said to the people in
   Latin, "It is you who are eaters of men. As to us, we do nothing evil."
   They asked him, "What is God's name?" "God," said he, "has not a name
   like a man." The two martyrs received the coup de grâce, after having
   exhausted with full knowledge all that was most atrocious that Roman
   cruelty could invent.

   The fêtes lasted several days; every day the combats of the gladiators
   were relieved by the punishment of the Christians. It is probable that
   they introduced the victims two and two, and that every day saw one or
   other pair of martyrs perish. They put in the arena those who were
   young and those thought feeble, that the sight of their friends'
   suffering might frighten them. Blandina and a young man of fifteen
   years of age, named Ponticus, were kept to the last day. They were thus
   witnesses of all the trials of the others, but nothing shook them. Each
   day there was a strong attempt made on them; it was sought to make them
   swear by the gods; they refused with disdain. The people, much
   irritated, would listen to no sentiment of shame or pity. They made the
   poor girl and her young friend exhaust all the hideous series of the
   punishments of the arena; after each trial they proposed that they
   should swear. Blandina was sublime. She had never been a mother; this
   boy by her side became her son, born in the tortures. Attentive only to
   him, she followed him in each of his halting-places of pain, to
   encourage him, and to exhort him to persevere to the end. The
   spectators saw this and were struck by it. Ponticus expired after
   having submitted to the complete series of torments.

   Of all the holy band there remained only Blandina. She triumphed and
   shone with joy. She looked like a mother who has seen all her sons
   proclaimed conquerors, and presents them to the great King to be
   crowned. That humble slave was shown to be the inspirer of heroism in
   her companions; her ardent voice had been the stimulant which had
   upheld the weak nerves and failing hearts. Thus she was thrust into the
   bitter career of tortures which her brothers had passed through, as if
   it had been a nuptial festival. The glorious and near issue of all
   these trials made her leap with pleasure. She placed herself at the end
   of the arena, not to lose any of the ornaments which each punishment
   engraved upon her flesh. There was first a cruel scourging which tore
   her shoulders, then they exposed her to the beasts, who contented
   themselves with biting her and drawing her about. The odious burning
   chair was not spared her. At last they enclosed her in a net and
   exposed her to a furious bull; this animal, seizing her with its horns,
   threw her many times into the air and let her fall heavily. But the
   blessed one felt nothing any longer; she rejoiced already with supreme
   felicity, lost as she was in internal communion with Christ. It was
   necessary to finish her like the others. The crowd ended by being
   struck with admiration, they spoke of nothing but the poor slave.
   "Truly," said the Gauls, "never have we seen a woman in our country
   suffer so much."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XX.

  RECONSTITUTION OF THE CHURCH OF LYONS--IRENÆUS.

   The rage of the fanatics was not satisfied, it gratified itself upon
   the corpses of the martyrs. The bodies of the confessors who had died
   stifled in prison were thrown to the dogs, and a guard was set night
   and day lest any of the faithful might give them burial. As to the
   others, each day there were taken from the arena broiled bones, scraps
   torn by the teeth of the beasts, limbs roasted or blackened in the
   fire, heads which had been cut off, mutilated trunks; and these were
   left likewise without burial, and in the sewers, exposed to the air,
   with a guard of soldiers watching over them for six days. This hideous
   spectacle excited varied reflections among the Pagans. Some thought
   that they had sinned by excess of humanity, and that the martyrs ought
   to have been subjected to still more cruel punishments. Others mingled
   irony with a shade of pity. "Where is their God?" they said. "Of what
   use was this worship to them who preferred it to life?" The Christians
   felt a deep grief at not being able to conceal in their graves the
   remains of the holy bodies. The excess of cruelty on the part of the
   Pagans appeared to them the proof of a malice which had reached its
   height, and the sign of an approaching judgment from God. "Come," said
   they, "this is not enough," and they added, as they remembered their
   Apocalypse, "Ah, let the sinner triumph more that the good may more
   improve." They sought to take away the bodies during the night, trying
   the effect of money and entreaties upon the soldiers. All was useless;
   the authorities guarded those wretched remains with tenacity. The
   seventh day having come, the order was given to burn the infected mass,
   and to throw the ashes into the Rhone, which flowed hard by, so that
   there might remain no trace of them upon the earth. There had been in
   this way of acting more than a mental reservation. They imagined by the
   complete disappearance of the corpses to take away from the Christians
   the hope of resurrection. This hope appeared to the Pagans the origin
   of all the evil. "It is by the trust they have in the resurrection,"
   they said, "that they introduce among us this new strange worship, that
   they contemn the most terrible punishments, that they walk to death
   with eagerness and even with joy. Let us see then if they will rise
   again, and if their God is able to take them out of our hands." The
   Christians were reassured by the thought that they could not conquer
   God, and that he knew well how to recover the remains of his servants.
   They believed indeed in a later age that miraculous apparitions had
   revealed the ashes of the martyrs, and all the middle ages believed
   that they possessed them, as if the Roman authorities had not destroyed
   them. The people used to call these innocent victims by the name of
   Macchabees.

   The number of the victims had been forty-eight. The survivors of the
   churches so cruelly tried rallied very quickly. Vettius Epagathus was
   found what he really was, the good genius, the guardian of the Church
   of Lyons. He was not yet bishop. Already the distinction of the
   ecclesiastic by profession and of the layman who shall be always a
   layman is felt. Ireæeus, the disciple of Pothin, and who had, if one
   may express it so, an education in clerical habits, took his place in
   the direction of the Church. It was perhaps he who indited, in the name
   of the communities of Lyons and Vienna, that admirable letter to the
   churches of Asia and Phrygia, of which the larger portion has been
   preserved, and which includes all the account of the combats of the
   martyrs. It is one of the most extraordinary pieces which any
   literature possesses. Never has a more striking picture been traced of
   the degree of enthusiasm and devotion to which human nature can reach.
   It is the ideal of martyrdom, with as little pride as possible on the
   part of the martyr. The Lyonese narrator and his heroes were certainly
   credulous men; they believed that the Antichrist would come to ravage
   the world; they saw in everything the action of the Beast, the wicked
   demon to whom the good God grants (one cannot tell why) that he should
   triumph momentarily. Nothing more strange that God, who makes a garland
   of flowers from the sufferings of his servants, and pleases himself to
   arrange his designs, expressly devoting some to the beasts, others to
   decapitation, the others to suffocation in prison. But the enthusiasm,
   the mystical tone of the style, the spirit of sweetness and good sense
   which mark the whole recital, inaugurate a new rhetoric, and make this
   piece the pearl of the Christian literature of the second century.

   To the circular epistle, the brethren of Gaul added the letters
   relative to Montanism written by the confessors in the prison. This
   question of Montanist prophecies assumed such an importance that they
   believed they were obliged to give their own opinion on this point.
   Irenæus was probably again their spokesman. The extreme reserve with
   which he expresses himself in his writings on Montanism, the love of
   peace which he imported into all controversies, and which caused it to
   be said so often that no one had been better named than he--Irenæus
   (peaceful)--leads us to believe that his opinion was impressed with a
   lively desire of reconciliation. With their ordinary judgment, the
   Lyonese pronounced without doubt against the excesses, but recommended
   a tolerance which, unfortunately, was not always sufficiently observed
   in these burning debates.

   Irenæus, settled henceforth at Lyons, but in constant correspondence
   with Rome, presented there the model of the accomplished ecclesiastic.
   His antipathy for the sects (the gross millenarianism which he
   professed, and which he held from the Presbyteri of Asia, did not
   appear to him a sectarian doctrine), the clear view he had of the
   dangers of Gnosticism, made him write those vast books of controversy,
   the work of a mind limited no doubt, but with a most healthy moral
   conscience. Lyons, thanks to him, was for a moment the centre of the
   emission of the most important Christian writings. Like all the great
   doctors of the Church, Irenæus found means to associate with his
   supernatural beliefs, which appear to us at this day irreconcilable
   with a right mind, the rarest practical sense. Very inferior to Justin
   in philosophic spirit, he is much more orthodox than he was, and has
   left a strong trace in Christian theology. To an enthusiastic time he
   united a moderation which is astonishing, to a rare simplicity he
   joined profound science, with ecclesiastical administration the
   government of souls; finally, he possessed the clearest conception
   which had yet been formulated in the universal Church. He has less
   talent than Tertullian; but how superior is he in heart and life!
   Alone, among the Christian polemics who combated heresies, he shows
   some charity for the heretic, and puts himself on guard against the
   calumnious inductions of orthodoxy.

   The relations between the churches of the Upper Rhone and Asia becoming
   more and more rare, the surrounding Latin influence became greater
   little by little. Irenæus and the Asians who surrounded him followed
   already the Western custom for Easter. The Greek custom was lost; Latin
   was soon the language of these churches, which, in the fourth century,
   were not essentially distinguished from that of the rest of Gaul. Yet
   the traces of Greek origin effaced themselves very slowly; several
   Greek customs were preserved in the liturgy at Lyons, Vienne, Autun,
   until the middle ages. An ineffaceable souvenir was inscribed in the
   annals of the universal Church; this little Asiatic and Phrygian
   island, hidden in the midst of the darkness of the West, had thrown
   forth an unequalled brilliancy. The solid goodness of our races, joined
   to the brilliant heroism and the love of Orientals for glory, produced
   sublime episodes. Blandina, on the cross at the extremity of the
   amphitheatre, was like a new Christ. The sweet, pale slave, attached to
   her stake on this new Calvary, showed that the servant, when a holy
   cause is concerned, is equal to the free man and sometimes excels him.
   We say nothing of the rights of man. The ancestors of these are very
   old. After having been the town of Gnosticism and Montanism, Lyons
   shall be the town of the Vaudois, of the Pauperes of Lugduno, and shall
   become the grand battlefield where the opposing principles of modern
   conscience shall engage in the most impassioned struggle. Honour to
   those who suffer for such a cause! Progress shall bring in, I trust,
   the day when these grand constructions, which modern Catholicism raises
   imprudently upon the heights of Montmartre and Fourvières, shall become
   temples of the supreme Forgiveness, and shall include a chapel for all
   causes, for all victims, for all martyrs.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXI.

  CELSUS AND LUCIAN.

   The determined conservative who, in passing near some mutilated corpses
   of the martyrs of Lyons, said to himself, "They have been too gentle;
   some more severe punishments must be invented!" was not more narrow
   than those politicians who, in all ages, have believed they could
   arrest religious or social movements by punishments. Religious and
   social movements are fought with by time and the progress of reason.
   The sectarian socialism of 1848 has disappeared in twenty years without
   special laws of repression. If Marcus-Aurelius, instead of employing
   the lions and the red-hot chair, had used the primary school and the
   teaching of a rationalist State, it would have better prevented the
   seduction of the world by Christian supernaturalism. Unfortunately,
   they were not placed upon the true ground. To combat religions by
   maintaining, by exaggerating even the religious principle, is the worst
   calculation. To show the emptiness of everything supernatural, this is
   the radical cure for fanaticism. Now scarcely any one was at that point
   of view. The Roman philosopher Celsus, an educated man, of great good
   sense, who had anticipated on several points the results of modern
   criticism, wrote a book against Christianity, not to prove to
   Christians that their style of conceiving of the intervention of God in
   the affairs of the world was contrary to what we know of the reality,
   but to show that they were wrong in not practising the religion which
   they found established.

   This Celsus was the friend of Lucian, and appears at bottom to have
   shared the scepticism of the great laugher of Samosate. It was at his
   request that Lucian composed the intellectual essay upon Alexander of
   Abonoticus, where the foolishness of believing in the supernatural is
   so well exposed. Lucian, with him heart to heart, represents him as an
   unreserved admirer of that grand liberating philosophy which has saved
   man from the phantoms of superstition, and which preserves him from all
   vain beliefs and errors. The two friends, exactly like Lucretius, look
   upon Epicurus as a saint, a hero, a benefactor of the human race, a
   divine genius, the only one who had seen the truth and has dared to
   speak it. Lucian, on the other hand, speaks of his friend as an
   accomplished man; he boasts of his wisdom, his justice, his love of the
   truth, the sweetness of his manners, and the charm of his conversation.
   His writings appear to him the most useful and beautiful of the age,
   capable of opening the eyes of all those who have any reason. Celsus in
   fact has taken as his speciality to discover the snares to which poor
   humanity is subject. He had a strong antipathy to the Goetes and the
   introducers of false gods after the manner of Alexander of Abonoticus.
   As to general principles, he appears to have been less firm than
   Lucian. He wrote against magic, rather to unveil the charlatanism of
   the magicians than to show the absolute emptiness of their art. His
   criticism in what concerns the supernatural is identical with that of
   the Epicureans; but he does not stop there. He puts upon the same
   footing astrology, music, natural history, magic, and divination. He
   repels most spells as impostures, but he admits some. He does not
   believe in the legends of Paganism, but he considers them great,
   marvellous, and useful to men. Prophets in general appear to him
   charlatans, and yet he does not treat as a simple dream the art of
   foretelling the future. He is eclectic, deistical, or, if it is
   preferred, a Platonist. His religion resembles much that of
   Marcus-Aurelius, Maximus of Tyre, and that which later shall be the
   religion of the Emperor Julian.

   God, universal order, delegates his power to some special gods, a sort
   of demons or ministers, to whom is presented the worship of polytheism.
   This cult is lawful, or at least very acceptable, when it is not
   carried to excess. It becomes a strict duty when it is the national
   religion, each one having as his duty the adoration of the divine
   according to the form which has been transmitted to him by his
   ancestors. True worship is to hold always one's thoughts raised towards
   God, the common father of all men. Internal piety is essential, the
   sacrifices are nothing but the sign. As to the adorations which people
   make to the demons, those obligations are of little consequence and may
   be satisfied by a movement of the hand, although it is good to treat
   them seriously. The demons do not need anything, and it is necessary
   not to delight too much in magic or magical operations; but one must
   not be too ungrateful, and, besides, all piety is salutary. To serve
   the inferior gods is to please the great God whom they extol.
   Christians may well yield some extraordinary honours to a son of God
   appearing recently in the world! Like Maximus of Tyre, Celsus has a
   philosophy of religion which allows him to admit all cults. He would
   admit Christianity on the same footing as the other beliefs if
   Christianity had only a pretension limited to the truth.

   Providence, divination, the prodigies of the temples, the oracles, the
   immortality of the soul, future rewards and punishments appeared to
   Celsus as integral parts of a State doctrine. It must be recollected
   that the possibility of magic was at that time almost a dogma. They
   were Epicureans, atheists, impious, and ran the risk of their lives who
   dared to deny it. All sects, the Epicureans excepted, taught its
   reality. Celsus seriously believed in it. His reason shows him the
   falsity of generally admitted supernatural beliefs; but the
   insufficiency of his scientific education and his political prejudices
   prevented him from being consequent; he maintains, at least in
   principle, certain beliefs quite as little rational as those he
   combats. The feeble knowledge which people had then of the laws of
   nature made all such credulousness possible. Tacitus has certainly an
   enlightened mind, and yet he does not dare to repel completely the most
   puerile prodigies. The apparitions of the temples and divine dreams
   were considered to be facts. Elien was soon to write his books to
   demonstrate, by pretended facts, that those who deny the miraculous
   manifestations of the gods are "more unreasonable than children," that
   those who believe in the gods are blessed, while the most fearful
   adventures happen to the incredulous and blasphemers.

   What Celsus was eminently is, a subject devoted to the emperor--a
   patriot. We suppose him to have been a Roman or Italian; it is certain
   that Lucian, loyal as he is, has not such a pronounced sympathy for the
   empire. The fundamental reasoning of Celsus is this: the Roman religion
   has been a phenomenon concomitant with the Roman grandeur; therefore,
   it is true. Like the Gnostics, Celsus believes that every nation has
   its gods, who protect it in proportion as it adores them as they wish
   to be adored. To abandon its gods is, for a nation, the equivalent of
   suicide. Celsus is thus the reverse of a Tatian, the bitter enemy of
   Hellenism and Roman society. Tatian sacrifices the Hellenic
   civilisation entirely to Judaism and Christianity. Celsus attributes
   all that is good among the Jews or Christians to the borrowings made
   from the Greeks. Plato and Epictetes are for him the two poles of
   wisdom. If he had not known Marcus-Aurelius he would have certainly
   loved and admired him. From such a point of view, he could not look on
   Christianity but as an evil; but he does not indulge in calumnies, he
   acknowledges that the manners of the sectaries are gentle and well
   regulated; it is the grounds of credibility in the sect which he would
   discuss. Celsus made a thorough investigation on the subject, read the
   Christian and Jewish books, and conversed with both classes. The result
   of his researches was a work entitled A True Discourse, which naturally
   enough has not come down to us, but which it is possible to reconstruct
   from the quotations and the analyses which Origen has given of it.

   It is beyond doubt that Celsus knew better than any other Pagan writer
   Christianity, and the books which served as its basis. Origen, in spite
   of his remarkable Christian instruction, is astonished to have so many
   things to learn from him. As to erudition Celsus is a Christian doctor.
   His journeys in Palestine, Phoenicia, and Egypt have opened his mind on
   the matters of religious history. He has read attentively the Greek
   translations of the Bible, Genesis, Exodus, the Prophets, including
   Jonah, Daniel, Enoch, and the Psalms. He knew the Sibylline writings,
   and he saw their fraud; the emptiness of the tentatives of allegorical
   exegesis did not escape him. Among the writings of the New Testament he
   knew the four Canonical Gospels and many others, perhaps the Acts of
   Pilate. While decidedly preferring Matthew, he takes good account of
   the different retouchings to which the Gospel texts have been
   subjected, especially in view of the Apology. It is doubtful if he had
   in his hands St. Paul's writings; like St. Justin he never names him;
   yet he recalls some of his maxims and is not ignorant of his doctrines.
   As to ecclesiastical history he has read the dialogue of Jason and
   Papiscus, numerous Gnostic and Marcionite writings, especially the
   Heavenly Dialogue, a writing of which there is no mention elsewhere. He
   does not appear to have had the writings of St. Justin, although the
   way in which he thinks of Christian theology, Christology, and the
   Canon are exactly agreeable to the theology, Christology, and Canon of
   St. Justin. The Jewish legend of Jesus was familiar to him. The mother
   of Jesus had committed adultery with the soldier, Pantherus; she had
   been rejected by her husband, the carpenter. Jesus wrought his miracles
   by means of the secret sciences which he had learned in Egypt.

   It was especially in exegesis that Celsus astonishes us by his
   penetration. Voltaire has not triumphed better over Biblical history,
   the impossibilities of Genesis taken in its natural sense, that which
   is artlessly childish in the stories of the creation, of the deluge and
   the ark. The bloody, hard egotistical character of Jewish history; the
   bizarrerie of the divine choice in fixing on such a race to make of
   them the people of God, are well brought to light. The bitterness of
   the Jewish scoffs against the other sects is set forth in a lively
   manner as acts of injustice and pride. All the Messianic plan of the
   Judeo-Christian history, having as its base the exaggerated importance
   which men, and in particular the Jews, claim in the universe, is
   refuted by the hand of a master. Why should God come down to earth?
   Could it be to know what was passing among men? But does he not know
   all things? Is his power so limited that he cannot correct anything
   without coming into the world or sending some one here? Could this be
   known? It is to impute to him an emptiness entirely human. And then why
   so late? Why rather at one moment than another? Why rather in one
   country than another? The Apocalyptic theories of the final
   conflagration and of the Resurrection are in the same way victoriously
   refuted. Bizarre pretension, to render immortal dust, putrefaction!
   Celsus triumphs by opposing to this religious materialism his pure
   idealism, his absolute God who does not manifest himself in the
   progress of finished things.

   "Jews and Christians present to me the effect of a lot of field mice or
   pismires leaving their hole, or frogs settled in a marsh, or worms in
   the corner of a ditch . . . . . and saying among themselves: It is to
   us that God reveals and announces everything; he has no concern for the
   rest of the world; he leaves the heavens and the earth to roll on at
   their own fancy, to occupy himself with us alone. We are the only
   beings with whom he communicates by his messengers, the only ones with
   whom he desires to have society, for he has made us like himself.
   Everything is subordinated to us, the earth, the water, the air, and
   the stars, all has been done for us and destined for our service, and
   it is because it has so happened that certain among us have sinned that
   God himself will come or will send his own Son to burn up the wicked,
   but to make us enjoy eternal life with him.'"

   The discussion on the life of Jesus is conducted exactly according to
   the method of Reimarus and Strauss. The impossibilities of the Gospel
   history, if one may take it as history, have never been better shown.
   The appearance of God in Jesus appears to our philosophy unseemly and
   useless, the evangelical miracles are paltry, the walking magicians
   have done quite as much without being regarded as the Son of God. The
   life of Jesus is that of a miserable Goëte hatred of God. His character
   is provoking, his manner of speaking decidedly indicates a man who is
   powerless to persuade; it is unseemly for a God or even a man of sense.
   Jesus ought to have been beautiful, strong, majestic, eloquent. Now his
   disciples confess that he was little, uncomely, and without nobleness.
   Why, if God wished to save the human race, did he send his Son only to
   a corner of the world? He should rather have sent his Spirit into many
   bodies, and commanded his celestial envoys in different directions,
   since he knew that the messenger destined to the Jews should be put to
   death. Why also two opposing revelations, that of Moses and that of
   Jesus? Jesus has risen, do they say? That is reported of a crowd of
   others, Zamolxis, Pythagoras, Rhampsinit.

   Perhaps it first ought to be made a subject of examination whether any
   man really dead has risen with the same body. Why treat the adventures
   of others as fables without verisimilitude, as if the issue of your
   tragedy had a better appearance and was credible, with the cry that
   your Jesus threw on high from the cross while expiring amid the shaking
   of the earth and the darkness? Living he has been able to do nothing
   for himself; dead do you say he rose, and showed the marks of his
   suffering, the holes in his hands? But who has seen all that? A woman
   with an evil spirit, as you yourselves confess, or otherwise possessed
   in the same way, whether the pretended witness had dreamed that which
   his troubled spirit suggested to him, or that his abused imagination
   had given a substance to its desires (which happens so open), or rather
   that he had wished to strike the minds of men by a marvellous story,
   and by the help of this imposture to furnish material for
   charlatans.. . . . At his tomb there were present, some say, one angel,
   others say two, to announce to the women that he had risen; for the Son
   of God, as he appeared to be, had not the power alone to open his tomb;
   he needed some one to come and displace the stone. . . . If Jesus
   wished really to make his divine power to shine he must have shown it
   to his enemies, to the judge who had condemned him, to the whole world,
   for since he was dead, and God besides, as you pretend, he had nothing
   more to fear from anyone and that was not apparently that he should
   remain concealed that he had been sent. By the some necessity, to place
   his divinity in the full light, he ought to have disappeared all at
   once from the cross. . . Dead he only causes himself to he seen in
   secret by a woman and her companions. His suffering had had innumerable
   witnesses; his resurrection has only one. It is the reverse of what
   should have taken place.

   "If you had such a strong desire to do something new, how much better
   would it have been to choose to deify some one of those who died
   manfully, and who are worthy of a divine fable. If you object to take
   Hercules or Æsculapius, or any one of the ancient heroes, who already
   are honoured with worship, you have Orpheus, an inspired man, as no one
   disputes, and who perished by a violent death. Perhaps you will say
   that there were no more to take. Be it so; but then you have an
   Anaxarcus, who, cast one day into a mortar that they might pound hint,
   cruelly made game of his executioner. Pound pound, the case of
   Anaxarcus, for as for himself you cannot touch him'--a word full of a
   divine spirit. Here again will it be said you have been prevented.
   . . . Ah, well, then will you not take Epictetes? As his master twisted
   his leg, he, calm and smiling, said, You are breaking it,' and the leg
   was indeed broken. I told you that you were going to break it.' What
   has your God said like that in his agonies? And the sibyl, whose
   authority many of you quote from, why do you not take her? You would
   have had the best grounds for calling her the daughter of God. You are
   content to introduce wrongly, and across each other fraudulently, a
   number of blasphemies into his books, and you give us for a God a
   personage who has finished by a wretched death an infamous life. Come,
   you would have been better to choose Jonas, who escaped safe and sound
   from a great fish; or Daniel, who escaped from the lions; or some other
   one, concerning whom you have told us things more ridiculous still."

   In his judgments upon the Church, such as it was at his time, Celsus
   shows himself singularly malevolent. Apart from some honest and gentle
   men the Church appears to him to be a mass of sectaries hurting one
   another. It is a new race of men, born yesterday, without country,
   without ancient traditions, leagued against civil and religious
   institutions, pursued by justice, marked with infamy, and glorying in
   public execration. Their assemblies are clandestine and unlawful; they
   bind themselves there by an oath to break the laws and to suffer
   everything for a barbarous doctrine, which would in any case need to be
   perfected and purified by Greek reason. A secret and dangerous
   doctrine! The courage which they put forth to sustain it is
   praiseworthy; it is good to die rather than abjure or feign to abjure
   the faith which one has embraced. But yet it is necessary that faith
   should be founded on reason, and should not have for its only
   foundation a part taken upon no examination. The Christians besides
   have not invented martyrdom; every creed has given examples of ardent
   conviction. They mock at powerless gods who do not know how to revenge
   their injuries. But has the supreme God of the Christians revenged his
   crucified Son? Their presumption in deciding questions over which the
   wisest hesitate is the act of people who only know how to seduce the
   simple. All that they have of good, Plato and the philosophers have
   said better before them. The Scriptures are nothing but a translation
   in a gross style of what the philosophers, and especially Plato, have
   said in an elegant style.

   Celsus is struck by the divisions of Christianity, and by the anathemas
   which the different churches pronounce upon each other. At Rome, where,
   according to the most likely opinion, the book was written, all sects
   flourished. Celsus knew the Marcionites and the Gnostics. He saw,
   nevertheless, that in the midst of this labyrinth of sects there was
   the orthodox Church, "the Great Church which had no other name than
   that of Christian." The Montanist extravagances, the sibylline
   impostures inspire him naturally only with contempt. Certainly, if he
   had known better the learned Episcopate of Asia, such men as Melito for
   example, who dreamed of concordats between Christianity and the empire,
   his judgment would have been less severe. What hurt him was the extreme
   social meanness of the Christians, and the small intelligence of the
   means by which they exercised their propaganda; those whom they wished
   to gain were base people--slaves, women, and children. Like charlatans,
   they avoided as much as they could honest people who would not allow
   themselves to be deceived, taking into their nets the ignorant and the
   foolish, the ordinary provender of knaves.

   "What harm is it then to be well educated, to love fine learning, to be
   wise, and to pass for such? Is that an obstacle to the knowledge of
   God? Are they not rather helps to attain to the truth? What are these
   fair-runners, these jugglers doing? Do they address themselves to men
   of sense, to tell them their good news? No, but if they see somewhere a
   group of children, of street porters, or low people, it is there they
   ply their industry and cause themselves to be admired. It is the same
   way inside families; here are some wool-carders, some shoemakers, some
   fullers, some people of the lowest ignorance, and quite destitute of
   education. Before masters, men of experience and judgment, they dare
   not open their mouths; but if they surprise the children of the house,
   or women who have no more reason than themselves, they set themselves
   to work wonders. Only such can believe; the father and the preceptors
   are fools who do not know the true good and are incapable of
   understanding it. Those preachers alone know how they ought to live;
   the children are found following them, and through them good fortune
   will come to all the family. If while they are speaking some serious
   person, one of the preceptors, or the father himself, come in
   unexpectedly, the more timid keep silence; the bolder are not allowed
   to excite the children to shake off the yoke, insinuating in a low
   voice what they would not say before their father or preceptor, so as
   not to expose themselves to the brutality of those corrupted people who
   would chastise them. Those who want to know the truth have only to
   brave the father and preceptors, and go with the women and brats to
   their part of the house, or to the bootmakers' stall, or the fullers'
   shop, to understand the absolute! See how they act to gain
   converts. . . . Whoever is a sinner, whoever is without understanding,
   whoever is weak in mind, in a word whoever is miserable, let him draw
   near; the kingdom of God is for him."

   One may imagine how such an overturning of the authority of the family
   in education would he hateful to a man who perhaps exercised the
   functions of a tutor. The whole Christian idea that God had been sent
   to save sinners revolts Celsus. He only wants justice. The privilege of
   the prodigal son is to him incomprehensible.

   "What harm is there in being free from sin? Let the unjust, they say,
   humble himself by the feeling of his misery, and God will receive him.
   But if the righteous, trusting in his virtue, raises his eyes towards
   God, what! will he be rejected? Conscientious magistrates do not suffer
   the accused to melt into lamentations, lest they should be seduced into
   sacrificing justice to pity. God, in his judgments, is then accessible
   to flattery? Why has he such a preference for sinners? . . . Did these
   theories come from the desire of drawing around him a more numerous
   clientèle? Will it be said that it is proposed by this indulgence to
   improve the sinners? What an illusion! The nature of people does not
   change; the bad are not improved either by force or gentleness. Would
   God not be unjust it he showed himself complaisant to sinners, who know
   the art of affecting him, and if he abandon the good, who have not the
   talent for that?"

   Celsus would have no bounty extended to false humility, to importunity,
   to humble prayers. His God is the God of noble and right minds, not the
   God of pardon, the consoler of the afflicted, the patron of the
   wretched. He evidently sees a great danger, from the point of view of
   politics and also from the point of view of his profession as a man of
   public instruction, that it should be permissible to say that, to be
   dear to God, it is good to have been guilty, and that the humble, the
   poor, and the minds without culture have because of this special
   advantages.

   "Listen to their professors. The sages,' they say, repel our teaching,
   led away and prevented as they are by their wisdom.' What man of
   judgment, in fact, could allow himself to accept a doctrine so
   ridiculous? It is sufficient to look at the crowd who embrace it to
   despise it. Their masters seem like quacks who offer to give healing to
   a sick person, on condition that the learned doctor shall not be called
   in, lest they should discover their ignorance. They are obliged to show
   suspicious knowledge. Leave me to do it,' they say; I will save you, I
   only; the ordinary doctors kill those whom they boast that they will
   cure.' They speak like drunken men, who among themselves accuse men of
   being overcome by wine, or the short-sighted who would persuade those
   like themselves that those who have good eyes do not see at all."

   It is especially as a patriot and friend of the State that Celsus shows
   himself the enemy of Christianity. The idea of an absolute religion,
   without distinction of nations, appears to him a chimera. All religion
   is, in his eyes, national; religion has no raison d'être but as
   national. He certainly does not love Judaism; he thinks it full of
   pride and badly-founded pretensions, inferior in everything to
   Hellenism; but inasmuch as the religion of the Jews is national,
   Judaism has its rights. The Jews ought to conserve the customs and
   beliefs of their fathers as other peoples do, although the powers to
   whom Judea has been entrusted may be inferior to the gods of the Romans
   who conquered them. One is a Jew by birth; one is a Christian by
   choice. That is why Rome never seriously thought of abolishing Judaism,
   even after the fearful wars of Titus and Hadrian. As to Christianity,
   it is the national religion of no one; it is the religion which men
   adopt as a protest against the national religion by a collective and
   corporate spirit.

   "They refuse to observe the public ceremonies and to render homage to
   those who preside; then they renounce also the wearing of the manly
   robe, marriage, becoming fathers, or filling the functions of life; let
   them go forth altogether far from here, without leaving the least seed
   of themselves, and that the earth may be disembarrassed of their breed!
   But if they would marry, if they would have children, if they would
   share in the things of life, good as well as evil, it is proper that
   they should render to those who are charged with administering
   everything the proper honours. . . . We ought continually, both in word
   and action, and even when we do not speak or act, to have our souls
   raised towards God. This being granted, what harm is there in seeking
   the good of those who have received this power from God, and specially
   that of the kings r.nd the powerful of the earth? It is, indeed, not
   without the intervention of a divine energy that they have been raised
   to the rank they occupy."

   In good logic Celsus was wrong. He does not limit himself to demand
   political confraternity; he would have also religious confraternity. He
   is not limited to say to them, "Keep your beliefs; serve the same
   country with us, and we demand nothing contrary to your principles."
   No, he would have Christians taking part in ceremonies opposed to their
   ideas. He makes some bad reasonings, to show them that the Polytheistic
   cult should not horrify them.

   "Doubtless," he says, "if a pious man were compelled to commit impious
   action, or to pronounce some shameful word, it would be right for him
   to endure all punishments rather than act thus; but it is not the same
   when we command you to honour the sun or to chant a beautiful hymn in
   honour of Athene. There are there certain forms of piety, and we cannot
   have too much piety. You believe in angels: why don't you admit the
   existence of demons or secondary gods? If the idols are nothing, what
   harm is there in taking part in the public festivals? If there are
   demons, servants of the all-powerful God, should not pious men render
   them homage? You would appear, indeed, so much the more to honour the
   great God as you would glorify these secondary divinities. By applying
   itself thus to everything, piety becomes more complete."

   To which the Christians had the right to reply: "That concerns our
   conscience; the State is not to reason with us on that point. Speak to
   us of civil and military duties, which have no religious character, and
   we shall fulfil them." In other words, nothing which connects us with
   the State should be of a religious character. This solution appears
   very simple to us; but how are we to reproach politicians of the second
   century with not having put it into practice when in our days we find
   so many difficulties surrounding it?

   More admirable, certainly, is the reasoning of our author as regards
   the oath in the name of the emperor.

   There was there a simple adhesion to the established order, an order
   which was in itself only the defence of civilisation against barbarism,
   and without which Christianity would have been swept away like all the
   rest. But Celsus appears to us to be wanting in generosity, when he
   mixes up threatening with reasoning. "You do not pretend, doubtless,"
   said he, "that the Romans should abandon, to embrace your beliefs,
   their religious and civil traditions, that they should leave their
   gods, and put themselves under the protection of your Most High, who
   has not known how to defend his own people? The Jews no longer possess
   a rood of earth, and you, drawn from all parts, vagabonds, reduced to a
   small number, we should seek to end it with you?"

   What is singular in fact is that, after having fought Christianity to
   the death, Celsus sometimes seems to come near it himself. We can see
   that at bottom Polytheism is only an embarrassment, and he envies it
   its one God. The idea that one day Christianity shall be the religion
   of the empire shone before his eyes, as before those of Melito. But he
   turns with horror from such a prospect. That would be the worst manner
   of dying. "A power more enlightened and far-seeing," he said to them,
   "will destroy you root and branch, rather than perish itself through
   you." Then his patriotism and his good sense show him the impossibility
   of such a religious policy. The book, which had commenced by the most
   bitter refutations, closes with proposals of conciliation. The State
   runs the greatest risks; it is concerned in saving civilisation; the
   barbarians are coming over on every side; gladiators and slaves are
   enrolled. Christianity shall lose as much as established society in the
   triumph of the barbarians. Concord is therefore easy. "Help the emperor
   with all your force; share with him in the defence of right; fight for
   him if circumstances demand it; aid him in the management of his
   provinces. For that purpose cease to decline the duties of civil life
   and military service; take your part in the public functions, if it be
   necessary for the safety of the laws and the cause of piety."

   That was easy to say. Celsus forgot that those whom he wished to rally
   thus were continually menaced with the cruellest torments. He
   especially forgot that, in maintaining the established cult, he asked
   the Christians to admit greater absurdities than those he combated
   among themselves. This appeal to patriotism could not be listened to.
   Tertullian said, proudly, "To destroy your empire we have only to
   withdraw; without us there would be nothing but inertia and death."
   Abstention has always been the revenge of defeated conservatives. They
   know that they are the salt of the earth; that without them society is
   impossible. It is then natural that in their moments of annoyance they
   should simply say, "Pass us by!" To tell the truth, no one in the Roman
   world, at the time of which we speak, was prepared for liberty. The
   principle of the State religion was that of nearly all. The plan of the
   Christians is already to become the religion of the empire. Melito
   shows Marcus-Aurelius the establishment of the revealed religion to be
   the best use of his authority.

   The book of Celsus was very little read at the time of its appearance.
   It was only seventy years after that Christianity knew of its
   existence. It was Ambrose, that Alexandrinian bibliophile and scholar,
   the teacher of Origen, who discovered the impious book, read it, sent
   it to his friend, and begged him to reply to it. The effect of the book
   was then very little felt. In the fourth century, Hierocles and Julian
   used it, and almost copied it; but it was too late. Celsus had not
   probably taken away a single disciple of Jesus. He was right from the
   point of view of good natural sense, but simple good sense, when it
   finds itself opposed to the wants of mysticism, is very little listened
   to.

   The soil had not been prepared by a good ministry of public
   instruction. It must be remembered that the emperor was not himself
   free from all belief in the supernatural; the best minds in the century
   admitted the medical dreams and the miraculous cures in the temples of
   the gods. The number of pure rationalists, if considerable in the first
   century, is very much limited now. Those spirits who, like Cæcilius and
   Minucius Felix, professed a sort of atheism, held only more forcibly to
   the established religion. In the second half of the second century, we
   really only see a single man who, being above all superstition, had a
   good right to smile at all human follies, and to pity them likewise.
   That man, that mind, at once the most solid and the most charming of
   his age, was Lucian.

   Here there is more ambiguity. Lucian absolutely rejected the
   supernatural. Celsus admits all religions; Lucian denies them all.
   Celsus thinks he is conscientiously bound to study Christianity up to
   its sources; Lucian, who anticipates what it will lead to, takes up a
   very superficial notion of it. His ideal is Demonax, who, quite unlike
   Celsus, made no sacrifices, nor initiated himself into any mystery, had
   no other religion than gaiety and universal benevolence.

   This entire difference in the point of departure made Lucian to be less
   at a distance from the Christians than Celsus. He who had the best
   right of any one to be severe as to the supernatural shows himself, on
   the contrary, at times indulgent enough to them. Like the Christians,
   Lucian is a demolisher of Paganism, a subject resigned, but not loving,
   to Rome. Never was there any disquieted patriotism with him, or a
   single one of those anxieties for the State which devoured his friend
   Celsus. his laugh is like that of Peres, his diasyrnios made a chorus
   to that of Hermias. lie spoke of the immorality of the gods, of the
   contradiction of the philosophers, almost like Tatian. His ideal city
   singularly resembled a church. The Christians and he were allied in the
   same war, war against local superstitions, goëtes, oracles, and
   thaumaturges.

   The chimerical and Utopian side of the Christians could not but
   displease him. It seemed, indeed, that he had thought often of them in
   tracing, in the Fugitives, that picture of a society of Bohemianism,
   impudent, ignorant, and insolent, raising a real tribute under the name
   of alms, austere in words, in reality debauchés, seducers of women,
   enemies of the Muses, people of pale face and shaven heads, parties in
   shameful orgies. The picture is less gloomy, but the allusion is
   perhaps more contemptuous, in Peregrinus. Certainly Lucian did not see,
   like Celsus, a danger for the State in those base sectaries, whom he
   shows us living as brethren and animated by the most ardent charity for
   each other. It is not he who shall ask who persecutes them. There are
   enough of fools in the world! Those are not by any means the most
   wicked.

   Lucian certainly formed a strange idea of "the crucified sophist who
   introduced those new mysteries and succeeded in persuading his
   disciples not to adore him." He pities such credulity. How should those
   unfortunates, who have taken it into their heads that they are
   immortal, be exposed to all aberrations? The cynic who vaporises
   himself at Olympia, the Christian martyr who seeks for death to be with
   Christ, appear to him fools of the same order. In view of these pompous
   deaths sought for willingly, his reflection is that of Arrius
   Antoninus: "If you so much desire to be roasted, do it among yourselves
   at your ease and without this theatrical ostentation." This care to
   gather together the remains of the martyr, to raise them to the altars,
   this claim to obtain from them miracles of healing, to erect its pyre
   in a sanctuary of prophecy--common enough follies these to all
   sectaries. Lucian is of opinion that one might laugh at this if knavery
   were not mixed up with it. He did not regard the victims with favour,
   because they provoked the executioners.

   It was the first appearance of this form of human genius, of which
   Voltaire has been the perfect incarnation, and which, in many points of
   view, is the truth. Man being incapable of resolving seriously any
   metaphysical problems which he had imprudently raised, what would the
   sage do in the middle of the war of religions and systems? To abstain,
   to smile, to preach tolerance, humanity, benevolence without
   pretension, that is to render a simple service to poor humanity. The
   radical remedy is that of Epicurus, who destroyed at a blow religion,
   and its object and the evil it brings with it. Lucian appears to us
   like a wise man wandered in a world of fools. He hates nothing, he
   laughs at everything, serious virtue excepted.

   But at the time when we stop this history men of this kind become rare;
   they may be counted. The very intellectual Apulerius of Madaurus is, or
   at least affects to be, very much opposed to these strong minds. He had
   been invested with the priesthood. He detested the Christians as
   impious. He repelled the accusation of magic, not as chimerical, but as
   a fact not proved; all is complete for him, the gods and the demons.
   The true thinker was in some sort an isolated being, badly seen, and
   obliged to dissimulate. We produce with horror the history of a certain
   Euphronius, an obdurate Epicurean, who fell sick, and whose parents
   brought him into a temple of Æsculapius. There a divine oracle
   signified to him this recipe: "Burn the books of Epicurus, knead the
   ashes of them with soft wax, rub the belly with this liniment, and wrap
   the whole round with bandages." We read also of the history of a cock
   of Tanagre which, wounded on the leg, was sent among them who sung a
   hymn to Æsculapius, and accompanied them with its song, while showing
   to the god its wounded leg. A revelation being made to bring about its
   cure, "they saw the cock beating its wings, lengthening its stride,
   raising its neck and shaking its comb, to proclaim that Providence
   which considers creatures wanting in reason."

   The overthrow of good sense was accomplished. The delicate railleries
   of Lucian, the just criticisms of Celsus, fell only as powerless
   protests. In one generation man in entering life shall have no other
   choice than that of superstition, and soon even that choice he shall
   have no longer.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXII.

  NEW APOLOGIES--ATHENAGORAS, THEOPHILUS OF ANTIOCH, MINUCIUS FELIX.

   Never was the struggle more ardent than in those last years of
   Marcus-Aurelius. Persecution was at its highest period. The attacks and
   replies crossed each other. The parties borrowed one after the other
   the weapons of dialectic and irony. Christianity had its Lucian in a
   certain Hermias, who calls himself "philosopher," and who seems to set
   himself to the task of adding to all the exaggerations of Tatian on the
   mistakes of philosophy. His writing, probably composed in Syria, is not
   only an apology: it is a sermon addressed to the assembled believers.
   The author has published it under the title of Diasyrmos, or "Tales of
   the Philosophers outside." The pleasantry was heavy and weak enough. It
   recalls the attempts which have been produced in our age, in the bosom
   of Catholicism, to employing the irony of Voltaire to the profit of the
   good cause, and to make the apology for religion in the style of a
   Tertullian in good humour. The sarcasms of Hermias do not only strike
   at the exaggerated claims of philosophy; they reach to the most
   legitimate attempts of science, the desire to know the things which are
   now perfectly discovered and known. According to the author, science
   has for its origin the apostasy of the angels. These are the unhappy
   perverse beings who have taught men philosophy, with all its
   contradictions. The knowledge of the old schools which the author
   possesses is wide, but not very profound; as to the philosophical
   spirit, never was a man so completely without it.

   The clemency of the emperor, his known love of truth, called forth,
   year after year, new petitions, where the generous advocates of the
   persecuted religion tried to show what was monstrous in those
   persecutions. Commodus, associated with the empire from the end of the
   year 176, had his part in these entreaties, to which--strange
   thing!--he later on gave better heed than his father. "To the emperors,
   Marcus-Aurelius Antoninus and Marcus?Aurelius Commodus of Armenia,
   Sarmatia (and whatever was their greatest title) philosophers." . . .
   Thus began an apology, written in a very good antique style by
   Athenagoras, an Athenian philosopher, who appears to have been
   converted to Christianity by his own efforts. The exceptional position
   allowed to Christians, under a reign full of mildness and happiness,
   and which had given peace and liberty to the whole world, was
   scandalous. All the cities enjoyed a perfect self-government. All
   people were permitted to live according to their laws and their
   religion. The Christians, although very loyal towards the empire, were
   the only men who were persecuted for their creed. And even if the
   authorities had contented themselves by taking away their property and
   life! But what was still more insupportable was the official calumnies
   with which they were loaded--atheism, the eating of human flesh, and
   incest.

   If the Christians were guilty of atheism, philosophers were guilty of
   the same crime. The Christians admitted that supreme intelligence,
   invisible, impassable, incomprehensible, which is the "last word" of
   philosophy. Why make that a reproach to them which was praised in
   others? What the Christians said of the Son and the Spirit complements
   philosophy--does not contradict it. The Son of God is the Word of God,
   the eternal reason of the Eternal Spirit. The Christians rejected the
   sacrifices, the idols and the fables of Paganism. Who can blame them?
   The gods were often only men deified. The miracles of healing in the
   temples are the work of demons.

   Athenagoras has no difficulty in demonstrating that the crimes with
   which Christians are reproached have no verisimilitude about them. He
   affirms the perfect purity of their morals, notwithstanding the
   objections directed against the kiss of peace.

   "According to the difference in age, we treat some as sons and
   daughters, others as brothers and sisters, others again as fathers and
   mothers; but these titles of relationship bring with them no stain. The
   Word tells as in fact: If anyone shall repeat the kiss to procure the
   enjoyment of pleasure . . .' and it adds, There must be great
   scrupulousness concerning the kiss, and with stronger reason in that
   which concerns the proscyneme, since, if it were obtained by the
   slightest impure thought, it would deprive us of eternal life.' The
   hope of eternal life makes us contemn the present life, even as far as
   the pleasures of the mind. Each of us uses his own spouse according to
   certain rules we have laid down, and in the manner necessary for the
   procreation of children; even as the workman, after he had entrusted
   his grain to the soil, waits for the harvest without sowing above it.
   You will find among us many persons of both sexes who have grown old in
   celibacy, hoping thus to live nearer God. . . . Our doctrine is that
   each one ought to remain as he is born or be content with a single
   marriage. Second marriages are only adultery decorously
   disguised. . . .

   "If we were to ask our accusers if they have seen what they say, there
   would be none impudent enough to assert it. We have slaves, some of us
   more, some less; we do not think of concealing them, and nevertheless
   not one among them has made any of these lying statements against us.
   We cannot endure the sight of a man who has been put to death, even
   justly. Who can look with cheerfulness upon the spectacles of the
   gladiators and the beasts, especially when it is you who give them? Ah
   well, we have renounced these spectacles, believing that there is
   hardly any difference between looking on at a murder and committing it.
   We hold as a murderess the woman who procures abortion, and we believe
   that is to kill a child only to expose it. . . .

   "What we ask is the common justice, it is not to be punished for the
   name we bear. When a philosopher commits a crime they judge him for
   that crime, and they do not make his philosophy responsible. If we are
   guilty of the crimes of which they accuse us, spare neither age or sex,
   exterminate along with us our wives and children. If these are
   inventions without any other foundation than the natural enmity of vice
   to virtue, it is for you to examine our life, our doctrine, our devoted
   submission to you, to your house, to the empire, and to do us the same
   justice that you do to our adversaries."

   Extreme deference, almost obsequiousness, towards the empire is the
   character of Athenagoras as of all the apologists. He flatters in
   particular the ideas of heredity, and assures Marcus-Aurelius that the
   prayers of the Christians will have the effect of assuring the
   succession of his son.

   "Now that I have replied to all these accusations, and that I have
   shown our piety towards God as well as the purity of our minds, I ask
   nothing more from you than a sign from your royal head. Oh! Princes
   whom nature and education have made so excellent, so moderate, so
   humane. Who is more worthy of being favourably listened to by the
   sovereign whose government we pray for, that the succession may be
   established between you and your son according to what is most just,
   and that your empire, receiving without ceasing new accretions, should
   reach over the whole earth? And in praying thus we pray for ourselves,
   since the tranquillity of the empire is the condition through which we
   may in the bosom of a gentle and tranquil life apply ourselves entirely
   to the observance of those precepts which have been imposed upon us.

   The dogma of the resurrection of the dead was that which caused the
   greatest difficulty to minds which had received a Greek education.
   Athenagoras devoted to this a special conference, seeking to reply to
   the objections drawn from the case where the body loses its identity.
   The immortality of the soul is not sufficient. Some commandments, such
   as those which concern adultery and fornication, do not regard the
   soul, since the soul is not capable of such misdeeds. The body has its
   part in virtue, it ought to have its part in the recompense. Man is not
   complete without being made up of body and soul, and all that is said
   of the end of man is applied to the complete man. Notwithstanding all
   these reasonings the Pagans obstinately said, "Show us one who has
   risen from the dead, and when we have seen him we will believe," and
   they were not wrong.

   Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch, about the year 170, was, like
   Athenagoras, a convert from Hellenism, who, when he was converted, did
   not believe that he did anything but change one philosophy for another
   which was better. He was a very fertile teacher, a catechist endowed
   with a great talent for exposition, a clever polemic according to the
   ideas of the age. He wrote against the dualism of Marcion and against
   Hermogenes, who denied creation and asserted the eternity of matter. He
   commented upon the Gospels, and he wrote, they say, a concord or
   harmony. His principal work which has been preserved to us was a
   treatise in three books, addressed to a certain Autolycus, probably a
   fictitious personage under whose name Theophilus represents the
   instructed Pagan held in error by the prejudices spread against
   Christianity. According to Theophilus, one is a Christian by the heart,
   it is the passions and the vices which keep one from seeing God. God is
   immaterial and without form, but his works reveal him. The gods of the
   Pagans are men whom they cause to be adored, and the worst of men.

   Theophilus speaks already of the Trinity, but his trinity had not the
   appearance of that of Nice, it is composed of three persons, God, the
   Word, and Wisdom. His trust in the reading of the prophets, as a means
   for the conversion of the heathen, may appear exaggerated. His
   scholarship is abundant, but his criticism is totally defective, and
   the exegesis which he gives of the first chapters of Genesis is very
   weak. What shall we say of the assurance with which he quotes to Pagans
   as a decisive authority the Judæo-Christian Sibyl whose authenticity he
   fully admits?

   To sum up, Theophilus approaches much nearer the narrow and malignant
   spirit of Tatian than the liberal spirit of Justin and Athenagoras.
   Sometimes he admits that the philosophers and the Greek poets have
   anticipated revelation, notably in what concerns the final
   conflagration of the world, but most frequently he finds them stained
   by enormous errors. The Greeks have plundered Genesis by altering it.
   The Greek wisdom is but a pale, modern, and very feeble plagiarism from
   Moses. Even as the sea would dry up if it were not ceaselessly fed by
   the rivers, so would the world perish by the wickedness of man if the
   law and the prophets had not established truth and justice. The
   Catholic Church is like an island prepared by God in the midst of a sea
   of errors. But let them not be deceived; there are heresies, islands of
   reefs without water, without fruit, full of fierce beasts. Beware of
   the pirates who would attack and destroy you there. Theophilus is never
   so triumphant as when he reduces to nothing the absurd calumnies with
   which they pursued his co-religionists. Otherwise he is feeble, and
   Autolycus is not wrong after such arguments to persist in his
   incredulity. The pearl of this apologetic literature of Marcus Aurelius
   is the dialogue composed by the African, Minucius Felix. It is the
   first Christian work written in Latin, and one feels already that the
   Christian Latin literature, theologically inferior, will become greater
   than the Greek Christian literature, because of the shades and
   manliness of its style. The author, originally from Cirta, remained at
   Rome, and exercised there the profession of an advocate. Born a Pagan,
   he had received a most liberal education, and had embraced Christianity
   upon reflection. He knew his classics perfectly, imitated them, and
   occasionally copied them. Cicero, Seneca, and Sallust were his
   favourite authors. Among his contemporaries no one wrote in Latin
   better than he. The book of his compatriot Fronton struck him: he
   wished to reply to the attack. He did so, taking, it would seem, his
   style from the illustrious rhetorician, and making more than one
   borrowing. Perhaps he had also read Celsus' work, and refers to it more
   than once without naming it.

   A learned Pagan, belonging to the leading family of Cirta, Cæcilius
   Natalis, and two Christians, Octavius and Minucius, went down to the
   seashore, near Ostium, during the autumn recess. Cæcilius, perceiving a
   statue of Serapis, put his hand to his mouth, according to custom. A
   discussion ensued. Cæcilius commences by a long discourse, which one
   may consider as a nearly textual reproduction of Fronton's argument. It
   is a perfect representation of the objections a Roman such as he would
   have to Christianity. The tone is that of a conservative, who does not
   much disguise his haughty incredulity, and defends his religion without
   believing in it. Sceptical on the foundation of things, disdainful of
   all speculation, Cæcilius holds to the established religion only
   through decency and habit, and because the dogmatism of Christians
   displeased him. The schools of philosophy have only produced disputes;
   the human mind knows not how to bridge the space which separates it
   from God. The wiser give it up. What shall we say of the presumption of
   certain people, drawn from the basest classes, without education or
   science, strangers to all literature, pretending to decide questions as
   to which, for centuries back, philosophy has deliberated? Is it not
   much wiser, leaving these, the higher questions, in our humility, to
   follow the worship established by our ancestors? The old ages, thanks
   to their ignorance and simplicity, had certain privileges, particularly
   that of seeing the gods near them and having them for kings. In such a
   matter antiquity is everything; the truth--that is what has been
   believed for a long time past. Rome has deserved to reign over the
   world by accepting the rites of the entire globe. How can one think of
   changing a religion so useful? This old cult has seen the beginnings of
   Rome, has defended it against the barbarians, has braved at the Capitol
   the assault of the Gauls. Would you have it that Rome should renounce
   this to please some factious people who abuse the credulity of women
   and children?

   Thanks to rare skilfulness in language, Cæcilius shows that all is
   fabulous and yet true in what concerns divination, the cults, the
   miraculous cures, and the dreams. His position is that of Celsus. At
   bottom he is an Epicurean; he believes little in Providence or
   supernatural interventions; but his attachment to the religion of the
   State renders him crafty.

   "Man and the animals are born, live and grow by a sort of spontaneous
   concretion of elements which divide, dissolve, dissipate. Everything
   comes back on itself, returns to its source, without any being playing
   in that the position of fabricator, judge or creator. Thus the reunion
   of the fiery elements makes suns shine unceasingly, and then other suns
   still. Thus the vapours which are extracted from the earth are gathered
   together in masses, rise to the clouds and fall in rains. The winds
   whistle, the hail rattles, the thunder rolls in the breaking of the
   clouds, the lightnings shine, the thunderbolts gleam; all this athwart
   and across; the lightning smites the mountains, strikes the trees,
   touches without distinction sacred and profane spots, slays guilty men,
   and often religious men. What shall we say of those blind and
   capricious forces, which hurry away everything without order and
   without trial; in shipwrecks, the fate of good and evil confounded,
   merits made ex æquo; in fires, the innocent surprised by death as well
   as the guilty; when the sky is infected with pestilential virus, death
   without distinction to all; in the midst of the fury of battle, the
   bravest falling; in time of peace, wickedness not only equal to virtue,
   but privileged so much so that many ask whether it is better to detest
   their wickedness or to ask the good fortune of these for themselves? If
   the world were governed by a higher Providence, and by the authority of
   some divinity, would Phalaris and Dionysius have deserved the crown,
   Rutilius and Carmilla exile, or Socrates poison? Look at the trees
   covered with fruits, a harvest, and an exuberant vintage; the rain
   spoils everything, the hail breaks everything; so true is it the truth
   is concealed and forbidden to us, or rather that chance without law
   reigns alone across the infinite unreachable variety of cases."

   The picture which Cæcilius, interpreter of the prejudices of high Roman
   society, made of the Christian morals was most gloomy. They had reason
   for hiding themselves--these sectaries; it is that they dare not show
   themselves. Their secret and nocturnal assemblies are only conventicles
   for infamous pleasures. Disdaining all that is honourable, the
   priesthood, the purple, public honours, incapable of saying a word in
   honourable assemblies, they take refuge in corners to dogmatise. These
   people in rags, and half naked! O height of audacity! despising present
   torments through belief in torments future and uncertain. Through fear
   of dying after their death, they do not fear to die now.

   "They know each other by marks or secret signs; they almost love each
   other before being known. Then debauch becomes their religion, the bond
   which binds them together. They are called without distinction brothers
   and sisters, so that by the use of this sacred name that which would
   only be adultery or fornication becomes incest. It is so that this vain
   and foolish superstition boasts of its crimes. If there had not been in
   these stories a foundation of truth, it is impossible that public
   report, always wise, should have spread so many monstrous tales about
   them. I have heard it said that they worship the head of the most
   ignoble beast, rendered sacred in their eyes by the most baseless
   arguments; a worthy religion in truth, and made expressly for such
   morals! Others tell. . . . If there are falsehoods there I don't know;
   there are at least the suspicions which secret and nocturnal rites
   naturally provoke. And after all, when we attribute to them the worship
   of a man punished by the last penalty for his misdeeds, as well as the
   presence in their ceremonies of the inauspicious wood of the cross,
   they only put upon their altars what befits them: they worship what
   they deserve.

   "The picture of the initiation of the neophytes is also known to be
   abominable. A child, covered with paste and flour to deceive those who
   are not in the secret, is placed before him who is about to be
   initiated. He is invited to strike him; the floury crust makes him
   believe in everything most innocently; the child dies under his secret
   blind blows; and then--oh, horror!--they greedily lick his blood, they
   tear in pieces his limbs; henceforth their federation is sealed by a
   victim--the mutual knowledge they have of their crime is the pledge of
   their silence. No one knows anything of their feast; they speak of it
   on all sides, and the discourse of our compatriot of Cirta has made it
   believed. On solemn days some people of every age, men and women, meet
   together at a banquet with the children, sisters, and mothers. After a
   plentiful repast, when the guests are heated, and drunkenness has
   excited in them the fire of incest, there passes what follows:--A dog
   is attached to the candelabra; they draw it; they make it leap from the
   place where it is attached by throwing to it a little cake. The
   candelabra is overturned; then, disembarrassed of all disagreeable
   light, in the bosom of the darkness, complaisant to all immodesties,
   they are confused by the chance or lot in copulation, with an infamous
   lubricity, all incestuous, if not in actual fact, at least by
   complicity, since the vow of all pursues that which may result from the
   act of each.

   "I pass on; for already these are enough of allegations, all or nearly
   all proved by the sole fact of the darkness of that perverse religion.
   Why, indeed, should they be obliged to conceal the object of their
   religion, such as it is, when it is proved that good loves publicity,
   and that crime alone seeks secrecy? Why have they not altars, temples,
   and known images? Why should they never speak in public? Why this
   horror for free assemblies, if what they adore with so much mystery was
   not either punishable or shameful? Who is this unique God, solitary in
   sorrow, who does not know a free nation or a kingdom, nor even the
   lowest degree of Roman superstition? Alone, the miserable Jewish
   nationality honours this one God, but at least it honours him openly
   with its temples, altars, victims, ceremonies: a poor effete God,
   dethroned, since he is now captive with his nation to the Roman
   gods. . . . The larger part of you suffer, you confess, from misery,
   cold, fatigue, hunger, and your God permits it--takes no notice of it!
   Either he does not wish to, or he cannot, succour his own; he is either
   powerless or unjust.

   "Threatenings, punishments, torments, that is your lot; the cross--it
   is not a question of adoring it but of mounting it; the fire which you
   predict and which you fear you actually submit to. Where is, then, this
   God who can save his servants when they live again, and can do nothing
   for them when they are living now? Is it by the grace of your God that
   the Romans rule, command, and are your masters?--and you during this
   time always in suspicion and disquieted. You abstain from all honest
   pleasures, you desert the fêtes, public banquets, sacred festivals. As
   if you dreaded the gods whom you deny, you hold in horror the meats
   from which a part has been cut for sacrifice, the drinks part of which
   have been poured out. You do not surround your heads with flowers, you
   refuse perfume for your bodies, reserving them for funerals. Yell deny
   even crowns to the tombs; pale, trembling, worthy of pity. . . . Thus
   unhappy you shall not rise again, and meanwhile you do not live. If,
   then, you have any wisdom, any feeling of ridicule, cease to lose
   yourselves in those heavenly spaces, and to seek anxiously the
   destinies and the secrets of the earth. It is enough to look at one's
   feet, especially for ignorant and unpolished people, without education
   and without culture, to whom it is not given to comprehend human
   things, and who with greater reason cannot have the right to speak upon
   divine things."

   The merit of the author of this curious dialogue lies in having
   diminished in no way the forces of the reasons of his adversaries.
   Celsus and Fronton have not expressed with more energy what was
   contrary to the simplest ideas of natural science in those perpetual
   announcements of the conflagration of the world by which the simple are
   frightened. The Christian ideas on the doctrine of the Resurrection are
   not criticised with less vigour. Whence comes that horror of the pyre
   and the cremation of corpses, as if the earth would not do in a few
   years what the pyre does in some hours? What does it matter if the
   corpse is broken by the beasts, or buried in the sea, or covered by the
   soil, or absorbed by the flame?

   Octavius replies weakly to these objections, inherent in some sort to
   his dogma, and which Christianity shall carry with it during the whole
   course of its existence. God, said the advocate of Christianity, has
   created the world; he can destroy it. If he has made man out of
   nothing, he can surely raise him from the dead. The doctrine of the
   conflagration is taught in the philosophical systems. If the Jews have
   been conquered it is their own fault. God has not abandoned them: it is
   they who have abandoned God.

   Octavius shows himself more subtle still when he pretends that the sign
   of the cross is the basis of all religion, and especially of the Roman
   religion; that the Roman standard is a gilded cross; that the trophy
   represents a man on a cross; that the vessel with its yards, the yoke
   of a chariot, the attitude of a man in prayer, are figures of the
   cross. His explanation of auguries and oracles by the action of
   perverse spirits is also a little childish. But he eloquently refutes
   the aristocratic prejudices of Cæcilius. The truth is the same for all;
   all can find it and ought to seek it. God is manifest in the mind;
   Providence follows with a glance of the eye cast upon the order of the
   world and man's conscience. This truth is even revealed, although
   obliterated in the Pagan traditions. At the foundation of all religions
   and all poetry is found the idea of an all-powerful Being, father of
   the gods and of men, who sees all, and is the universal cause. Octavius
   proves his thesis by some passages borrowed from Cicero. Monotheism is
   the natural religion of man, since he, in his erudition, says simply:
   "O God!" The providence of God is the "last word" of Greek philosophy,
   and especially of Plato, whose doctrine would be divine if it were not
   injured by too much complaisance for the principle of State religion.
   This principle Octavius attacks with extreme vivacity. The reasons
   drawn from the grandeur of Rome affect him little; this grandeur is
   nothing in his eyes but a tissue of violence, perfidies, and cruelties.

   Octavius excels in showing that the Christians are innocent of the
   crimes of which they are accused. They have put them to the torture;
   not one has confessed, and yet the confession would have saved them.
   The Christians are neither statues, nor temples, nor altars. They are
   right. The true temple of the Divinity is the heart of man. What
   sufferings are equivalent to a good conscience, an innocent heart? To
   practise righteousness is to pray; to cultivate virtue is to sacrifice;
   to save one's brother is the best of offerings. Among Christians, the
   most pious is the most righteous. Octavius triumphs especially in the
   courage of the martyrs.

   "What a fine spectacle for God, when the Christian fights with sorrow;
   when he gathers himself up against all menaces, punishments and
   torments; when he laughs at the horrible noise of death and the terror
   of the executioner; when he maintains his liberty before kings and
   princes; bends only before God, to whom he belongs; when, as triumphant
   and conquering, he braves him who pronounces on him his sentence of
   death! To conquer, in fact, is to know how to attain one's end! . . .
   The Christian may, therefore, appear unhappy; he never is so. You raise
   to heaven such men as Mucius Scævola, whose death was certain if he had
   not sacrificed his right hand. And how many of us have suffered without
   a complaint not only that their right hand, but that their whole body
   should be burned, when it was in their power to have saved them! . . .
   Our children, our wives play themselves with the crosses, the torments,
   the beasts, all the utensils of punishment--thanks to a patience which
   is inspired in them from on high."

   How the magistrates who preside at these horrors tremble. God does not
   allow honours and riches but to cause them to be lost; raised the
   higher, their fall shall be the heavier. There are some victims
   fattened and already crowned for death. Escorts, fasces, purple,
   nobility of blood, what vanities! All men are equal, virtue alone makes
   the difference between them.

   Conquered by these arguments, Cæcilius, without allowing Minucius time
   to conclude, declares that he believes in Providence and the religion
   of the Christians. Octavius, in his explanation, scarcely leaves pure
   Deism. He mentions neither Jesus, nor the Apostles, nor the Scriptures.
   His Christianity is not that of which the Shepherd dreams; it is a
   Christianity of men of the world who do not shun gaiety, or talent, or
   an amiable taste for life, nor a search for elegance in style. How far
   are we from the Ebionite or even the Jew of Galilee! Octavius is
   Cicero, or better, Fronton become Christian. It is really by
   intellectual culture that he arrives at Deism. He loves nature, he is
   pleased by the conversation of well-educated people. Men made upon this
   model would not have created either the Gospel or the Apocalypse, but,
   on the other hand, without such adherents, the Gospel, the Apocalypse,
   the Epistles of Paul, would have remained the secret writings of a
   narrow sect which, like the Essenes or the Therapeutics, would have
   finally disappeared.

   Minucius Felix gives even more than the Greek Apologists the tone which
   prevails among the defenders of Christianity in all ages. He is a
   skilful advocate addressing himself to people less versed in dialectics
   than the Greeks of Egypt or Asia, concealing three-fourths of his dogma
   to secure the adhesion to the whole without discussion of detail, using
   the appearances of the lettered to convert the lettered, and to
   persuade them that Christianity does not compel them to renounce the
   philosophies and the writers whom they admire. "Philosophers,
   Christians . . . . but what? it is only one and the same thing. Dogmas
   repugnant to reason! . . . . come, then! but the Christian dogma is in
   its own terms what Zeno, Aristotle, Plato said, and nothing more. You
   treat us as barbarians; but we cultivate the good authors as well as
   you do." Of special beliefs in religion as it is preached, not a word;
   to inculcate Christianity they avoid pronouncing the name of Christ.
   Minucius Felix is the preacher of Notre Dame, speaking to people of the
   world easy to please, making himself all things to all men, studying
   the weaknesses and the fancies of the people he wishes to conquer,
   affecting under his cope of lead the behaviour of the easy man,
   straining his symbol to render it acceptable. Make a Christian upon the
   faith of this pious sophist, nothing could be better, but remember that
   all this was a bait. The next day he who was represented as accessory
   shall become the principal; the bitter bark which they have wished to
   make you swallow in small compass and reduced to its simplest
   expression shall recover all its bitterness. They had told you that the
   gallant man, to be a Christian, has scarcely any need to change his
   maxims; now that the trick is played, they tell you to pay as
   superaddition an enormous sum. This religion, which was, they say, only
   natural morals, implies over the market price an impossible physique, a
   bizarre metaphysic, a chimerical history, a theory of divine and human
   things which is in everything contrary to reason.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXIII.

  PROGRESS OF ORGANISATION.

   In the midst of circumstances so difficult in appearance, the
   organisation of the Church was completed with a surprising rapidity. At
   the point at which we have arrived, the Church of Jesus is something
   solid and substantial. The great danger of Gnosticism, which was to
   divide Christianity into sects without number, is exorcised. The word
   Catholic Church flashes from all quarters like the name of that great
   body, which will henceforth pass through the ages without breaking to
   pieces. And we can see well already what is the character of this
   Catholicity. The Montanists are looked upon as sectaries, the
   Marcionists are conquered by straining the Apostolic teaching, the
   different Gnostic schools are being more and more repelled from the
   bosom of the general Church. There is then something which is neither
   Montanism nor Marcionism, nor Gnosticism, which is unsectarian
   Christianity; the Christianity of the majority of the bishops resisting
   heresies and using them all, not having, if it be desired, anything
   except negative characters, but preserved by those negative characters
   from pietistic aberrations and from the rationalistic solvent.
   Christianity, like all who wished to live, puts itself under discipline
   and retrenches its own excess. It joins to mystic enthusiasm a fund of
   good sense and moderation which shall kill Millenarianism, the
   charismas, the speaking with tongues and all spiritual primitive
   phenomena. A handful of enthusiasts, like the Montanists, rushing to
   martyrdom, discouraging penitence, condemning marriage, is not the
   Church. The just mean triumphs; it shall not be given to radicals of
   any sort to destroy the work of Jesus. The Church is always of average
   opinion, she is the affair of all the world, not the privilege of an
   aristocracy. The pietistic aristocracy of the Phrygian sects and the
   speculative aristocracy of the Gnostics are equally dismissed with
   their claims. There are in the Church the perfect and the imperfect,
   all can have part in it. Martyrdom, fasting, and celibacy are excellent
   things, but one can without heroism be a Christian and a good
   Christian.

   It was the Episcopate without any intervention of the civil power,
   without any support from police or tribunals, which established order
   above liberty in a society founded at first upon individual
   inspiration. That is why the Ebonites of Syria, who had no Episcopacy,
   had not the idea of Catholicity either. At the first glance the work of
   Jesus was not born viable; it was a chaos. Founded upon a belief in the
   end of the world, which the years rolling by ought to convince of
   error, the Galilean assembly appeared only to be capable of breaking up
   into anarchy. Free prophecy, the charismas, the speaking with tongues
   and individual inspiration; this was more than was necessary for all to
   be confined within the proportions of an ephemeral chapel, as one sees
   so much of in America and England. Individual inspiration created, but
   destroyed at once what it had created. After liberty, rule was
   necessary. The work of Jesus might be considered saved on the day in
   which it was admitted that the Church had a direct power--a power of
   presenting that of Jesus. The Church from that moment dominated the
   individual, and chased him if need were from his own. Soon the Church,
   a body unstable and changing, was personified in the Elders; the powers
   of the Church became the powers of a clergy, the dispensatory of all
   the graces, the intermediary between God and the believer. Inspiration
   passes from the individual to the community. The Church has become
   everything in Christianity; one step more and the bishop becomes
   everything in the Church. Obedience to the Church, then to the bishop,
   is set forth as the first of duties, innovation is the mask of the
   false, schism shall henceforth be for the Christian the worst of
   crimes.

   Thus the Primitive Church had at the same time order and excessive
   liberty. The pedantry of scholasticism was as yet unknown. The Catholic
   Church quickly accepted the fertile ideas which took birth among the
   heretics, keeping back what they contain of sectarianism. The
   spontaneity of theology surpassed everything which has been seen later.
   Without speaking of the Gnostics who pushed fancy to the utmost limits,
   St. Justin, the author of the Confessions, Pseudo-Hermas, Marcion, and
   those innumerable masters appeared from all parts, cutting out the full
   dress, if one may express it so; each one made a Christology according
   to his own fancy. But in the midst of the enormous variety of opinions
   which filled the first Christian age, there was constituted a fixed
   point, the opinion of Catholicism. To convince the heretic it is not
   necessary to reason with him. It is sufficient to show him that he is
   not in communion with the Catholic Church, with the great churches
   which can reckon the succession of their bishops up to the apostles.
   Quod semper, quod ubique became the absolute rule of truth. The
   argument of prescription, to which Tertullian shall give such an
   eloquent form, sums up all the Catholic controversy. To prove to any
   one that he is an innovator, one lately come into theology, is to prove
   that he is in the wrong. An insufficient rule, since by a singular
   irony of fate the very doctor who developed this method of refutation
   in a style so imperious died a heretic!

   The correspondence between the churches became soon a habit. The
   circular letters from the chiefs of the great churches, read on Sunday
   to the assembly of the faithful, were a continuation of the apostolic
   literature. The Church, like the synagogue and the mosque, is a thing
   essentially city-like. Christianity (we might almost say as much of
   Judaism and Islamism) shall be a religion of towns, not a religion of
   rustics. The countryman, the paganus, shall be the last resistance
   which Christianity shall encounter. The Christian rustics, not very
   numerous, went to church at the nearest town.

   The Roman town thus became the cradle of the Church, as the country
   districts and the little towns received the Gospel from the great
   towns. They received also their clergy from them, always subject to the
   bishop of th e large town. Among the towns the civitas alone had a real
   church, with an Episcopos; the little town was in ecclesiastical
   dependence upon the large town. This primacy of the great towns was a
   principal fact. The great town once converted, the little town and the
   country followed the movement. The diocese was thus the original unity
   of the Christian conglomerate.

   As to the ecclesiastical province, implying the precedence of the great
   churches over the small, it corresponds in general to the Roman
   province. The founder of the limits of Christianity was Augustus, the
   divisions of the worship of Rome and of Augustus were the secret law
   which ruled everything. The towns, which had a flamen or archiereus,
   were those which later on were an arch-bishopric; the flamen civitatis
   became the bishopric. At the beginning of the third century the flamen
   duumvir occupies in the city the rank which a hundred or a hundred and
   fifty years after was that of the bishop in the diocese. Julian tried
   later on to oppose these flamens to the Christian bishops and the curés
   to the augustates.

   It is thus that the ecclesiastical geography of a country is very
   nearly the same in almost everything as the geography of the same
   country at the Roman epoch. The picture of the bishoprics and
   archbishoprics is that of the ancient civitates according to their
   bonds of subordination. The empire was like the mould where the new
   religion coagulated. The interior framework, the hierarchical
   divisions, were those of the empire. The ancient positions in the Roman
   administration, and the registers of the Church in the middle ages and
   even in our days, scarcely differ.

   Rome was the point where this great idea of Catholicism elaborated
   itself. Its Church had an undisputed primacy. It owed that partly to
   its holiness and its excellent reputation. Everybody recognised now
   that this Church had been founded by the apostles Peter and Paul; that
   these two apostles had suffered martyrdom at Rome, that John even had
   there been plunged into boiling oil. They showed the places sanctified
   by these apostolic acts, partly true and partly false. All this
   surrounded the Church of Rome with an unequalled halo. Doubtful
   questions were brought to Rome to receive arbitration, if not solution.
   They led this argument, that, since Christ had made of Cephas the
   corner-stone of his Church, this privilege should be extended to his
   successors. The bishop of Rome became the bishop of bishops, he who
   admonished the others. Pope Victor (189-199) pushed this claim to an
   excess which the wise Irenaeus restrained. But the blow was struck,
   Rome had proclaimed her right (dangerous right!) to excommunicate those
   who did not move in everything with her. The poor Artemonites (a sort
   of anticipative Arians) had complained much of the injustice of the lot
   which made heretics of them, while up to Victor's time all the Church
   of Rome thought with him. The Church of Rome put itself from that time
   above history. The spirit which, in 1870, shall proclaim the
   infallibility of the Pope may be recognised already from the end of the
   second century by certain signs. The work, of which the fragment known
   under the name of Canon de Muratori, written at Rome about 180, shows
   us already Rome ruling the Canon of the churches, giving for a basis to
   Catholicism the Passion of Peter, repelling alike Montanism and
   Gnosticism. The attempts at symbols of the faith also commenced, in the
   Roman Church, about this time. Irenæus refuted all the heresies by the
   faith of this Church, "the greatest, the most ancient, the most
   illustrious; which possesses, by a continued succession, the true
   tradition of the apostles Peter and Paul; to which, by reason of its
   primacy, the rest of the Church should defer." Every Church reputed to
   have been founded by an apostle had a privilege; what should be said of
   the Church which was believed to have been founded by the two greatest
   apostles at once?

   This precedence of the Church of Rome did nothing but increase to the
   third century. The bishops of Rome showed a rare ability, avoiding
   theological questions, but always in the first rank in the questions of
   organisation and administration. Pope Cornelius conducted everything in
   the matter of Novatianism: we can see this especially in removing the
   bishops of Italy and giving them successors. Rome was thus the central
   authority of the churches of Africa. Aurelian, in 272, judges that the
   real bishop of Antioch is he who is in correspondence with the bishop
   of Rome. When is this superiority of the Church of Rome to suffer an
   eclipse? When Rome ceases to be really the unique capital of the
   empire, at the end of the third century: when the centre of great
   affairs is transported to Nicæa, to Nicomedia, and especially when the
   Emperor Constantine creates a new Rome on the Bosphorus. The Church of
   Rome, from Constantine to Charlemagne, had really fallen from what it
   was in the second and third century. It rose more powerful than ever
   when, by its alliance with the Carlovingian house, it became for eight
   centuries the centre of all the great affairs of the West.

   We may say that the organisation of the churches has known five degrees
   of advancement, of which four have been traversed in the period
   embraced by this work. First, the primitive ecclesia, where all the
   members are equally inspired by the Spirit. Then the elders presbyteri
   taking in the ecclesia a right of considerable power and absorbing the
   ecclesia. Then the president of the elders, the episcopos, absorbs in a
   little nearly all the powers of the elders, and consequently those of
   the ecclesia. Then the episcopi of the different churches,
   corresponding to them, form the Catholic Church. Between the episcopi
   there was one, that of Rome, which was evidently destined to a great
   future. The Pope, the Church of Jesus transformed in monarchy with Rome
   for its capital, may be perceived in a distant obscurity; but the
   principle of this last transformation is still weak to the end of the
   second century. Let us add that this transformation has not had, like
   others, the universal character. The Latin Church alone is favoured by
   it, and even, in the bosom of this Church, the tentative of the papacy
   ended by bringing in revolt and protestation.

   Thus the grand organisms which still form such an essential part of the
   moral and political life of the European peoples have all been created
   by these artless and sincere men, whose faith has become inseparable
   from the moral culture of humanity.

   At the end of the second century the episcopate is thoroughly ripe, the
   papacy exists in germ. The oecumenical councils were impossible; the
   Christian could alone permit of those great assemblies: but the
   provincial synod was used in the Montanist and Easter affairs: the
   presidence of the bishop of the provincial capital was admitted without
   contest. An active epistolary correspondence was, in the apostolic age,
   the soul and condition of the whole movement. In the case of
   Novatianism, about 252, the different provincial assemblies,
   communicating with each other, constitute a true council by
   correspondence, having the Pope Cornelius as president. In the process
   against Privatus, bishop of Lambesa, and in the question of the baptism
   of heretics, things passed in the same way.

   A writing which shows well the rapid progress of this internal movement
   of the churches towards the constitution, let us rather say towards the
   exaggeration of the hierarchical authority, is the supposed
   correspondence of Ignatius, of which the reasonable letter of Polycarp
   is perhaps an appendix. One can suppose that these writings appear
   about the time at which we have arrived. Who better than these two
   great bishop martyrs, whose memory was everywhere revered, could
   counsel the faithful to submit to order?

   "Obey the bishop as Jesus Christ obeys the Father, and the presbyterial
   body like the apostles; revere the deacons like the very commandment of
   God. Let nothing which concerns the Church be done without the bishop.
   As to the act of the Eucharist, that ought to be held as good which is
   administered by the bishop or by him to whom he has entrusted the duty.

   "Then where the bishop is visible, let the people be; even as where
   Christ Jesus is, there is the Catholic Church. It is not permitted to
   baptize nor to make the agape without the bishop; the episcopal
   approbation is the mark of what pleases God, the firm and sure rule to
   follow in practice.

   "It is seemly therefore that you should support the bishop, as also you
   do. For your venerable presbyterial body, worthy of God, is with the
   bishop in the same harmonious sympathy as the chords to the harp. It is
   by the effect of your union and your affectionate concord that Jesus
   Christ is praised. Let each one of you be then as in a chorus, so that,
   in full accord and unanimous, receiving the chromatique from God in
   perfect unity, you sing with one voice through Jesus Christ to the
   Father, so that he hears you and recognises you, by your good actions,
   as members of his Son."

   Already the name of Paul and his relations with Titus and Timothy had
   been used to give to the Church a kind of little canonical code upon
   the duties of the faithful and the clergy. They did the same under the
   name of Ignatius. A piety quite ecclesiastical took the place of the
   ardour which, during more than a hundred years, kept up the memory of
   Jesus. Orthodoxy is now the sovereign good; docility is what saves; the
   old man must bow before the bishop as well as the young. The bishop
   ought to occupy himself with everything, and know the names of all his
   subordinates. Thus, by force of pushing to their extreme the principles
   of Paul, they arrived at some ideas which would have revolted Paul. He
   who would not that he should be saved by his works, would he have
   admitted that he could be saved by simple submission to his superiors
   On other points, pseudo-Ignatius is a very genuine disciple of the
   great apostle. At an equal distance from Judaism and Gnosticism, he is
   one of those who speaks in the most exalted manner of the divinity of
   Jesus Christ. Christianism is for him, as for the author of the Epistle
   Diognetes, a religion entirely separate from Mosaism. All the primitive
   distinctions have, besides, disappeared before the dominant tendency
   which drew the most opposed parties towards unity. Pseudo-Ignatius
   gives the hand to the Judeo-Christian pseudo-Clement, to preach
   obedience and respect for authority.

   A very striking example of this abdication of differences which had
   filled the Church of Christ for more than a hundred years was that
   given by Hegesippus. Having left Ebionism, but fully received by the
   orthodox Church, this respectable old man completed at Rome his five
   books of "Memoirs," the first basis of ecclesiastical history. The work
   commenced with the death of Jesus Christ. It is doubtful, however,
   whether it is written in chronological order. In many points of view,
   it was a polemical book against heresies, and the apocryphal
   revelations written by the Gnostics and Marcionites. Hegesippus showed
   that many of these apocryphas were composed quite recently.

   The memoirs of Hegesippus would have been priceless to us, and their
   loss is not less regrettable than those of the writings of Papias. It
   was the whole treasury of the Ebionite traditions, rendered acceptable
   to the Catholics, and presented in a spirit of lively opposition to the
   Gnosis. What concerns the Jewish sects and the family of Jesus was much
   developed, evidently according to some special information. Hegesippus,
   whose mother-tongue was Hebrew, and who did not receive a Hellenic
   education, had the credulity of a Talmudist. He is repelled by no
   bizarrerie. His style appeared to the Greeks simple and dull, doubtless
   because he had borrowed from the Hebrew, like him of the Acts of the
   Apostles. We have had a curious specimen of it in this story of the
   death of James, a piece of such a singular tone that one is tempted to
   believe that it has been borrowed from an Ebionite work written in
   rhymed Hebrew.

   No one was less like a sectary than the pious Hegesippus. The idea of
   Catholicism held a place in his mind such as with the author of the
   pseudo-Ignatian epistles. His object is to prove to the heretics the
   truth of the Christian doctrine, by showing them that it has been
   taught uniformly in all the churches, and that it had always been
   taught in the same manner since the apostles. Heresy, starting from
   that of Thebuthis (?), arises from pride or ambition. The Roman Church,
   in particular, has replaced for authority the old Jewish discipline,
   and created in the West a centre of unity like that which constituted
   at the very first in the East the episcopate of the parents of Jesus,
   issued like him from the race of David.

   We see that the old Ebion was much sweetened. After Hegesippus we do
   not see this variety of Christianity, unless it be in the heart of
   Syria. There Julius Africanus, about 215, found still some primitive
   Nazarenes, and received from them traditions very analogous to those
   among which Hegesippus lived. The latter underwent some progress, or
   rather some narrowing of orthodoxy. They read him little and they
   copied him less. Origen and St. Hippolytus did not know of his
   existence. Only the curious in history, like Eusebius, would know him,
   and from these precious pages those have been saved which the more
   modern chonographers have inserted in their pages.

   Another sign of maturity is the epistle addressed to a certain
   Diognetus, a fictitious personage, no doubt, by an eloquent and fairly
   good anonymous writer, who recalls sometimes Celsus and Lucian. The
   author supposes his Diognetus to be animated by a desire to know "the
   new religion." The Christians, replied the apologists, are at an equal
   distance both from Greek idolatry and from superstition, a disquieted
   spirit, and from the vanity of the Jews. All the work of the Greek
   philosophy is but a mass of absurdities and charlatan tricks. The Jews,
   on the other side, had the habit of honouring the one God in the same
   manner as the polytheists adored their gods; that is to say, by
   sacrifices, as if that could be agreeable to him. Their over-scrupulous
   precautions as to food, their superstition as to the Sabbath, their
   boasting in regard to circumcision, their paltry preoccupation as to
   fasts and new moons, were ridiculous. It is not permitted that one
   should distinguish between the things which God has created, to
   consider the one pure, and to reject the others as useless and
   superfluous. To pretend that God forbids to do on the Sabbath day an
   action which has nothing dishonourable, what could be more impious? To
   present the mutilation of the flesh as a sign of election, and to
   imagine that, for that, God would love him, what could be more
   grotesque?

   "As to the mystery of the Christian religion, no one may hope to
   understand it. The Christians indeed are not distinguished from other
   men either by country, by tongue, or by manners; they do not dwell in
   towns of their own, nor do they use a separate dialect; their life is
   not marked by any particular asceticism; they do not lightly adopt the
   fancies and dreams of disturbed minds; they do not attach themselves,
   as so many others, to sects bearing this or that name; but dwelling in
   the Greek and barbarian towns, just as fortune places them, conform
   themselves to the local customs in the habits, government, and other
   things of life, astonishing everybody by the truly admirable
   organisation of their republic. They dwell in some special countries,
   but in the manner of people who are only on a visit; they share in the
   duties of the citizens, and they support the charges of strangers.
   Every foreign land is to them a native country, and every country is to
   them a foreign land. They marry, as all others do, and have children;
   but they never abandon their new-born babes. They eat in common, but
   their table is not common for all that. They are in the flesh, yet do
   not live according to the flesh. They remain on the earth, but are
   citizens of heaven. They obey the established laws, and by their
   principles of life they are raised above the laws. They love everybody,
   and they are persecuted by everybody, misunderstood, and condemned.
   They meet death, and through that are assured of life. They are poor
   and they enrich others; they want everything and yet abound. They are
   crushed down with insults, and by the insults they arrive at glory.
   They are calumniated and the moment after they proclaim their justice;
   injured, they bless; they reply to insult by respect; doing nothing but
   good, they are punished as malefactors; punished, they rejoice as if
   they had been gratified with life. The Jews make war on them as on the
   Gentiles; they are persecuted by the Greeks, and those who hate them
   cannot say why.

   "In short, that which the soul is in the body the Christians are in the
   world. The soul is diffused among all the members of the body, and the
   Christians are diffused among all the towns in the world. The soul
   lives in the body, and yet it is not of the body; in the same way the
   Christians dwell in the world without being of the world. The invisible
   soul is held prisoner in the visible body; besides, the presence of the
   Christians in the world is of public notoriety: but their worship is
   invisible. The flesh hates the soul and fights with it, without doing
   it any other harm than to keep it from enjoyment. The world also hates
   the Christians, although the Christians do no harm except make
   opposition to pleasure. The soul loves the flesh which hates it; in the
   same way the Christians love those who detest them. The soul is
   imprisoned in the body, and yet it is the bond which preserves the
   body. In like manner the Christians are held in the prison of the
   world, and yet they are those who maintain the world. The immortal soul
   dwells in a mortal body; thus the Christians are provisionally
   domiciled in corruptible habitations, waiting for the incorruptibility
   of heaven. The soul is softened by the sufferings of hunger and thirst;
   the Christians, punished every day, multiply more and more. God has
   assigned to them a post which he will not permit them to desert."

   The spiritual apologist puts his own finger on the explanation of the
   phenomenon which he would represent as supernatural. Christianity and
   the empire are looked on as two animals which would devour each other
   without giving an account of the causes of their hostility. When a
   society of men takes up such an attitude in the bosom of a great
   society, when it becomes in the State a separate republic, supposing it
   were composed of angels, it is a pest. It is not without reason that
   they were detested, these men in appearance so gentle and well-doing.
   They really demolished the Roman empire; they absorbed its energy; they
   laid hold of its functions, in the army especially, as its choicest
   subjects. It does not serve to say that the Christian was a good
   citizen because he paid his contributions, and that he was generous in
   alms, and steady, when he is really a citizen of heaven, and when he
   considers the terrestrial fatherland only as a prison in which he is
   chained side by side with wretches. The fatherland is an earthly thing;
   he who would become an angel is always a poor patriot. Religious
   enthusiasm is bad for the State. The martyr may maintain that he does
   not rebel, that he is the most submissive of subjects; the fact of
   anticipating penalties, of putting the State to the alternative of
   persecuting him or subjecting the law to the theocracy, is more
   prejudicial to the State than the worst of revolts. It is never without
   reason that he is the object of every one's hatred; nations have, in
   that matter, an instinct which never deceives. The Roman empire felt,
   at bottom, that this secret republic was killing it. Let us hasten to
   add that, by persecuting it violently, it permitted itself to act on
   the worst policy, and that it accelerated the result while wishing to
   prevent it.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXIV.

  SCHOOLS OF ALEXANDRIA AND EDESSA.

   Many things were ended; others had begun; the school and books replaced
   tradition. No one had any longer a claim to have seen either the
   apostles or their immediate disciples. Reasonings such as that set
   forth by Papias forty years back, that disdain for books, and that
   avowed preference for the people who had known the original, would pass
   no longer. Hegesippus shall be the last who shall make journeys to
   study on the spot the doctrine of the churches. Irenæus found these
   researches useless. The Church is a vast depot of truth from which one
   has but to draw. If we except the barbarians who did not know how to
   write, no one had any more need to consult oral tradition.

   They set themselves therefore resolutely to write; the doctor, the
   ecclesiastical scribe, replaced the traditionist; the time for the
   creation of beginnings has gone by; ecclesiastical history commences;
   we say ecclesiastical, and not clerical. The doctor, in fact, at the
   time at which we have arrived, is very often a layman. Justin, Tatian,
   Athenagoras, and the majority of the apologists are neither bishops nor
   deacons. The doctors of the school of Alexandria have a distinct place
   outside of the clerical hierarchy; the institution of the catechumenate
   served to the development of that institution. Some postulants, often
   educated people, prepared outside of the Church for acceptance by
   baptism, demanded a separate instruction more accurate than that of the
   faithful. Origen is the catechist and preacher, with the permission of
   the bishop of Cæsarea, without having any defined rank among the
   clergy. St. Jerome shall hold a situation analogous to this, which,
   even in his time, is full of difficulties. It was natural indeed that,
   little by little, the Church should absorb the ecclesiastical teaching,
   and that the doctor should become a member of the clergy subordinated
   to the bishop.

   We have seen that Alexandria, through the disputes on Gnosticism, and
   perhaps in imitation of the Muséon, had a catechetical school of sacred
   letters, distinct from the Church, and some doctors to comment upon the
   scriptures sensibly. This school, a species of Christian university,
   was prepared to become the centre of the movement of all theology. A
   young Cecilian convert named Pantænus was the chief of it, and carried
   into the sacred instruction a breadth of ideas which no Christian chair
   had as yet known. Everything pleased him--philosophers, heresies, and
   the strangest religions. Out of them all he made his honey, Gnostic in
   the best sense, but removed from the chimeras which Gnosticism nearly
   always implied. From this moment there were grouped around him some
   youths at once lettered and Christian, especially the young convert
   Clement, about twenty years of age, and Alexander, the future bishop of
   Jerusalem, who played, in the first half of the third century, a rôle
   so considerable. The vocation of Pantænus was especially oral teaching;
   his voice had a peculiar charm; he left among his disciples more
   celebrated than himself a profound feeling. Not less favourable than
   Justin to philosophy, he conceived of Christianity as the worship of
   all that is beautiful. Of happy genius, brilliant, luminous, kindly to
   all, he was in his age the most liberal and open spirit the Church had
   possessed till then; and he marked the dawn of an extraordinary
   intellectual movement, perhaps superior to all the attempts of
   rationalism which have ever been produced in the heart of Christianity.
   Origen, at the date at which we stand, is not born yet, but his father,
   Leonidas, nourished in his heart that ardent idealism which made a
   martyr of him and the first master of that son whose bosom he shall
   kiss during his sleep as the temple of the Holy Spirit.

   The Pagan East did not always inspire in Christians the same antipathy
   as Greece. The Egyptian Polytheism, for example, was treated by them
   with less severity than the Hellenic Polytheism. The Sibylline poet of
   the second century announces at Isis and Serapis the end of their reign
   with more sadness than insult. His imagination is struck by the
   conversion of an Egyptian priest who in his turn shall convert his
   compatriots. He speaks in enigmatical terms of a great temple raised to
   the true God, who shall make out of Egypt a sort of holy land which
   shall not be destroyed till the end of time.

   The East, on its side, always given to syncretism, and by advance in
   sympathy with all that which bears the character of disinterested
   speculation, rendered to Christianity this large tolerance. If we
   should compare to the strict patriotism of a Celsus, a Fronton, the
   open mind of a thinker such as Numenius of Apamea, what a difference!
   Without being exactly Christian or Jew, Numenius admires Moses and
   Philo. He equalled Philo to Plato; he called the latter an ancient
   Moses; he knew even the apocryphal compositions on Jamnes and Mambre.
   To the study of Plato and Pythagoras, philosophy ought, according to
   him, to unite the knowledge of Brahman, Jewish, magical, and Egyptian
   institutions. The result of the inquiry, we may say in advance, will be
   that all these people are in accord with Plato. As Philo allegorises
   the Old Testament, Numenius explains symbolically certain facts in the
   life of Jesus Christ. He admits that the Greek philosophy is originally
   from the East, and owes the true notion of God to the Egyptians and the
   Hebrews; he proclaims this philosophy insufficient, even in its most
   venerated masters. Justin and the author of the Epistle to Diognetes
   said scarcely anything more. Numenius, however, does not belong to the
   Church; the sympathy and admiration for a doctrine did not in an
   eclectic carry him to a formal adhesion to this doctrine. Numenius is
   one of the precursors of Neo-platonism; it is by him that the influence
   of Philo and a certain knowledge of Christianity penetrated into the
   school of Alexandria. Ammonius Saccas, at the time when we finish this
   history, perhaps frequents the Church from which philosophy shall not
   delay to make him depart. Clement, Ammonius, Origen, Plotin! What a
   century is to open for the city which nourishes all these great men,
   and becomes more and more the intellectual capital of the East!

   Syria numbered many of these independent spirits who showed themselves
   favourable to Christianity, without on that account embracing it. Such
   was that Mara, son of Serapion, who looked on Jesus as an excellent
   legislator, and admitted that the destruction of the nationality of the
   Jews had arisen from their having put to death "their wise king." Such
   was also Longinus, or the author, whoever he may be, of the treatise,
   On the Sublime, who read with admiration the first pages of Genesis,
   and places the expression, "Let light be and light was" among the most
   beautiful words he knows.

   The most original among the mobile and sincere minds which the
   Christian law charmed, but not in a style exclusive enough to make them
   detach themselves from everything else and make of them simple members
   of the Church, was Bardesanes of Edessa. He was, if one may so express
   it, a man of the world, rich, amiable, liberal, educated, well placed
   at court, versed at once in Chaldean science and Hellenic culture, a
   sort of Numenius, acquainted with all the philosophies, all religions,
   and all the sects. He was sincerely Christian; he was even an ardent
   preacher of Christianity, almost a missionary; but all the Christian
   schools he went through lacked something to his mind; no one took
   possession of him. Marcion alone, with his austere asceticism,
   displeased him thoroughly. Valentinianism, on the contrary, in its
   Oriental form, was the teaching to which he always returned. He
   delighted in the syzgies of æons and denied the resurrection of the
   body. He preferred to this material conception the views of Greek
   spiritualism on pre-existence and the survival of the soul. The soul,
   according to him, is neither born nor dies; the body is only a passing
   instrument. Jesus had not a true body; he was united to a phantom. It
   seems that towards the end of his life Bardesanes came nearer the
   Catholics; but, definitively, orthodoxy repelled him. After having
   fascinated his own generation by his brilliant preaching, by his ardent
   idealism, and by his personal charm, he was covered with anathemas;
   they classed him among the Gnostics, he who never wished to be classed
   at all.

   One only of Bardesanes' treatises found favour among orthodox readers;
   it was a dialogue in which he combated the worst errors of the East,
   the Chaldean error, astrological fatalism. The form of the Socratic
   conversations pleased Bardesanes. He liked to pose before the public
   surrounded by his friends, and discussing with them the highest
   problems of philosophy. One of his disciples named Philip drew out or
   was thought to have drawn out the conservation. In the dialogue on
   fatality, the principal interlocutor of Bardesanes is a certain Aoueid
   tainted by the errors of astrology. The author opposes to these a truly
   scientific reasoning: "If man is dominated by means and circumstances,
   how is it that the same should produce human developments quite
   different from each other? If man is dominated by race, how can a
   nation changing its religion, for example, making itself Christian,
   become quite different from what it was?" The interesting details which
   the author gives on the manners of unknown countries piqued curiosity.
   The last editor of the romance of the Confessions, then Eusebius, then
   St. Cesaire, made capital out of it. It is singular that, being in
   possession of such a writing, we should still ask what Bardesanes
   thought upon the question of the influence of the stars on the acts of
   men, and in the events of history. The dialogue expresses itself on
   this point with all the clearness which one could desire. Yet St.
   Ephrem, Diodorus and Antiochus combat Bardesanes as if he had accepted
   the errors of his masters of Chaldea. Sometimes his school would appear
   as a profane school of astronomy as much as of theology. It pretended
   to fix by certain calculations the duration of the world at six
   thousand years. It admitted the existence of sidereal spirits residing
   in the seven planets, especially in the sun and moon, whose monthly
   union preserves the world by giving it new forces.

   What Bardesanes was without contradiction was the creator of Christian
   Syriac literature. Syriac was his tongue; although he knew Greek he did
   not write in that idiom. The work necessary to render the Aramean idiom
   flexible for the expression of philosophical ideas belongs entirely to
   him. His works, moreover, were translated into Greek by his pupils
   under his own eyes. Allied to the royal family of Edessa, having been,
   as it appears, educated as the companion of Abgar VIII. bar Manou, who
   was a fervent Christian, he contributed powerfully to the extirpation
   of Pagan customs, and had a most important social and literary
   position. Poetry had always been awanting in Syria; the old Aramean
   idioms had only known the old Semitic parallelism. Bardesanes composed,
   in imitation of Valentin, a hundred and fifty hymns, of which the
   cadenced rhythm, partly imitated from Greek, fascinated everybody,
   especially young people. It was at once philosophical, poetical,
   Christian. The strophe was composed of eleven or twelve verses of five
   syllables, scanned according to the accent. They sang the hymns in
   chorus, to the accompaniment of the cithara, to Greek airs. The
   civilising influence of this beautiful music was considerable. Nearly
   all Osrhoene became Christian. Unfortunately Abgar IX., son of Abgar
   VIII., was dethroned in 216 by Caracalla; this phenomenon of a little
   principality founded on the principles of a liberal Christianity,
   disappeared; Christianity continued to make some progress in Syria, but
   in the orthodox direction, and by giving up every day more of the
   speculative liberties which were at first allowed it.

   The connections of Bardesanes with the Roman empire are obscure.
   According to certain appearances the persecutions of the last years of
   Marcus-Aurelius gave him the idea of presenting an apology to that
   emperor. Perhaps it was in connection with Caracalla or Heliogabalus,
   whom it is very easy to confound in the texts with Marcus-Aurelius. It
   seems that he composed a dialogue between himself and a certain
   Apollonius, a special friend of the emperor, in which this latter asks
   that he should deny the Christian name. Bardesanes replied courageously
   like Demetrius the Cynic: "Obedience to the orders of the emperor does
   not relieve me from the necessity of dying."

   Bardesanes left a son, named Harmonius, whom he had sent to study at
   Athens, and who continued the school, making it lean still more to the
   side of Hellenism. In imitation of his father he expressed the most
   elevated ideas of Greek philosophy in Syriac hymns. There resulted from
   all this a discipline too marked in respect to the medium which
   Christianity allowed. It was necessary to be a member of such a Church,
   to have intellect and instruction. The worthy Syrians were frightened.
   The fate of Bardesanes much resembled that of Paul of Samosata. They
   treated him as a dangerous charmer, a woman seducer, irresistible in
   private. His hymns, like the Thalia of Arius, were treated as a magical
   work. Later, St. Ephrem found no other means to dethrone these hymns,
   and to keep children from their charm, than to compose orthodox hymns
   to the same airs. From that time, whenever there was produced in the
   Church of Syria any remarkable person having independence of mind and a
   great knowledge of the Scriptures, they said with terror, "This will be
   a Bardesanes."

   His talent and the services he rendered were, however, not forgotten.
   His birthday was marked in the Chronicle of Edessa among the great
   anniversaries of the city. His school lasted during all the third
   century, but produced no very celebrated man. Later on, the germ of
   dualism which was in the teaching of the master approached the
   Manichæan school. The Byzantine chroniclers and their disciples the
   Arabic polygraphists constituted a sort of trinity of evil, composed of
   Marcion, Ibn-Daïsan and Manes. The name "Daïsanites" became synonymous
   with atheist, zendik; those Daïsanites were reckoned as Mussulmans
   among the secret sects affiliated to Parseeism, the cursed trunk of all
   heresies.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXV.

  STATISTICS AND GEOGRAPHICAL EXTENSION OF CHRISTIANITY.

   In a hundred and fifty years the prophecy of Jesus was accomplished.
   The grain of mustard seed had become a tree which began to cover the
   world. In the hyperbolic language which is customary in such a matter,
   Christianity had spread "everywhere." St. Justin had affirmed already,
   about 150, that there was not a corner of the earth, even among the
   most barbarous peoples, where people did not pray in the name of the
   crucified Jesus. St. Irenæus expresses himself in the same manner:
   "They push and spread like the evil herd; their places of meeting
   multiply on all sides," say the ill-disposed. Tertullian, on the other
   hand, writes twenty years after: "We are of yesterday, and already we
   fill your whole framework, your cities, your strong places, your
   councils, your camps, your tribes, your decuries, the palace, the
   senate, the forum; we have only left out your temples. Without betaking
   ourselves to arms, in which we have little experience, we could combat
   you by separating from you; you would be afraid of your solitude, of a
   silence which would appear like the stupor of a dead world."

   Up to the time of Hadrian the knowledge of Christianity is the act of
   those who are in the secrets of the police, and a small number of the
   curious. Now a new religion rejoices in the greatest publicity. In the
   Oriental part of the empire no one was ignorant of its existence; the
   lettered class spoke about it, discussed it, borrowed from it. Far from
   being enclosed in the Jewish circle, the new religion gathers from the
   Pagan world the greatest number of her converts, and, at least at Rome,
   surpasses in number the Jewish Church, from which it has come. It is
   neither Judaism nor Paganism; it is a third definitive religion,
   destined to replace all that precedes it.

   The figures are in such a matter impossible to fix, and certainly they
   differ much according to the provinces. Asia Minor continued to be the
   province where the Christian population was more dense. It was also the
   hearth of piety. Montanism appeared in the leaven of the universal
   ardour which burns in the spiritual body of the Church. Indeed, while
   they fought they were animated by what appeared to them a sacred flame.
   In Hierapolis and in many towns of Phrygia the Christians must have
   formed the majority of the population. Since the reign of Septimus
   Severus, Apamea of Phrygia put upon its coins a Biblical emblem, Noah's
   Ark, with an allusion to his name of Kibotos. In the West, we have
   seen, in the midst of the third century, some towns destroying their
   ancient temples, converted en masse. All the neighbouring region of the
   Propontides shared in the movement. Greece, properly speaking, on the
   contrary, was slow to leave the old religion, which she did not abandon
   till the middle ages, and then almost with her heart against the
   change.

   In Syria, about 240, Origen found that, in connection with the
   assemblage of the people, the Christians are "not very numerous;" what
   they say of Protestants and Israelites in Paris. When Tertullian says
   to us, "Fiunt non nascuntur, Christiani," he indicates to us that the
   earlier Christian generation had counted few souls. The Church of Rome,
   in 251, possessed forty-six priests, seven deacons, seven sub-deacons,
   forty-two acolytes, fifty-two exorcists, readers, and porters; it had
   more than fifteen hundred widows or poor, and, it was supposed, about
   thirty or forty thousand believers. At Carthage, about the year 212,
   the Christians formed the bulk of the population. All the Greek portion
   of the empire possessed flourishing Christian bodies; there was not a
   town of any importance which had not its church and its bishop. In
   Italy, there were sixty bishops; even little towns almost unknown had
   them. Dalmatia was evangelised. Lyons and Vienne had Christian colonies
   composed of Asians and Syrians, using Greek, but exercising their
   apostleship among the neighbouring peoples who spoke Latin or Gallic.
   The Gallo-Roman and Hispano-Roman world, nevertheless, was really
   scarcely broached. A very superstitious local Polytheism presented in
   these vast continents a mass most difficult to pierce.

   Britain had no doubt already seen the missionaries of Jesus. Her claims
   on that point are founded much less upon fables, of which the Isle of
   Saints, like all the great Christian communities, surrounded the cradle
   of its faith, than upon a leading fact, viz.: the observance of Easter
   according to the quarto-deciman rite, that is to say, the old style of
   Asia Minor. It is possible that the first churches of Britain owed
   their origin to some Phrygians, some Asians, like those who founded the
   churches of Lyons and Vienne. Origen says that the virtue of the name
   of Jesus Christ had passed the seas to seek the Britons in another
   world.

   The condition of the believers was in general very humble. With some
   exceptions, all open to doubt, we do not see any great Roman family
   passing over to Christianity with its slaves and clients, before
   Commodus. A man of the world, a knight, or functionary, ran against
   impossibilities in the Church. The rich were out of their element
   there. Life in common with people who had neither their fortune nor
   social rank was full of difficulties, and the relations of society were
   found almost forbidden to them. Marriage above all presented enormous
   difficulties; because many Christians espoused Pagans rather than give
   themselves to a poor husband. Thus when we find in the Christian
   cemeteries, from the time of Marcus-Aurelius and the Severuses, the
   names of the Cornelii, Pompeii; Cæcilii, it is hazardous to conclude
   that there had been believers among these great names by right of
   blood. The clients and the slaves were the origin of these ambitious
   agnomina. The intellectual standard was likewise very low at first.
   That high culture of reason which Greece had inaugurated was generally
   wanting in the first two generations. With Justin, Minucius Felix, the
   author of the epistle to Diognetes, the average was raised; soon, with
   Clement of Alexandria and Origen, it rose still higher; at the
   beginning of the third century, Christendom shall possess men on a
   level with the enlightened of the century.

   Greek was still essentially the Christian tongue. The most ancient
   catacombs are all Greek. In the middle of the third century, the
   sepulchres of the popes have Greek epitaphs. Pope Cornelius wrote to
   the churches in Greek. The Roman liturgy was in the Hellenic tongue;
   even when Latin had prevailed, it was often written in Greek
   characters; some Greek words, pronounced in the fashion of the iota,
   frequently occurring, which was that the Eastern people, remained as
   marks of its origin. One country alone had a Church speaking Latin,
   that was Africa. We have seen Minucius Felix open the Latin Christian
   literature by a chef d'oeuvre. Tertullian, twenty years later, after
   having hesitated between the Greek and Latin tongues for the
   composition of his writings, shall fortunately prefer the second and
   present the strangest literary phenomenon; an unheard of mixture of
   talent, flexibility of mind, eloquence and bad taste; a great writer,
   if we admit that to sacrifice all grammar and correctness to effect is
   to write well. At last Africa shall give to the world a fundamental
   book--the Latin Bible. One at least of the first Latin translations of
   the Old and New Testaments was made in Africa; the Latin text of the
   mass, some leading portions of the Liturgy, appear also to be of
   African origin. The lingua vulgata of Africa contributed thus to the
   formation of the ecclesiastical language of the West, and thus
   exercised a decided influence over our modern tongues. But there
   resulted from that another consequence; it was that the fundamental
   texts of the Latin Christian literature were written in a language
   which the lettered of Italy found barbaric and corrupt, which later on
   gave occasion on the part of the rhetoricians for endless objections
   and epigrams.

   From Carthage, Christianity shone powerfully into Numidia and
   Mauritania. Cirta produced both adversaries and defenders of the most
   ardent kind for the faith of Jesus. A town concealed in the depths of
   the province of Africa, Scillium, fifty leagues from Carthage,
   furnished some months after the death of Marcus-Aurelius a group of
   twelve martyrs, led by a certain Speratus, who showed an unbreakable
   firmness, struggled with the pro-consul, and gloriously opened the
   series of African martyrs.

   Edessa became day by day a Christian centre of high importance. Placed
   in the vassalage of the Parthians, Osrhoene had submitted to the Romans
   since the campaign of Lucius Verus (165); but it kept its dynasty of
   Abgars and Manous till about the middle of the third century. This
   dynasty, which was related to the Jewish Izates of Adiabene, showed
   itself extremely favourable to Christianity. In 202, at Edessa, a
   church was destroyed by an inundation. Osrhoene possessed numerous
   Christian communities at the end of the second century. A certain
   Palut, bishop of Edessa, ordained by Serapion of Antioch (190-210),
   remains celebrated by his contests with the heretics. At last Abgar
   VIII. bar Manou (176-213) definitely embraced Christianity in the time
   of Bardesanes, and, in sympathy with that great man, made rude war upon
   the Pagan customs, especially the practice of emasculation, a vice
   deeply rooted in the usages of the Syrian cults. Those who continued to
   honour Targatha in that strange manner had their hand cut off.
   Bardesanes, against the theory of climates, remarks that the Christians
   spread in Parthia, Media, Hatra, and into the most remote countries,
   not conforming themselves in any way to the laws of these countries.
   The first example of a Christian kingdom, with a Christian dynasty, was
   given at Edessa. This state of things, which caused much displeasure,
   especially among the great, was overturned in 216 by Caracalla; but the
   Christian faith scarcely suffered. From that time were probably
   composed those apocryphal works intended to prove the holiness of the
   town of Edessa, and especially that pretended letter from Jesus Christ
   to Abgar, of which Edessa later on grew so proud.

   Thus was founded, alongside the Latin literature of the churches of
   Africa, a new branch of Christian literature --the Syriac literature.
   Two causes created it, the genius of Bardesanes and the need of
   possessing an Aramean version of the sacred books. The Aramean writing
   had been for a long time used in these countries, but had not yet been
   used to establish a true literary work. Some Judeo-Christians laid the
   foundation of an Aramean literature by translating the Old Testament
   into Syriac. Then came the translation of the writings of the New; then
   were composed apocryphal stories. This Syrian Church, destined later on
   to a vast development, appeared to have included at that time the
   greatest varieties, from the Judeo-Christian up to the philosophy such
   as Bardesanes and Harmonius.

   The progress of the Church outside of the Roman empire was much less
   rapid. The important Church of Bosra had probably some suffragan
   churches among the independent Arabs. Palmyra no doubt already reckoned
   some Christians. The numerous Aramean populations subject to the
   Parthians embraced Christianity with the earnestness which the Syrian
   race showed always for the worship of Jesus. Armenia received, about
   the same time, the first germs of Christianity, to which it is possible
   that Bardesanes was not a stranger. Martyrs in Persian Armenia are
   spoken of from the third century.

   Some fabulous traditions, greedily received at the beginning of the
   fourth century, attributed to Christianity certain very remote
   conquests. Each apostle was reputed to have chosen his part of the
   world to convert. India especially, by the geographical indecision of
   the name it bears and the analogy of Buddhism with Christianity, made
   some singular illusions. It was claimed that St. Bartholomew had
   brought Christianity there, and had left a copy of the Gospel of St.
   Matthew in Hebrew. The celebrated Alexandrian doctor Pantænas had
   returned there upon the steps of the apostle, and found this Gospel.
   All this is doubtful. The use of the word India was extremely vague;
   whoever had embarked at Clysina and made the voyage of the Red Sea was
   reported to have been in India. Yemen was often described by that name.
   In any case there certainly resulted from these travels of Pantæas no
   durable church. All that the Manicheans have written concerning the
   missions of St. Thomas in India is fabulous, and it is artificially
   that they have connected later on with this legend the Syrian Christian
   communities which were established in the Middle Ages on the coast of
   Malabar. Probably there was mixed up with this tissue of fables some
   confusion between Thomas and Gotama, The question of the influence
   which Christianity could exercise upon Brahmanic India, and specially
   upon the cult of Krichna, is beyond the limits at which we should stop.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXVI.

  THE INTERIOR MARTYRDOM OF MARCUS-AURELIUS --HIS PREPARATION FOR DEATH.

   While all these strange moral revolutions were being accomplished the
   excellent Marcus-Aurelius, casting upon everything a loving and calm
   regard, bore always his pale visage, his gentle resigned face, and his
   sickness of heart. He spoke no longer, except in a low voice, and he
   walked with short steps. His strength sensibly diminished; his sight
   failed. One day he was obliged to lay down the book he held in his
   hand. "I am not allowed to read thee any more," he wrote, "but it is
   always permitted thee to repulse violence from thy heart, it is always
   permitted thee to scorn pleasure and pain, it is always permitted thee
   to be superior to vainglory, it is always permitted thee to declaim
   against fools and ingrates; better still it is permitted thee to do
   them good." Enduring life without pleasure, as without revulsion,
   resigned to the lot which nature had reserved for him, he did his duty
   every day, having without ceasing in his mind the thought of death. His
   wisdom was complete, that is to say, that his weariness was boundless.
   War, court, the theatre, all alike exhausted him, and yet he did all
   the good he could, for he did it as his duty. At the point at which he
   had arrived the love and the hatred of men are one and the same thing.
   Glory is the last of illusions; yet how vain is it! The memory of the
   greatest man disappears so quickly! The most brilliant courts are those
   of Hadrian, those great parades in the style of Alexander; what are
   they if this is not a decoration which passes away, and which is thrown
   aside as refuse? The actors change, the emptiness of the play is the
   same.

   When some enthusiastic Christians came to realise that they could not
   any longer hope to see the kingdom of God realising itself, except by
   fleeing to the desert, the Ammoniouts, the Nils, and the Pacômes shall
   proclaim the renunciation and disgust of things as the supreme law of
   life. These masters of the Thebaïde shall not equal in complete
   separation their crowned brother. He has made some ascetic operations,
   some receipts like those of the fathers for spiritual life, so as to
   convince himself by irresistible deductions of universal vanity.

   "To scorn the song, the dance, the pancratium, it is sufficient to
   separate them into their elements. As to music, for example, if you
   divide any one of the harmonies into sounds, and you ask, concerning
   each sound, is it there that the charm lies, there would be no longer a
   charm. In the same way as to dancing; divide the movement into
   attitudes. In the same way look at the pancratium; in a word, in regard
   to everything that is not virtue, reduce the object to what composes it
   by a complete analysis, and by this division you will come to despise
   it. Apply this process to the whole of life."

   His prayers had a humility and resignation quite Christian.

   "Wilt thou, therefore, be one day, my soul, good, simple, perfectly
   one, naked, more transparent than the material body which enwraps? When
   wilt thou stay the joy fully of loving all things, when wilt thou be
   satisfied, independent, without any longing, without the least
   necessity for a living or inanimate being for thy joys? When wilt thou
   have no longer need nor time to prolong thy pleasures, nor of space or
   place, or serenity of gentle climates, or even of the society of men?
   When wilt thou be happy with thy actual condition, content with the
   present good, persuaded that thou hast all which thou oughtest to have,
   that everything is good which concerns thee, that everything comes from
   the gods, that in the future everything shall be equally good--I mean
   all that they will decide for the preservation of the living being,
   perfect, good, just, beautiful, who has produced everything, includes
   everything, contains and comprehends all individual things, which only
   dissolve themselves to form new like the first? When shalt thou be
   such, O my soul, that thou shalt be able to live in the city of gods
   and men in such a way as never to address a complaint to them and never
   again to need their pardon?"

   This resignation became day by day more necessary. For the will which
   had been thought for a moment to be mastered by the government of the
   philosophers raised its head in all directions. At bottom the progress
   wrought by the reigns of Antonine and Marcus-Aurelius had only been
   superficial. Everything was bordered by a varnish of hypocrisy, by
   exterior appearances which were taken as caused by the unison of the
   two wise emperors. The mass of the people was gross, the army had grown
   weak, the laws only had been improved. What reigned throughout all was
   a deep gloom. Marcus-Aurelius had in one sense succeeded too well. The
   ancient world had taken the monk's cowl like those descendants of the
   noblesse of Versailles who become to-day Trappists or Carthusians.
   Unhappy end of those old aristocracies which after the excesses of a
   youthful folly become all at once virtuous, humane, and steady! There
   is here a symptom that they are about to die. The saintliness of the
   emperor had obtained in what concerned public opinion a result greater
   than what could have been looked for, it had made him in some sort
   sacred in the eyes of the people. There is here a fact honourable to
   human nature, and which history should no longer omit like so many
   other melancholy facts. Marcus-Aurelius was exceedingly beloved;
   popularity, so subject to misunderstand the deserts of men, for once at
   least has been just. The best of sovereigns has been the best
   appreciated. But the wickedness of the age took its revenge in other
   directions. Three or four times the goodness of Marcus-Aurelius injured
   him.

   The great inconvenience of real life, and what renders it unbearable to
   the higher man, is that, if we bring into it ideal principles,
   qualities become defects, so much so that very often the accomplished
   man succeeds less in it than he who has. motives of egotism or vulgar
   routine. The conscious honesty of the emperor made him commit a prime
   fault in being persuaded to associate in the government Lucius Verus,
   towards whom he was under no obligation. Verus was a frivolous and
   worthless man. It needed miracles of goodness, and delicacy would have
   been required, to prevent him from making disastrous blunders. The wise
   emperor, serious and earnest, took about with him in his litter the
   foolish colleague he had given himself. He always determinedly took him
   to be serious, he did not once rebel against this tiresome
   companionship. Like people who have been well brought up,
   Marcus-Aurelius was annoyed continually; his own manners had always
   dignity and grace. Minds of this kind, whether it be not to give pain
   to others, or out of respect to human nature, are resigned not to
   confess that they observe evil. Their life is a perpetual
   dissimulation. Faustina was in the life of the pious emperor another
   source of sadness; providence, which guards the education of great
   minds and works without ceasing to perfect them, prepared in her for
   him the most painful trials, a woman who did not understand. She began,
   it would seem, by loving him; probably she even found at first some
   happiness in that villa at Lorium, when in that beautiful retreat of
   Lanuvium, under the highest slopes of the Albanian mountains, which
   Marcus-Aurelius described to Fronton as a residence full of the purest
   joys. Then she grew weary of too much wisdom. Let us tell all; the fine
   sentences of Marcus-Aurelius, his austere virtue, his perpetual
   melancholy, his aversion to everything which resembled a court, must
   have appeared wearisome to a young woman, capricious, with an ardent
   temperament, and of marvellous beauty. Some careful researches have
   reduced to a small matter the deeds which calumny has been pleased to
   ascribe to the spouse of Marcus-Aurelius. That which remains to her
   charge is nevertheless grave: she did not love her husband's friends;
   she did not enter into his life; she had tastes quite apart from him.
   The good emperor perceived this, suffered, and was silent. His
   determined principle to see things as they ought to be, and not as they
   are, did not give way. In vain did they dare to show him on the stage
   as a deceived husband. The comedians even went so far as to name
   Faustina's lovers in public. He would consent to hear nothing. He would
   not depart from his constant gentleness. Faustina always remained "his
   very good and very faithful spouse." They never succeeded even after
   she was dead in making him abandon this monstrous falsehood. In a
   bas-relief, which may be seen to this day in Rome, in the museum of the
   Capitol, while Faustina is raised to heaven by Fame, the excellent
   emperor follows her from the earth with a look full of love. What is
   most extraordinary is, that in his beautiful private prayer to the
   gods, which he wrote upon the banks of the Gran, he thanks them for
   having given him "a wife so kind, so affectionate, and so simple." He
   had come in those last days to create an illusion for himself and to
   forget everything. But what a struggle he must have gone through to
   arrive at that! During long years an internal complaint slowly consumed
   him. The despairing effort which made up the essence of his philosophy,
   pushed sometimes even to sophism, concealed at bottom a terrible wound.
   How he must have said adieu to happiness to arrive at such extremes! We
   can never comprehend all this poor blighted heart suffered, how much
   bitterness was concealed by that pale face, always calm and half
   smiling. It is true that the adieu to happiness is the beginning of
   wisdom, and the most certain means of finding happiness. There is
   nothing so sweet as the return of joy which follows the renunciation of
   joy, nothing so lively, so profound, so charming as the enchantment of
   being disenchanted.

   A martyrdom much harder was inflicted upon Marcus-Aurelius in the
   person of his son Commodus. Nature, by a cruel sport, had given as a
   son to the best of men a sort of stupid athlete, only skilful at
   exercises of the body, a superb boy-butcher, ferocious, liking nothing
   except to kill. His little mind inspired him with a hatred of the
   intellectual society which surrounded his father. He fell into the
   hands of blackguards of the lowest kinds, who made of him one of the
   most odious monsters that have ever been seen. Marcus-Aurelius saw
   better than any one the impossibility of drawing anything out of this
   mean being, and nevertheless he neglected nothing to educate him well.
   The best philosophers lectured before the youth. He listened, something
   in the way in which a young lion would have done, while they taught,
   and allowed them to say on, yawning and showing long teeth to his
   masters. Marcus-Aurelius was misled in this matter by his want of
   practical finesse. He did not bring out his habitual sentiments on the
   benevolence which should be brought into the opinions and the
   consideration we owe to those who are not so good as we. The new
   motives for indulgence which he can give show us his charming good
   nature. "What evil can the most wicked of men do if thou remainest
   determinedly gentle to him, if on occasion thou dost exhort him
   quietly, and givest him, when he would injure thee, some lessons like
   this: No, no, my child, we are born for other things. It is not I who
   will bear the harm, but thou thyself, my son.' Show him dexterously by
   a general consideration that such is the rule, that neither the bees
   nor any other animals who live naturally in bands act as he does. No,
   give him not mockery or insult: let everything be said with a tone of
   true affection, as coming from a heart which anger has not embittered;
   do not speak to him as they do at school, nor with a view of obtaining
   the admiration of the audience, but speak to him with the same ease as
   if you were alone together." Commodus (if it is of him he is speaking)
   was no doubt little sensitive to this paternal rhetoric. There was
   evidently but one means of preventing the fearful evils that threatened
   the world; it was, by virtue of the right of adoption, to substitute a
   person more worthy of that which the chance of birth had designated.
   Julian particularises even more, and believes that Marcus-Aurelius
   should have associated in the government his son-in-law Pompeius, who
   would have continued to rule on the same principles as himself.

   There are here some things which it is easy to say when the obstacles
   are no longer there, and when one can reason far from the facts. It is
   forgotten, first, that the emperors since Nerva who made the adoption
   system so fruitful had no sons. Adoption, including the disinheriting
   of son or grandson, we see in the first century of the empire, but not
   with good results. Marcus-Aurelius, by principle, approved of direct
   heredity, in which he sees the advantage of preventing competition.
   Since Commodus was born in 161, he presented him alone to the legions,
   although he was a twin; often he took him when quite little into his
   arms and renewed this act, which was a sort of proclamation. Marcus was
   an excellent father: "I have seen thy little brood," Fronton writes to
   him, "and nothing has given me so much pleasure; they resemble thee to
   such a degree that there has never been in the world such a
   resemblance. I see thee doubled, so to speak; on the right, on the
   left, it is thee whom I believe I see. They have, thanks to the gods,
   the appearance of health, and a good style of crying. One of them holds
   a morsel of very white bread, like a royal infant; the other, a morsel
   of house bread, like a true son of a philosopher. Their little voices
   appear to me so sweet and so gentle that I believe I recognise in their
   babble the clear and charming sound of thy voice." These sentiments
   were those of the whole world; in 166 it is Lucius Verus who asks that
   the two sons of Marcus, Commodus and Annius Verus, should be made
   Cæsars. In 172, Commodus shares with his father the title of
   Germanicus. After the repression of the revolt of Avidius, the senate,
   to recognise in some way the disinterestedness in family matters which
   Marcus-Aurelius had shown, demanded by acclamation the empire and the
   tribunal power for Commodus. Already the natural badness of the latter
   was betrayed by more than one sign known to his pedagogues, but how can
   one pre-judge by such evil marks the future of a child of twelve years?
   From 176-177 his father made him imperator, consul, august. It was
   surely an imprudence, but they were bound by former acts; Commodus,
   besides, kept himself yet within bounds towards the end of the life of
   Marcus-Aurelius. The evil revealed itself all at once; at each page of
   the last books of the Thoughts we see the trace of internal sufferings
   in the excellent father, the accomplished emperor, who saw a monster
   growing up beside him, ready to succeed him, and ready to take in
   everything by antipathy the reverse of what he had seen done among good
   people.

   The thought of disinheriting Commodus must then without doubt have come
   to Marcus-Aurelius for the first time. But it was too late. After
   having associated him in the empire, after having proclaimed him so
   many times as perfect and accomplished before the legions, to go in
   face of the world, declaring him unworthy, would be a scandal.
   Marcus-Aurelius was taken by his phrases, by that style of an
   acknowledged benevolence which was too habitual to him; and after all
   Commodus was seventeen years of age, and who could be sure he wouldn't
   improve? Even after the death of Marcus-Aurelius they could hope.
   Commodus showed at first an intention to follow the counsels of
   deserving persons by whom his father had surrounded him. Is it not
   evident besides that if Pompeius or Pertinax succeeded Marcus-Aurelius,
   Commodus would become at once the chief of the military party, a
   continuation of that of Avidius, who held philosophy and the friends of
   the wise emperor in honour?

   We believe, then, that we must judge leniently the conduct of
   Marcus-Aurelius in these circumstances. He was morally right; but the
   facts made him wrong. At sight of this wretch, losing the empire by his
   disgusting life, dragging shamefully among the valets of the circus and
   the amphitheatre a name consecrated by virtue, one curses the goodness
   of Marcus; one regrets that the exaggerated optimism which had made him
   take Verus as his colleague, and which perhaps would never allow him to
   see all the faults of Faustina, should have made him commit a fault
   much more grave. According to the public voice, he could so much the
   better have disinherited Commodus that a story was told, according to
   which Marcus would have been freed as to this paternal duty. By a
   sentiment of pious indignation, it was declared that Commodus was not
   the son of Marcus-Aurelius. To absolve Providence from such an
   absurdity, they calumniated the mother. When they saw the unworthy son
   of the best of men fighting in the amphitheatre and comporting himself
   like an actor of the lowest kind: "He is not a prince," they said, "he
   is a gladiator. No, there is no son of Marcus-Aurelius there." They
   soon discovered in the band of gladiators some individual in whom they
   found a resemblance to him, and they affirmed that he was the true
   father of Commodus. The fact is that all the monuments show the
   resemblance of Commodus to Marcus, and confirm fully the evidence of
   Fronton.

   Without reproaching Marcus-Aurelius with not having disinherited
   Commodus, we can only regret that he could not do it. The perfection of
   the man injured the inflexibility of the sovereign. Capable of
   endurance, he would perhaps have saved the world, and he would not in
   anywise have borne the responsibility of the frightful decadence which
   followed. His misfortune was to have had a son. He forgot that the
   Cæsar is not a man like another, that his first duty is to enter into
   an arrangement with fate; that is, to divine what the time has marked
   as a sign. The heredity of dynasties is feudal, in unapplied Cæsarism.
   This régime is that which of all others produces the best or the worst
   fruits. When it is not excellent, it is execrable. Atrocious in the
   first century of our era, while a law of demi-heredity was followed,
   Cæsarism became splendid in the second, when the principle of adoption
   had definitely been brought in. The decadence commenced on the day
   when, by a weakness pardonable since it was inevitable, the best of
   princes whom adoption had brought to the empire did not follow a custom
   which had given for leaders to humanity the finest series of good and
   great princes the world has ever had. To crown the evil, he did not
   succeed in founding heredity. During the whole of the third century the
   empire was in the throes of intrigue and violence. The ancient world
   succumbed then.

   For some years Marcus-Aurelius endured this punishment, the most cruel
   that could be inflicted on a man of heart. His friends of infancy and
   youth were no more. All this excellent world formed by Antoninus, this
   solid and distinguished society which believed so profoundly in virtue,
   had gone down to the grave. Remaining alone in the midst of a
   generation which knew him no longer, and even desired to be rid of him,
   with a son at his side making him drink deep of grief, he had before
   him only the horrible prospect of being the father of a Nero, a
   Caligula or a Domitian.

   "Do not curse death, but make it welcome, since it is of the number of
   those phenomena which nature wills. The dissolution of our being is a
   fact as natural as youth, old age, growth, or full maturity. But if
   thou hast need of a very special reflection which should make thee
   kindly towards death, thou hast only to consider that from which it
   separates thee, and the moral world with which thy mind shall no longer
   be mixed. It is not that it is necessary to confound yourself with
   them; far from that; thou oughtest to love them, to endure them with
   gentleness. Only it is very necessary to tell thee that there are no
   people who share the sentiments that thou art leaving; the only motive
   which could attach us to life and retain us there would be to have the
   good fortune of finding ourselves with some men who hold the same
   opinions as we. But, at this hour, thou seest what lacerations are in
   thy bosom, so that thou criest, O death, do not delay thy coming, lest
   I should not come, I also, to forget myself!'

   "He was an honest man; he was a wise man!' some will say; what shall
   keep another from saying, See us delivered from this pedagogue; let us
   breathe! Certainly he was not bad to any of us, but I felt that in his
   heart he disapproved of us!' As to the bed of death, this reflection
   will make thee quit life very readily: I leave this life whence my
   travelling companions (for whom I have struggled so much, made so many
   vows, and taken such trouble) desire that I should go, hoping that my
   death will put them more at their ease.' What motive could make us,
   therefore, desire to remain longer here?

   "Do not, although in parting, show less benevolence to them; preserve
   in their view thy habitual character; remain affectionate, indulgent,
   gentle, and do not assume the appearance of a man who is leaving. It is
   nature which has formed thy connection with them. See how it breaks it.
   Ah, well, adieu, friends; I go without force being required to draw me
   from your midst; for this very separation is only conformable to
   nature."

   The last books of the Thoughts are connected with this period, in which
   Marcus-Aurelius, remaining alone with his philosophy which no one
   shares now, has only one thought--that of leaving the world quite
   gently. It is the same melancholy as in the philosophy of Carnoute; but
   the hour in the life of the thinker is quite another. At Carnoute, and
   on the banks of the Gran, Marcus-Aurelius meditates that he may be
   rendered brave in life. Now, all his thought is only a preparation for
   death, a spiritual exercise, to arrive adorned as for the altar. All
   the motives by which we can seek to persuade ourselves that death is
   not a sovereign injustice for virtuous man he presents to himself; he
   goes even to sophism, that he may absolve Providence, and prove that
   man in dying ought to be satisfied.

   "The time which the life of man lasts is only a point; his being is a
   perpetual flux; his sensations are obscure; his body, composed of
   different elements, tends with himself to corruption; his soul is a
   whirlwind; his destiny is an insoluble enigma; glory is an undetermined
   thing. In a word, all that concerns the body is a flowing river; all
   that concerns the soul is but a dream and smoke; life is a battle, a
   sojourn in a strange country; posthumous fame is forgotten. What, then,
   can serve as a guide? One thing, one only--that is philosophy; and
   philosophy it is to act on the genius who keeps us pure from all stain,
   stronger than pleasures or sufferings; accepting events and fate as
   emanations from the source from which it comes itself, at last waiting
   with a serene frame for death, which it takes to be the simple
   dissolution of the elements of which every living being is composed. If
   for the elements themselves, this is not an evil like submitting to
   perpetual metamorphoses, why look with sadness on the change and the
   dissolution of all things? This change is agreeable to the laws of
   nature, and nothing is evil that is so."

   Thus, by analysing life, he dissolves it, and renders it little
   different from death. He arrives at perfect goodness, absolute
   indulgence, and comparative indifference through pity and disdain. "To
   pass his life resigned amidst lying and unjust men" --that is the
   sage's programme. And he was right. The most solid goodness is that
   which is founded on perfect weariness, on the clear view of this fact,
   that everything in this world is frivolous and without any real
   foundation. In that absolute ruin of everything what remains?
   Wickedness? Oh! that ought not to be any trouble. Wickedness supposes a
   certain serious faith in life, faith at least in pleasure, faith in
   revenge and ambition. Nero believed in art; Commodus believed in the
   circus; and that made them cruel. But the disabused man who knows that
   every object of desire is frivolous, why should he give himself the
   pain of a disagreeable feeling? The goodness of the sceptic is the most
   secure, and the pious emperor was more than a sceptic; the movement of
   life in this soul was almost as gentle as the little sounds of the
   inmost atmosphere of a grave. He had attained the Buddhist nirvana--the
   peace of Christ. Like Jesus, Çakya-Mouni, Socrates, Francis d'Assisi,
   and three or four other sages, he had totally conquered death. He could
   smile at it, for it had really no more meaning for him.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXVII.

  DEATH OF MARCUS-AURELIUS--THE END OF THE OLD WORLD.

   On the 5th August, 178, the holy emperor quitted Rome to return, with
   Commodus, to those interminable wars of the Danube, which he wished to
   crown by the formation of solidly-constituted frontier provinces. The
   success was brilliant. They seemed to touch the limit so much longed
   for, and which had only been retarded by the revolt of Avidius. Some
   months afterwards the most important military enterprise of the second
   century is being terminated. Unfortunately the emperor was very weak.
   His stomach was so ruined that he often lived a whole day on some
   grains of theriac. He ate nothing except when he had to address the
   soldiers. Vienna on the Danube was, it would appear, the headquarters
   of the army. A contagious malady reigned in the country, for some years
   back, and it decimated the legions.

   On the l0th March, 180, the emperor fell sick. He at once hailed death
   as welcome, abstained from all nourishment and all drink, and he spoke
   and acted henceforth only as from the brink of the grave. Having made
   Commodus come to him, he begged him to complete the war so as not to
   appear to betray the State by a precipitate departure. On the sixth day
   of his sickness he called his friends together, and spoke to them in
   his customary tone, that is to say, with a slight irony, as to the
   absolute vanity of things and the small importance he attached to
   death. They shed abundant tears. "Why weep for me?" he said to them.
   "Think of saving the army. I do nothing but precede you. Adieu!" They
   wished to know to whose care he recommended his son. "To you," said he,
   "if he is worthy, and to the immortal gods." The army was inconsolable;
   for they adored Marcus-Aurelius, and they saw too well into what an
   abyss of evils they were about to fall after his death. The emperor had
   still energy enough to present Commodus to the soldiers. His art of
   preserving peace in the midst of the greatest griefs made him keep, in
   this cruel moment, a calm countenance.

   On the seventh day he felt his end approaching. He only received his
   son now, and he sent him away after a few moments, lest he might
   contract the malady from which he was suffering: probably this was only
   an excuse to free himself from his odious presence. Then he covered his
   head as if to sleep. The following night he yielded up his soul.

   They brought his body to Rome and interred it in Hadrian's mausoleum.
   The effusion of the popular piety was touching. Such was the affection
   they had for him that they never called him by his name or titles. Each
   one, according to his age, called him "Marcus, my father, brother,
   son." On the day of his obsequies scarcely any tears were shed, all
   being certain that he had only returned to the gods who had lent him
   for a moment to the world. During the very funeral ceremony they
   proclaimed him "Propitious God," with an unexampled spontaneity. They
   declared it sacrilege for any one, if his means permitted it, not to
   have his portrait in their houses. And this cult was not like so many
   ephemeral apotheoses. A hundred years after the statue of
   Marcus-Aurelius was seen in a great number of collections of lares
   among the penates. The emperor Diocletian had a separate worship for
   him. The name of Antoninus was henceforth sacred. It became, like that
   of Cæsar and Augustus, a sort of attribute of the empire, a sign of
   human and civil sovereignty. The numen Antoninum was like the
   beneficent star of that government whose admirable programme remained
   for the century which followed it, a reproach, a hope, a regret. We see
   some minds as little poetical as that of Septimus Severus, dreaming of
   it as of a lost heaven. Even Constantine bowed before that clement
   divinity, and wished that the golden statue of the Antonines might be
   reckoned among those of the ancestors and guardians of his power,
   founded nevertheless under quite different auspices.

   Never was cult more legitimate, and it is ours still to-day. Yes, such
   as we are, we carry in heart a mourning for Marcus-Aurelius, as if he
   had died yesterday. With him philosophy has reigned. For a moment,
   thanks to him, the world has been governed by the best and greatest man
   of his century. It is of importance that this experience should have
   been made. Will it ever occur a second time? Shall modern philosophy,
   like the ancient, ever reign in its turn? Shall it have its
   Marcus-Aurelius, supported by his Fronton and Junius Rusticus? Will the
   government of human things belong once more to the wisest? What does it
   matter, since that reign would be for only a day, and since the reign
   of fools would succeed it once more? Accustomed to contemplate with a
   calm and smiling eye the everlasting mirage of human illusions, modern
   philosophy knows the law of the passing creators of opinion. But it
   would be curious to seek for what should come forth from such
   principles, if they ever should arrive at power. It would be a pleasure
   to construct, à priori; the Marcus-Aurelius of modern times, to see
   what a mixture of force and feebleness could create, in a chosen soul
   called to the largest action, the kind of reflection particular to our
   age. One would like to see how criticism would ally itself to the
   highest virtue and to the most lively ardour for the good, what
   attitude a thinker of that school would observe before the social
   problems of the nineteenth century, by what art he would seek to turn
   them, lull them to sleep, elude them or solve them. What is certain is
   that the man called to govern his fellow-men ought always to
   contemplate the exquisite model of the sovereign which Rome in her best
   days presents. If it is true that it might be possible to surpass him
   in certain parts of the science of government, who does not know that
   in modern times the son of Annius Verus will always remain inimitable
   by his force of soul, his resignation, his accomplished nobility, and
   the perfection of his goodness?

   The day of Marcus-Aurelius' death may probably be taken as the decisive
   moment when the ruin of the old civilisation was decided. In
   philosophy, the great emperor had raised such a high ideal of virtue
   that no one cared to follow him; in politics, the fault of having so
   profoundly separated the duties of the father from those of the Cæsar,
   he reopened without desiring it the era of tyrants and anarchy. In
   religion, through being too much attached to a State religion, whose
   weakness he saw thoroughly, he prepared the violent triumph of the
   non-official worship, and he left to be laid to his memory a reproach
   unjust, it is true, but whose shadow ought not to have met us in a life
   so pure. In everything, except the laws, feebleness could be felt.
   Twenty years of kindness had relaxed the administration and favoured
   abuses. A certain reaction in the sense of the ideas of Avidius Cassius
   was necessary; in place of that, there had been a thorough uprooting.
   Horrible deception for good people! So much virtue, so much love, only
   ending in placing the world in the hands of a knacker of beasts--a
   gladiator. After this beautiful apparition of an Elysian world on
   earth, to fall into the hell of the Cæsars' which was believed to be
   closed for ever! Faith in good was then lost. After Caligula, Nero, and
   Domitian one was able to hope. Experiences had not been decisive. Now,
   it is after the greatest effort of governmental rationalism, after
   eighty-four years of an excellent régime, after Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian,
   Antoninus, Marcus-Aurelius, that the reign of evil recommences, worse
   than ever. Adieu, virtue! adieu, reason! Since Marcus-Aurelius could
   not save the world, who shall save it? Now, long live the fools, the
   absurd, the Syrian and his ambiguous gods! The grave physicians can do
   nothing. The invalid is worse than ever. Let the quacks come in, they
   often know better than honourable practitioners what the people need.

   What is sad in this is really that the day of Marcus-Aurelius' death,
   so evil for philosophy and civilisation, was a splendid day for
   Christianity. Commodus, having taken up the task of doing everything
   contrary to what he had seen, showed himself much less unfavourable to
   Christianity than his illustrious father. Marcus-Aurelius is the
   accomplished Roman with his traditions and prejudices. Commodus is of
   no race. He liked the Egyptian cults; he personally, with his head
   shaved, presided at the processions, carried the Anubis, and went
   through all the ceremonies with which the women were so pleased. He had
   himself represented in that attitude in the mosaics of the circular
   porticos of his gardens. He had Christians in his household. His
   mistress Marcia was almost a Christian, and used the love he gave her
   with credit, so as to alleviate the lot of the confessors condemned to
   the mines of Sardinia. The martyrdom of the Sicilians which took place
   on 17th July, 180, four months therefore after the ascension of
   Commodus, was no doubt the result of orders given before the death of
   Marcus, which the new government had not had time to withdraw. The
   number of victims under Commodus appears to have been less considerable
   than under Antoninus and Marcus-Aurelius. So true is it that between
   the Roman maxims and Christianity the war was to the death. Decius,
   Valerian, Aurelian, Diocletian, who sought to elevate the maxims of the
   empire, shall turn out to be ardent persecutors, while the emperors
   foreign to Roman patriotism, such as Alexander Severus, Philip the
   Arabian, and the Cæsars of Palmyra, will show themselves tolerant.

   With a principle less disastrous than that of an unbridled military
   despotism, the empire, even after the ruin of the Roman principle by
   the death of Marcus-Aurelius, would have been able to live still, and
   to give place to Christianity a century sooner than it did, and to
   avoid the rivers of blood that Decius and Diocletian made to flow from
   pure wastefulness. The rôle of the Roman aristocracy was ended; after
   having used folly in the first century, it used virtue in the second.
   But the hidden forces of the great Mediterranean Confederation were not
   exhausted. Just as, after the falling down of the political edifice
   built under the title of the family of Augustus, there was formed a
   provincial dynasty, the Flavii, to restore the empire; just as, after
   the falling to pieces of the edifice built by the adoption of the high
   Roman nobility, there were found some among Provincials, Orientals, and
   Syrians, for the restoration of the grand association where all would
   find peace and profit, Septimus Severus did again without moral
   elevation, but not without glory, what Vespasian had done before.

   Certainly the men of that new dynasty are not comparable to the great
   emperors of the second century. Even Alexander Severus, who equals
   Antoninus and Marcus-Aurelius in goodness, is far inferior to them in
   intelligence and nobility. The principle of the government is
   detestable. It is the outbidding of complaisance among the legions,
   revolt placed at a price; one does not address soldiers except with the
   purse in the hand. Military despotism never clothed itself in a more
   shameless form, but military despotism can have a long life. By the
   side of hideous spectacles, under those Syrian emperors whom they
   despise, what reforms are there? What a progress in legislation! What a
   day was that (under Caracalla) when every free man dwelling in the
   empire obtained equality of the laws! The advantages which this
   equality offered at that time must not be exaggerated; words, moreover,
   are never always empty in politics. Some excellent things were
   inherited. Philosophers of the school of Marcus-Aurelius had
   disappeared; but the juris-consulti replaced them. Papinian, Ulpian,
   Paul, Gaius, Modestinus, Florentinus, Marcian, during these execrable
   years, produced the chef-d'oeuvres, and really created the law of the
   future. Very inferior to Trajan and to the Antonines in political
   traditions, the Syrian emperors, inasmuch as they were not Romans, and
   had no Roman prejudices, often gave evidence of an openness of mind
   which the great emperors of the second century could not have, all so
   deeply conservative. They permitted, encouraged even, colleges or
   syndicates. Allowing themselves to go in that matter even to excess,
   they desired to have bodies of tradesmen organised in castes with
   special dresses. They opened the two leaves of the doors of the empire.
   One of them, the son of Mammæa, that good and affecting Alexander
   Severus, equals nearly, by his plebeian goodness, the patrician virtues
   of the great centuries; the highest thoughts pale before some righteous
   effusions of his heart.

   It is especially in religion that the emperors called Syrian
   inaugurated a breadth of ideas and a tolerance alike unknown till then.
   These Syrian ladies of Emesa, handsome, intelligent, rash even to
   Utopianism, Julia Domna, Julia Mæsa, Julia Mammæa, Julia Sæmia, were
   not restrained by any tradition or social rule. They dared what no
   Roman lady had dared to do; they entered the Senate, deliberated there,
   effectively governed the empire, repeated Semiramis and Nitocris over
   again. Faustina never could have done this, in spite of her lightness;
   she would have been stopped by tact, by the feeling of ridicule, by the
   rules of good Roman society. The Syrian ladies drew back before
   nothing. They had a senate of women, who decreed every extravagance.
   The Roman cult appeared cold and insignificant to them. Not being
   restrained by any family reasons, and their imagination finding itself
   more in harmony with Christianity than with Italian Paganism, these
   women amused themselves with accounts of the travels of the gods on the
   earth; Philostratus enchanted them with his Apollonius; probably they
   had a secret affiliation with Christianity. During this time the last
   respectable ladies of ancient society, like that aged daughter of
   Marcus-Aurelius, honoured by all, whom Caracalla caused to be killed,
   assisted in darkness at an orgie which formed a strange contrast to
   their recollections of youth.

   The provinces, and especially the provinces of the East, much more
   active and awake than those of the West, went definitely forward.
   Certainly Heliogabalus was a madman; and while his chimera of a central
   monotheistic cult, established at Rome, and absorbing all the other
   cults, showed that the strict circle of the Antonine idea was quite
   broken, Mamma and Alexander Severus went farther; while the
   juris-consulti continued to transcribe with the quietness of routine
   their old cruel maxims against liberty of conscience, the Syrian
   emperor and his mother were instructed in Christianity, testifying
   their sympathy with it. Not content to give security to the Christians,
   Alexander introduced Jesus among his lares, by a touching eclecticism.
   Peace seemed made, not as under Constantine, by the humbling of one of
   the parties, but by a large reconciliation. There was certainly in all
   this an audacious attempt at reform, inferior in its rational aspect to
   that of the Antonines, but more capable of succeeding, for it was much
   more popular; it heldin more esteem the province and the East. In such
   a democratic work people without ancestors, like those Africans and
   Syrians, had more chances of success than people with an irreproachable
   style like the aristocratic emperors. But the profound vice of the
   imperial system revealed itself for the tenth time. Alexander Severus
   was assassinated by the soldiers on the 19th March, 235 A.D. It was
   clear that the army could no longer tolerate tyrants. The empire had
   gradually fallen from the high Roman nobility to the officers of the
   province, now it passed to sub-officials and military assassins. While
   up to Commodus the assassinated emperors were intolerable monsters, at
   present it is the good emperor who creates some new discipline, he who
   represses the crimes of the army, who is surely marked out for death.

   Then opens that hell of a half-century (235-284 A.D.) when all
   philosophy, all civility, all delicacy foundered. The bidding, as at
   auction, the soldiery masters of everything, sometimes ten tyrants at
   once, the barbarian penetrating through all the fissures of the cracked
   world; Athens demolishing her ancient monuments to surround herself
   with evil walls against the terror of the Goths. If anything proves to
   what a degree the Roman empire was necessary, by intrinsic reason, it
   is that it was not totally dislocated in this anarchy. It is that it
   kept breath enough to revive under the powerful action of Diocletian,
   and to complete a course of two centuries yet. Among all orders the
   decadence was frightful. In fifty years they had forgotten the art of
   sculpture. Latin literature ceased completely. It seemed as if a bad
   genius brooded over this society, drinking its blood and its life.
   Christianity took to itself what was good in it, and impoverished to
   that extent civil order. The army was dying for want of a good
   recruitment of officers; the Church drew everything to itself. The
   religious and moral elements of the State have a very simple manner of
   punishing the State which does not give them the position to which they
   think they have a right; it is to retire to their tents. For a State
   cannot go away from them. Civil society has nothing thenceforth but the
   refuse intellects. Religion absorbs everything in it that is good.
   People leave a country which does not represent anything but a
   principle of material force. People chose their country in the ideal or
   rather in the institution which takes the place of the overthrown city
   and country. The Church became exclusively the bond of souls, and as it
   increased by the very misfortunes of civil society they comforted
   themselves easily for these misfortunes, in which it was easy to show a
   revenge of Christ and his saints.

   "If we were permitted to render evil for evil," said Tertullian, "one
   night and some torches would be enough for our revenge." They were
   patient, for they were sure of the future. Now, the world slew the
   saints; but to-morrow the saints shall judge the world. "Look at our
   faces well, for you will recognise us at the last judgment," said one
   of the martyrs of Carthage to the Pagans. "Our patience," said the most
   moderate, "comes to us from the certainty of being revenged; it heaps
   coals of fire on the heads of our enemies. What a day will that be when
   the Most High shall reckon up his faithful, shall send away the guilty
   to Gehenna and make our persecutors burn in the furnace of eternal
   fires! What a tremendous spectacle; what shall be my transports, my
   admiration, and my laughter! flow shall I applaud as I see in the
   depths of darkness, with Jupiter and their own worshippers, so many
   princes who have been declared received into heaven after their death!
   What joy to see the persecuting magistrates of the Lord's name consumed
   by flames more devouring than those the executioners lit up for the
   Christians!"
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXVIII.

  CHRISTIANITY AT THE END OF THE SECOND CENTURY--DOGMA.

   In the space of time which passed from the death of Augustus to the
   death of Marcus-Aurelius a new religion was produced in the world; it
   called itself Christianity. The essence of that religion consisted in
   believing that a grand celestial manifestation was made in the person
   of Jesus of Nazareth, a divine being, who, after a quite supernatural
   life, was put to death by the Jews, his compatriots, and rose again on
   the third day. Thus, the conqueror of death, he waits, at the right
   hand of God, his Father, the propitious hour to reappear in' the clouds
   to preside at the general resurrection, of which his own has been but
   the prelude, and to inaugurate, upon a purified earth, the kingdom of
   God; that is to say, the reign of the risen saints. While waiting thus,
   the assembly of the faithful, the Church, represents a kind of city of
   the saints presently living, always governed by Jesus. It was believed,
   in fact, that Jesus had delegated his powers to apostles, who
   established bishops and all the ecclesiastical hierarchy. The Church
   renews its communion with Jesus by means of the breaking of bread and
   the mystery of the cup, a rite established by Jesus himself, and by
   virtue of which Jesus becomes for the moment but really present in the
   midst of his own people. As consolation in their waiting, in the midst
   of the persecutions of a perverse world, the faithful have the
   supernatural gifts of the Spirit of God, that Spirit which formerly
   animated the prophets and which is not extinguished. They have
   especially the reading of the books revealed by the Spirit; that is to
   say, the Bible, the Gospels, the letters of the apostles, and those of
   the writings of the new prophets which the Church has adopted for
   reading in the public assemblies. The life of the believers ought to be
   a life of prayer, asceticism, renunciation, and separation from the
   world, since the present world is governed by the prince of evil,
   Satan, and since idolatry is nothing else than the worship of devils.

   Such a religion would appear at first as if it had come from Judaism.
   The Jewish Messianism is its cradle. The first title of Jesus, a title
   become inseparable from his name, is Christos, the Greek translation of
   the Hebrew word Mesih. The grand sacred book of the new worship is the
   Jewish Bible; its festivals, at least as to names, are the Jewish
   festivals; its prophecy is the continuation of the Jewish prophecy. But
   the separation between the mother and the child is made thoroughly. The
   Jews and the Christians, in general, detest each other; the new
   religion tends more and more to forget its origin and what it owes to
   the Hebrew people. Christianity is looked upon by most of its adherents
   as an entirely new religion, without any tie to that which precedes it.

   If we now compare Christianity, such as it existed about the year 180,
   with the Christianity of the Middle Ages, with the Christianity of our
   day, we find that it really has been augmented in a very small degree
   in the centuries which have passed away. In 180 the New Testament was
   closed; no other new book shall be added. Slowly the epistles of Paul
   have conquered their place after the gospels in the sacred code and in
   the liturgy. As to dogmas, nothing was fixed; but the germ of
   everything existed; scarcely any idea can appear which could not find
   authorities in the first and second centuries. There has been too much,
   there have been contradictions; the theological work shall rather
   consist in pruning, cutting away superfluities, than in inventing
   anything new. The Church shall allow to fall to the ground a crowd of
   matters badly begun; it will come away from these difficulties. It has
   still two hearts, so to speak; it has many heads; these anomalies shall
   pass away; but no dogma truly original shall form itself henceforth.

   The Trinity of the doctors of the year 180, for example, is undecided.
   Logos, Paraclete, Holy Spirit, Christ, and Son are words employed
   confusedly to designate the divine entity incarnate in Jesus. The three
   persons are not counted, numbered, if one may express it in that way;
   but the Father, the Son, and the Spirit are well enough designated by
   the three terms which shall be maintained as distinct, without,
   nevertheless, dividing the indivisible Jehovah. The Son shall increase
   exceedingly. That species of vicarship which Monotheism, from a certain
   time, is pleased to give to the Supreme Being shall in a singular
   manner obscure the Father. The bizarre formulas of Nicea shall
   establish some equalities contrary to nature; the Christ, the sole
   active person of the Trinity, shall be changed with the whole work of
   creation, and providence shall become God himself. But the epistle to
   the Colossians is only one step in such a doctrine; to arrive at these
   exaggerations only a little logic is needed. Mary, the mother of Jesus,
   is herself destined to increase to colossal proportions; she shall
   become indeed a person of the Trinity. Already the Gnostics have
   divined this future, and inaugurated a worship called by an immoderate
   importance.

   The dogma of the divinity of Jesus Christ exists complete; only, there
   is not agreement as to the formulas which serve to express it; the
   Christology of the Judeo-Christian of Syria and that of the author of
   the Hermas or the Confessions differ considerably; the work of theology
   shall be to choose, not to create. The millenarianism of the first
   Christians became more and more distasteful to the Greeks who embraced
   Christianity. Greek philosophy exercised a kind of violent thrust in
   order to substitute its dogma of the immortality of the soul for the
   old Jewish ideas (or Persian ideas if you will) of the resurrection and
   a Paradise on earth. The two formulas yet coexist. Irenæus surpassed
   all the millenarians in gross materialism, since already, fifty years
   back, the fourth gospel, so purely spiritualistic, proclaimed that the
   kingdom of God commences here below, that one carries it in himself.
   Caius, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and Dionysius of Alexandria
   sought soon to condemn the dream of the first Christians, and to
   envelop the Apocalypse in their antipathy. But it is too late to
   suppress anything so important. Christianity will subordinate the
   appearance of Christ in the clouds and the resurrection of the body to
   the immortality of the soul; so that the old primitive dogma of
   Christianity shall be almost forgotten and relegated, like a theatrical
   piece out of vogue, to the background of a last judgment, which has as
   little meaning since the fate of each one is fixed at death. Many
   declare that the torments of the damned will never end, and that these
   pains shall be a condiment to the joy of the righteous; others believe
   that they will finish or be mitigated.

   In the theory of the constitution of the Church, the idea that the
   apostolic succession is the foundation of the bishop's power, who is
   thus looked on not only as a delegate of the community, but as
   continuing the apostles' office, and being the depository of their
   authority, came more and more uppermost. Yet many Christians hold still
   to the much more simple conception of the Ecclesia in Matthew, where
   all the members are equal. In the fixing of the canonical books,
   agreement reigns as to the grand fundamental texts; but an exact list
   of the writings of the new Bible does not exist, and the limits, if we
   may so express it, of this new sacred literature are entirely
   undecided.

   The Christian doctrine is thus already one so compact that nothing
   essential shall be joined to it, and that any considerable retrenchment
   shall not be possible. Up to Mahomet, and even after him, there were in
   Syria some Judeo-Christians, Elkasaïtes, and Ebionites. In addition to
   these minim or Nazarenes of Syria, whom the erudite among the Fathers
   alone knew, and who did not cease even in the fourth century to inveigh
   against St. Paul in their synagogues, and to treat the ordinary
   Christians as false Jews, the East has never ceased to reckon some
   Christian families observing the Sabbath and practising circumcision.
   The Christians of Salt and Kerak appear to be, in our day, a kind of
   Ebionites. The Abyssinians are real Judeo-Christians, practising all
   the Jewish precepts, often with more rigour than the Jews themselves.
   The Koran and Islamism are only a prolongation of that old form of
   Christianity, Docetism, the suppression of the cross. On the other
   hand, in the full nineteenth century, the communist and apocalyptic
   sects of America make of millenarianism and an approaching last
   judgment the foundation of their belief, as in the first days of the
   first Christian generations.

   Thus, in that Christian Church of the end of the second century,
   everything was already said. There is not an opinion, not a course of
   ideas, not a fable which has not had her defender. Arianism was in germ
   in the opinions of the monarchists, Artemonites, Praxeas, Theodotus of
   Byzantium, and those made the remark with reason that their belief had
   been that of the majority of the Church of Rome up to the time of Pope
   Zephyrin (about the year 200). That which is wanting in this age of
   unbridled liberty is what shall later on bring about councils and
   doctors--namely, discipline, rule, and the elimination of
   contradictions. Jesus is already God, and yet many people have a
   repugnance to call him by this name. The separation from Judaism is
   accomplished, and yet many Christians practise still all Judaism.
   Sunday replaces Saturday, which does not prevent certain of the
   faithful observing the Sabbath. The Christian passover is distinguished
   from the Jewish passover; and yet some entire churches always follow
   the ancient usage. In the supper, most churches use ordinary bread;
   many, nevertheless, especially in Asia Minor, use only unleavened
   bread. The Bible and the writings of the New Testament are the base of
   the ecclesiastical teaching, and at the same time a crowd of other
   books are adopted by some and rejected by others. The four Gospels are
   fixed, and yet many other evangelical texts circulate and obtain
   favour. The majority of the faithful, far from being enemies of the
   Roman empire, only waited the day of reconciliation, admitting already
   the thought of a Christian empire; others continue to vomit against the
   capital of the Pagan world the most sombre apocalyptic predictions. An
   orthodoxy is formed and already used as a touchstone to set aside
   heresy; but, lest this reason of authority should be abused; the most
   Christian doctors rail hotly against what they call the "plurality of
   error." The primacy of the Church of Rome commenced to be marked out;
   but those even who submitted to this primacy would have protested if it
   had been said that the bishop of Rome would one day aspire to the title
   of sovereign of the universal Church. To resume, the differences which
   separate in our days the most orthodox Catholic and the most liberal
   Protestant there is very little difference, except such disagreements
   as existed then between two Christians who have not remained less in
   perfect communion with each other.

   What makes the unequalled interest of this creating period? Accustomed
   to study only the reflected periods of history, nearly all those who in
   France have given forth views upon the origins of Christianity have
   considered only the third and fourth centuries. The centuries of
   celebrated men and oecumenical councils, symbols and rules of faith,
   Clement of Alexandria, and Origen, the Council of Nicea and St.
   Athanasius, are for them the summits and the highest figures. We do not
   deny the importance of any epoch in history, but there are not
   beginnings there. Christianity was entirely made before Origen and the
   Council of Nicea, and who made it? A multitude of great anonymous
   persons, unconscious groups, writers without name or pseudonyms, the
   unknown author of the Epistles to Titus and Timothy, attributed to
   Paul, have contributed more than any Council to the constitution of
   ecclesiastical discipline. The obscure authors of the Gospels have
   apparently more real importance than their most celebrated
   commentators. And Jesus? It will be confessed, I hope, that there had
   been some reason for which his disciples loved him to the point of
   believing that he had risen from the dead, and to see in him the
   accomplishment of the Messianic ideal, the superhuman being destined to
   preside at the complete renovation of heaven and earth.

   Fact in such a matter is the mark of right, success is the grand
   criterion. In religion and morals, invention is nothing. The maxims of
   the Sermon on the Mount are as old as the world; no one has the
   literary property of them. The essential thing is to realise these
   maxims and to give them as a basis to a society. That is why, in the
   case of the religious founder, the personal charm is the leading thing.
   The grand work of Jesus has been to make himself loved by a score of
   people, or rather to have made them love the idea in him up to a point
   which triumphs over death. It was the same with the apostles and with
   the second and third generations. Founders are always obscure; but in
   the eyes of the philosopher the glory of these unnamed ones is the true
   glory. They were not great men, those humble contemporaries of Trajan
   and Antoninus, who have decided the faith for the world. Compared with
   them the celebrated personages of the Church of the third and fourth
   centuries make a much better figure. And yet these last have built upon
   the foundation which the first have laid. Clement of Alexandria and
   Origen were only half Christians. These are Gnostics, Hellenists, and
   Spiritualists, placing the essence of Christianity in metaphysical
   speculation, not in the application of the merits of Jesus or the
   Biblical Revelation. Origen confesses that if the Law of Moses be
   understood in its proper sense it would be inferior to the laws of the
   Romans, the Athenians, and the Spartans. St. Paul had already denied
   the title of Christian to a Clement of Alexandria, saving the world by
   a gnosis where the blood of Jesus Christ plays scarcely any part.

   The same reflection may be applied to the writings which these ancient
   ages have left us. They are flat, simple, gross, artless, analogous to
   letters without orthography, which in our days the most despised
   communist sectaries would write. James, Jude recall Cabet or Babick,
   the fanatic of 1848 or the fanatic of 1871, convinced, but not knowing
   his language, expressing by fits and starts, in a touching manner, his
   artless aspiration of conscience. And yet these are the stammerings of
   a kind of people who have become the second Bible of the human race.
   The upholsterer Paul wrote Greek as badly as Babick did French. The
   rhetorician governed by literary consideration, for whom French
   literature commences at Villau; the doctrinaire historian who thinks
   only of reflected developments, and for whom the French constitution
   commences with the pretended Constitutions of St. Louis, cannot
   understand these apparent bizarreries.

   The age of beginnings is chaos, but a chaos rich in life; it is the
   fertile plain where a being is prepared to exist, a monster still, but
   endowed with a principle of unity, of a type strong enough to remove
   impossibilities and to give himself essential organs. What are all the
   efforts of the conscious centuries if we compare them with the
   spontaneous tendencies of the embryo age--a mysterious age where the
   being, in process of making himself, cuts away a useless appendage,
   creates for himself a nervous system, and stretches out a limb? It is
   in these moments that the Spirit of God broods over his work, and that
   the group which works for humanity can truly say:--

   "Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXIX.

  WORSHIP AND DISCIPLINE.

   The history of a religion is not the history of a theology. The
   subtleties without value with which they have ornamented this name are
   the parasite which devours the religions.

   Jesus had no theology, he had the most lively feeling that could be of
   Divine things, and of the filial communion of man with God. Thus he did
   not institute a worship, properly speaking, outside of what he already
   found established by Judaism. The "breaking of bread," accompanied by
   the action of grace or the eucharist, was the only rite a little
   symbolic which he adopted; and yet Jesus does nothing but give it
   importance and appropriate it, for the beraka (benediction) before
   breaking the bread had always been a Jewish usage. However this may be,
   this mystery of bread and wine is considered as being the body and
   blood of Jesus, so much so, that those who eat and drink of them
   partake of Jesus, become the generating element of a whole religion.
   The ecclesia or assembly was the foundation. Christianity has never
   gone from that. The ecclesia, having for central object the communion
   or eucharist, became the mass: now the mass has always reduced the
   remainder of the Christian cult to the rank of accessory and secondary
   practice.

   They were far, about the time of Marcus-Aurelius, from the primitive
   Christian assembly, during which two or three prophets, often women,
   fell into ecstasy, speaking at the same time, and demanding from each
   other after the attack what wonderful things they had said. That was no
   longer seen among the Montanists. In the immense majority of the
   churches the elders and the bishops presided over the assembly, ruling
   the readings, they only speaking. Women are seated apart silent and
   veiled. Order reigns throughout, thanks to a considerable number of
   secondary employés having distinct functions. Little by little the seat
   of the episcopos and the seats of the presbyteri constitute a central
   half circle choir. The eucharist demands a table before which the
   celebrant pronounces the prayers and the mysterious words. Soon they
   established a rood-loft for the readings and the sermons, then a
   chancel of separation between the presbyterium and the remainder of the
   hall. Two reminiscences ruled all this infancy of Christian
   architecture; first a vague remembrance of the Temple at Jerusalem, of
   which a part was accessible to the priests alone in a preoccupation of
   the grand heavenly liturgy found in the Apocalypse. The influence of
   this book upon the liturgy was of the first order. The desire was to do
   on earth what the twenty-four old men and the beast-shaped singers did
   before the throne of God. The service of the Church was thus modelled
   upon that of heaven. The use of incense doubtless came from the same
   inspiration. The lamps and the candles were specially employed at
   funerals.

   The grand liturgical act of the Sunday was a chef d'oeuvre of mystery
   and of understanding of the popular sentiments. It was already the
   mass, but the complete mass, not the flattened mass, if I dare to say
   so, crushed down as in our days; it was the mass living in all its
   parts, each part preserving the primitive signification which it later
   on so strangely lost. This mixture, skilfully composed of psalms,
   canticles, prayers, readings, professions of faith--this sacred
   dialogue between the bishop and the people--prepared their souls to
   think and feel in common. The homily of the bishop, the reading of the
   correspondence from foreign bishops and from persecuted churches, gave
   life and actuality to the peaceful assembly. Then came the solemn
   preface to the mystery, announced full of gravity, the recall of souls
   to contemplation, then the mystery itself, a secret canon, some prayers
   more holy even than those which had preceded; then the act of supreme
   brotherhood, the partaking of the same bread and the same cup. A sort
   of solemn silence fell upon the Church at that moment. Then when the
   mystery was finished life was renewed, the chants recommenced, the
   actions of grace even multiplied; a long prayer embraced all the orders
   of the Church, all the conditions of humanity, all the established
   powers. Then the president, after having exchanged with the faithful
   some pious desires, dismissed the assembly by the ordinary formula in
   judicial audiences, and the brethren separated full of edification for
   many days.

   This assembly of the Sunday was in a manner the knot of all the
   Christian life. This sacred bread was the universal bond of the Church
   of Jesus. They sent it to the absent at their homes, to the confessors
   in prison, and from one church to the other, especially about the time
   of Easter; they gave it to the children, it was the grand sign of
   communion and brotherhood. The agape, an evening repast in common, not
   distinguished at first from the supper, became separated more and more
   and degenerated into abuse. The supper, on the contrary, became
   essentially a morning office, the distribution of the bread and wine
   was made by the elders and deacons. The faithful received it standing.
   In certain countries, especially in Africa, they believed because of
   the prayer, "Give us each day our daily bread," it was a duty to
   communicate every day. They carried away for that purpose a morsel of
   blessed bread, which they ate by themselves in the family after the
   morning prayer.

   They were pleased, in imitation of the mysteries, to surround this
   supreme act with profound secrecy. Some precautions were taken that the
   initiated alone should be present in the church at the moment when it
   was celebrated. This was nearly the only fault which the budding Church
   committed. They believed because it sought the shade that it had need
   of it, and this, joined indeed to other indications, furnished
   appearances for the accusation of magic. The holy kiss was also a great
   source of edification and danger. The sage doctors recommended that it
   should not be repeated if any pleasure was felt in it, nor be taken
   twice, nor should the lips be open. They were not slow besides to
   suppress the danger by introducing the danger into the Church of the
   separation of the sexes. The Church had no temple, for they maintained
   as a fixed principle that God has no need of a temple, that his true
   temple is the heart of the righteous man. It had certainly no
   architecture which could make it recognised; it was at that time only a
   house apart. They called it "the House of the Lord," and the most
   tender sentiments of Christian piety commenced to cling to it. The
   assemblies at night, no doubt, because they were forbidden by law, had
   a great charm for the imagination. At bottom, although the true
   Christian held temples in aversion, the Church aspired secretly to
   become a temple; it became so completely in the middle ages. The chapel
   and the church of our days resemble much nearer the ancient temples
   than the churches of the second century.

   An idea soon spread abroad contributed much to this transformation; it
   was represented that the eucharist was a sacrifice, since it was the
   memorial of the supreme sacrifice accomplished by Jesus. This
   imagination filled up a lacuna which the new religion appeared to
   present to the eyes of superficial people--I mean the want of
   sacrifices. Accordingly the eucharistic table became an altar, and it
   was a matter of offerings and oblations. These oblations were the very
   same bread and wine which the wealthy believers brought, that it should
   not be at the Church's expense, the remainder belonging to the poor and
   the servants of the cult. One can see how such a doctrine might become
   fertile in misunderstandings. The Middle Ages, which abused the mass so
   much by exaggerating the idea of sacrifice, arrived at this through a
   strange course. From transformations to transformations, they had come
   to the low mass, where a man, in a little recess, with an infant which
   took the place of the people, presided over an assembly consisting of
   himself alone, speaking in dialogue without ceasing with people who
   were not there, apostrophising absent auditors, taking the offering
   himself, giving the kiss of peace to it alone.

   The Sabbath, at the end of the second century, was very nearly
   suppressed by the Christians. They appeared to find in it a mark of
   Judaism--a bad mark. The first Christian generations celebrated both
   Saturday and Sunday, the one in memory of the creation, the other as
   the souvenir of the resurrection; then everything concentrated itself
   on the Sunday. It was not that they looked exactly upon the second as a
   day of rest; the Sabbath was abrogated--not transferred; but the
   solemnities of Sunday, and especially the idea that this day ought to
   be one entirely for joy (it was forbidden to fast or to pray on one's
   knees), brought back the abstention from servile labour. It was much
   later that they came to believe that the precept of the Sabbath was
   applied to the Sunday. The first rules in this matter only concerned
   slaves, to whom from a feeling of pity they wished to secure some
   holidays. Thursday and Friday, dies stationum, were consecrated to
   fasting, to genuflexions and the souvenir of the Passion. The annual
   feasts were the two Jewish festivals, the Passover and Pentecost, with
   the transpositions known to them. As to the feast of Palms, it was half
   suppressed. The custom of shaking branches and crying Hosanna!
   associated as much good as evil with the Sunday before the Passover, in
   memory of a circumstance in the last week of Jesus. The anniversary day
   of the Passion was dedicated to fasting; on that day they abstained
   from the holy kiss.

   The worship of the martyrs took already a place so considerable that
   the Pagans and the Jews made objections to it, maintaining that the
   Christians revered the martyrs more than Christ himself. They buried
   them in view of the resurrection, and they placed around them
   refinements of luxury which contrasted with the simplicity of Christian
   manners; they almost worshipped their bones. On the anniversary of
   their death they went to their graves; they read the story of their
   martyrdom; they celebrated the eucharistic mystery in remembrance of
   them. It was the extension of the commemoration of the departed, a
   pious custom which held a large place in the Christian life. They were
   nearly saying mass for the dead now. On the day of their anniversary
   they made the offering for them, as if they lived still; they brought
   their names into the prayers which preceded the consecration; they ate
   the bread in communion with them. The worship of the saints, by which
   Paganism resumed its place in the Church--prayers for the dead, a
   source of the greatest abuse in the Middle Ages--was thus drawn from
   what, in primitive Christianity, was most elevated and pure.

   The ecclesiastical chant existed from an early time, and was one of the
   expressions of the Christian conscience. It was applied to hymns whose
   composition was free, and of which we have a specimen in Clement of
   Alexandria's hymn to Christ. The rhythm was short and light; it was
   that of the songs of the time, of those for example to which Anacreon
   was set. There was nothing in common, in any case, between them and the
   recitative of the Psalms. We can find some echo in the Paschal liturgy
   of our churches, which has specially preserved its archaic air in the
   Judeo-Christian Victimæ paschali; in the O filii et filiæ and the
   Alleluia. The carmen antelucanum of which Pliny speaks, or the office
   in galli cantu is found probably in the Hymnum dicat turba fratrum,
   especially in the following strophe, of which the silvery sound nearly
   brings back to us the air to which it was sung:--


   Galli cantos, gall plausus

   Proximum sentit diem,

   Et ante lucem muntiemus

   Christum regem seculo.

   Baptism had completely replaced circumcision, of which it was, in its
   origin among the Jews, only the preliminary. It was administered by a
   triple immersion in a separate place near the church: then the
   illuminated was introduced into the assembly of believers. Baptism was
   followed by the imposition of hands--the Jewish rite at the ordination
   of the rabbinate. It was what they called the baptism of the Spirit;
   without this baptism with water was incomplete. Baptism was nothing but
   a breaking with the past; it was by the imposition of hands that one
   became really a Christian. There were joined with this some anointings
   with oil, the origin of what is called confirmation, and a sort of
   profession of faith by questions and responses. All this constituted
   the definitive seal, the sphragis. The sacramental idea, the ex opere
   operato, the sacrament conceived of as a sort of magical operation,
   became thus one of the bases of the Christian theology. In the third
   century a species of novitiate in baptism, the catechumenate, was
   established; the faithful arrived at the threshold of the church only
   after having passed through the gradual orders of initiation. The
   baptism of infants began to appear about the end of the second century.
   It shall find up to the fourth century decided adversaries.

   Penance was already regulated at Rome about the time of the
   pseudo-Hermas. That institution which supposed a society so strongly
   organised made some surprising developments. It is a wonder that it did
   not rend the budding Church. If anything proves how much the Church was
   beloved, and the intensity of the joy which was found in it, it is to
   see to what rude trials men submitted to re-enter and regain among the
   saints the place which they had lost. Confession or avowal of the
   fault, already practised by the Jews, was the first condition of
   Christian penance.

   Never, we can see, was the material of a worship more simple. The
   vessels of the Supper became sacred only slowly. The saucers of glass,
   which were used there, were the first to be an object of a certain
   attention.

   The adoration of the cross was a respect rather than a worship; the
   symbolism remained of extreme simplicity. The palm, the dome with the
   fish, the IChThUS, the anchor, the phoenix, the AO, the T forming the
   cross, and probably already the chrisimon to mean Christ; such were
   nearly all the received allegorical figures. The cross itself was never
   represented, neither in the churches nor in the houses; on the
   contrary, the sign of the cross, made by bringing the hand to the
   forehead, was often repeated, but it cannot be that this usage was
   particularly dear.

   The worship of the heart, on the other hand, was the most developed
   that had ever been. Although the liberty of the charismas had already
   been well reduced by the episcopate, spiritual gifts, miracles, direct
   inspiration, continued in the Church and made the life of it. Irenæus
   saw in these supernatural faculties which marked it as the Church of
   Jesus. The martyrs of Lyons still shared in them. Tertullian believed
   himself surrounded by perpetual miracles. It is not only among the
   Montanists that a superhuman character is given to the most simple
   acts. Theopneustism and thaumaturgy in the whole Church were the
   permanent state. They only spoke by female spirits, who made certain
   replies, and were like harps resounding under the touch of the divine
   bow. The soror, whose souvenir Tertullian has preserved to us,
   astonished the Church by her visions. Like the illuminati of Corinth of
   the time of St. Paul, she mingled her revelations with the solemnities
   of the Church; she read their hearts; she pointed out remedies; she saw
   the souls corporeally like some little beings of human form, aërial,
   brilliant, tender, and transparent. Some ecstatic children passed also
   for the interpreters whom the Divine Word had chosen.

   Supernatural medicine was the first of these gifts, which they
   considered as the heritages of Jesus. The holy oil was the instrument
   of it. The Pagans were frequently healed by the oil of the Christians.
   As to the art of chasing away demons, everybody knows that the exorcist
   Christians had a great superiority; from all sides they brought the
   possessed, that they might be delivered absolutely, as the thing takes
   place to-day in the East. It even happened among those people who were
   not exorcised in the name of Jesus. Some Christians were indignant; but
   the majority rejoiced at it, seeing there a homage to truth. They did
   not stop in such a good path. As the false gods were nothing but
   demons, the power of chasing away demons implied the power of unmasking
   the false gods. The exorcist thus incurred the accusation of magic,
   which was reflected upon the entire Church.

   The orthodox Church saw the danger of these spiritual gifts, remnants
   of a powerful primitive ebullition, that the Church must be
   disciplined, under pain of being extinguished. The sensible doctors and
   bishops were opposed to it: for these marvels, which charmed the
   irrational Tertullian, and to which St. Cyprian attached so much
   importance, gave place to evil reports, and there mingled with them
   some individual oddities which orthodoxy opposed. Far from encouraging
   them, the Church marked the charismas with suspicion, and in the third
   century, without disappearing, they became more and more rare. Ecstasy
   was doomed. The bishop became the depository of the charismas, or
   rather the charismas were succeeded by the sacrament, administered by
   the clergy, while the charisma is an individual matter, an affair
   between man and God. The synods inherited permanent revelation. The
   first synods were held in Asia Minor against the Phrygian prophets;
   brought into the Church, the principle of inspiration by the Spirit
   became a principle of order and authority.

   The clergy were already a body distinct from the people. A great
   complete Church, besides the bishop and elders, had a certain number of
   deacons and assistant-deacons attached to the bishops and the ministers
   of his orders. It possessed, besides, a series of less functionaries,
   anagnostes or readers, exorcists, porters, singers or chanters,
   acolytes, who served in the ministry of the altar, filled the cups with
   water and wine, and carried the eucharist to the sick. The poor and the
   widows cared for by the Church, and who remained there more or less,
   were considered as people of the Church, and were inscribed on her
   rolls (matricularii). They filled the humblest offices, such as that of
   sweeping, later that of ringing bells, and lived along with the clergy
   from the surplus of the offerings of bread and wine. For the higher
   orders of the clergy, celibacy became more and more established; at
   least, second marriages were forbidden. The Montanists began soon to
   claim that the sacraments administered by a married priest were null.
   Castration was never anything but an excess of zeal, and was soon
   condemned. The sister-companions of the apostles, whose existence was
   established by well-known texts, were found among these thus
   introduced, a sort of deaconess-servants, who formed the origin of the
   concubinage avowed by the clergy in the Middle Ages. Rigorists demanded
   that they should be veiled, to prevent the too tender sentiments which
   might arise in the brethren in the ministry of love.

   The graves became from the end of the second century an annexe of the
   Church, and the object of an ecclesiastical service. The mode of
   Christian burial was always that of the Jews, inhumation, which
   consisted of placing the body enveloped in a shroud in a sarcophagus
   formed like a trough, often surmounted by an arcosolium. Cremation
   always inspired great repugnance in the faithful. The Mithraists and
   other Oriental sects shared the same ideas, and practised at Rome what
   was called the Syrian mode of burial. The Greek belief in the
   immortality of the soul led to burning, the Oriental belief in the
   resurrection led to interment. Many indications point to the most
   ancient Christian burials in Rome near St. Sebastian on the Appian Way.
   There the Jewish and Mithraist cemeteries are found. It is believed
   that the bodies of the apostles Peter and Paul rest in this place, and
   that is why they have called it Catatumbas, "to the tombs."

   About the time of Marcus-Aurelius a decided change took place. The
   question which preoccupied the great towns made an imperious demand.
   Just as the system of cremation was sparing in the matter of space
   consecrated to the dead, so inhumation in the Jewish, Christian, and
   Mithraist manner crowded the surface of the ground. One needed to be
   rich to purchase, while alive, a loculus in the dearest ground in the
   world, at the gate of Rome. When the great masses of population in
   comfortable circumstances wished to be interred in this way, it was
   necessary to go under ground. They dug to a certain depth to find black
   beds sufficiently firm; there they began to pierce horizontally,
   sometimes in many stages, those labyrinths in whose vertical walls were
   opened the loculi. The Jews, the Sabazians, the Christians
   simultaneously adopted this kind of burial, which agreed well with the
   congregational mind, and the taste for mystery which distinguished
   them. Now, the Christians having continued this kind of burial during
   the third, fourth, and a part of the fifth century, the collection of
   catacombs in the environs of Rome was nearly altogether a Christian
   work. From necessities analogous to those which caused these vast
   hypogea around Rome, they were produced likewise at Naples, Milan,
   Syracuse and Alexandria.

   In the first years of the third century, we see Pope Zephyrin
   entrusting his deacon Callistus with the care of these great mortuary
   depôts. They were what is called cemeteries or "sleeping places;" for
   men believed that the dead slept there waiting for the day of
   resurrection. Many martyrs were interred there. From this time the
   respect which had been connected with the bodies of the martyrs was
   applied to the places where they were laid. The catacombs were soon
   holy places. The organisation of the burial service was complete under
   Alexander Severus. About the time of Fabian and Cornelius, this service
   is one of the principal preoccupations of Roman piety. To repose near
   the martyrs, ad sanctos ad martyres, was a privilege. Year by year, the
   mysteries were celebrated over these sacred tombs. Hence the cubicula
   or sepulchral chambers, which, grown larger, became subterranean
   chapels, where they assembled in times of persecutions. Besides, they
   added sometimes scholæ, serving as a triclinium for the agapes.
   Assemblies under such conditions had the advantage that they could be
   taken as funerals, which placed them under the protection of the law.
   The cemetery, which was subterranean or in the open air, became thus a
   place essentially ecclesiastical. The fossor in some churches was a
   clergyman of the second order, like the anagnost and the porter. The
   Roman authority, which in questions of sepulture gave large toleration,
   very rarely interfered with these subterranean places; they admitted,
   except at moments of furious persecution, that the property of these
   consecrated areæ belonged to the community, that is to say, to the
   bishop. The entrance to the cemeteries was, besides, nearly always
   masked on the exterior by some family burying ground, whose right was
   beyond dispute.

   Thus the principle of burial by the brotherhood stood complete in the
   third century. Each sect built its subterranean passage and enclosed
   it. The separation of the dead became a common right. They were classed
   by their religion in the tomb; to remain after death with his brethren
   became a necessity. Up to that point, burial had been an individual or
   family matter; now it became a religious and collective matter; it
   supposed a community of opinions on divine things. It is not one of the
   least difficult that Christianity shall meet in the future.

   From its first beginning, Christianity was thus as opposed to the
   development of the plastic art as Islam has been. If Christianity had
   remained Jewish, architecture alone would have developed, as has been
   the case with the Mussulmans; the Church would have been like the
   Mosque, a grand house of prayer--that would have been all. But
   religions are what the races who adopt them make them. Brought among
   people who were the friends of art, Christianity became a religion as
   artistic as it would have been little so if it had remained in the
   hands of the Judeo-Christians. Thus it was some heretics who founded
   Christian art. We have seen the Gnostics entering into that path, with
   an audacity which scandalised the true believers. It was still too much
   so; everything that recalled idolatry was suspected. The painters who
   were converted were looked on askance, as having seemed to turn away to
   graven images the homage due to the Creator. The images of God and
   Christ, I mean the isolated images which seemed like idols, excited
   apprehension, and the Carpocratians, who had busts of Jesus, and
   addressed Pagan honours to them, were considered profane. The Mosaic
   precepts against figured representations were obeyed to the letter in
   the churches. The idea of the uncomeliness of Jesus, subversive of
   Christian art, was widely spread. There were some painted portraits of
   Jesus, St. Peter, and St. Paul, but this custom was regarded as being
   unseemly. The making of the statue of the woman with the issue of blood
   appeared to Eusebius as having need of an excuse; that excuse was that
   the woman who witnessed thus belief in Christ acted from a remnant of
   Pagan habit and by a pardonable confusion of ideas. Otherwise Eusebius
   repelled as entirely profane the desire to have portraits of Jesus.

   The arcosolia of the tombs some called pictures. They were made at
   first purely decorative, destitute of all religious significance;
   vines, leaves, vases, fruits, birds. Then Christian symbols were mixed
   with these; then they painted some simple scenes, borrowed from the
   Bible, and in which a special delight was found in the time of
   persecution; such as Jonah under his gourd, or Daniel in the den of
   lions, Noah and his dove, Psyche, Moses drawing water from the rock,
   Orpheus charming the beasts with his lyre, and especially the Good
   Shepherd, in which they could only copy one of the most widely spread
   types of Pagan art. The historical subjects of the Old and New
   Testaments did not appear till most recent times. The table, the sacred
   bread, the mystic fishes, some scene of angling, the symbolism of the
   supper, are, on the contrary, represented from the third century.

   All this little painting of ornament, excluded still from the churches,
   and which was not tolerated because it tended to precedent, had
   absolutely nothing original in it. It would be wrong to see in those
   timid essays the principle of a new art. The expression was feeble; the
   Christian idea totally absent; the countenance generally undecided. The
   execution was not bad; there were some artists who had received a good
   enough instruction in the studio. It is very superior in any case to
   that which is found in the real Christian painting which was born much
   later. But what a difference in the expression! Among the artists of
   the seventh and eighth centuries one can follow a powerful effort to
   introduce into the scenes represented a new sentiment; the material
   means were quite wanting. The artists of the catacombs, on the
   contrary, are painters of the Pompeian kind, converted by some motives
   entirely foreign to art, and who apply their skill to what is suitable
   to the austere places which they decorate.

   The Gospel history was only treated by the first Christian painters
   partially and slowly. It is here especially that the Gnostic origin may
   be seen with clearness. The life of Jesus, which the ancient Christian
   painters present, is exactly that which the Gnostics and the Docetists
   have set forth, that is to say, that the passion does not appear there.
   From the Prætorium to the resurrection all the details are suppressed,
   the Christ in this order of ideas not having really suffered. They
   disembarrassed themselves thus of the shame of the cross--a great
   scandal to the Pagans. At that time there were Pagans who pointed to
   the God of the Christians with derision as the crucified; the
   Christians defended themselves from this. By representing a crucifix
   they were afraid of provoking the blasphemies of the enemy, and to
   appear wedded to their own opinions. Christian art was born heretical;
   it bears traces of that for a long time; Christian iconography
   disengaged itself from the prejudices among which it was born. It only
   leaves it to submit to the apocryphal, themselves more or less born
   under a Gnostic influence. Hence a situation for a long time false.
   Even fully up to the Middle Ages some doctors of authority condemned
   art; art on its side even ranked with orthodoxy--permitted itself
   strange liberties. Its favourite subjects were borrowed from the
   condemned books, so much so that the representatives forced the gates
   of the church when the book which explained them had been for a long
   time expelled. In the west in the thirteenth century art emancipated
   itself all at once, but it was not the same in Oriental Christianity.
   The Greek Church and the Oriental churches never triumphed completely
   over that antipathy to images which has been carried to its acme in
   Judaism and Islamism. They condemned the relief, and shut themselves up
   into a hieratic imagery, out of which serious art shall have much
   difficulty to emerge.

   We cannot see that in private life Christians made any scruple of using
   the products of ordinary industry, which bore no representation
   shocking to them. Soon, nevertheless, there were Christian workmen who,
   even on the usual objects, replaced the ancient ornaments by images
   appropriate to the taste of the sect (Good Shepherd, a dove, a fish, a
   ship, a lyre, an anchor). A sacred guild of gold-smiths and
   glass-workers was formed especially for the necessities of the supper.
   Ordinary lamps bore nearly all the Pagan emblems; there was soon in
   trade lamps with the representation of the Good Shepherd, which
   probably came from the same workshop as the lamps with the
   representations of Bacchus or Serapis. The sculptured sarcophagi,
   representing sacred scenes, appeared about the end of the third
   century. Like the Christian paintings, they did not differ except in
   the subject from the styles of the Pagan art of the same period.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXX.

  CHRISTIAN MANNERS.

   The manners of the Christians were the best preaching of Christianity.
   One word summed them up--piety. It was the life of good little people
   without worldly prejudices, but of a perfect honesty. The Messianic
   expectation grew weaker every day, and they passed from the somewhat
   strained morality, which was suitable to a state of crisis, to the
   stable morality of a settled society. Marriage was invested with a high
   religious character. They did not require to abolish polygamy; the
   Jewish manners, if not the Jewish law, had, in fact, nearly suppressed
   that. The harem was not, to tell the truth, among the ancient Jews but
   an exceptional abuse--a privilege of royalty. The prophets always
   showed themselves hostile to it; the practice of Solomon and his
   imitators was a subject of blame and scandal. In the first centuries of
   our era the cases of polygamy became very rare among the Jews; neither
   the Christians nor the Pagans reproached them with it. By the double
   influence of the Roman and Jewish marriage, there arose also that high
   ideal of the family which is still in our days the basis of European
   civilisation, so much so that it has become an essential part of
   natural law. It is necessary to recognise nevertheless that upon this
   point the Roman influence was superior to the Jewish influence, since
   it is only through the influence of the modern codes, drawn from the
   Roman law, that polygamy has disappeared from among the Jews.

   The Roman, or it may be the Aryan influence, is also more traceable
   than the Jewish influence in the disfavour with which second marriages
   were regarded. These appear to them like an adultery decently
   disguised. As to the question of divorce, in which certain Jewish
   schools had yielded a blamable relaxation, they did not show themselves
   less strict. Marriage could not be broken but by the adultery of the
   wives. Not to separate "that which God has united" became the basis of
   the Christian law. At last the Church placed itself in full
   contradiction to Judaism by the fact of considering celibacy and
   virginity as a preferable state to marriage. Here Christianity,
   preceded, besides, in that by the Therapeutists, came near no doubt to
   the ideas which among the ancient Aryan peoples presented the virgin as
   a sacred being. The synagogue always held marriage as obligatory; in
   its eyes the celibate is guilty of homicide; he is not of the race of
   Adam, for man is not complete except when he is united to the woman;
   marriage ought not to be deferred after the age of eighteen. They made
   an exception to him who gave himself up to the study of the law, and
   who feared that the necessity of ministering to the needs of a family
   would take him from his work. "Let those who are not like me, absorbed
   by the law, people the earth," said Rabbi ben Azai.

   The Christian sects which remained connected with Judaism advised, like
   the synagogue, early marriages, and even wished that the pastors should
   keep an eye open upon the old men that they might be restrained from
   the danger of adultery. All at once, however, Christianity turned to
   the opinion of Ben Azai. Jesus, although he lived for more than thirty
   years, had never married. The expectation of an approaching end of the
   world rendered useless the desire for children, and the idea was
   established that there is no perfect Christian except through
   virginity. "The patriarchs had reason to see to the multiplication of
   their posterity; the world was young then; now, on the contrary, all
   things were declining and drawing to their close." The Gnostic and
   Manichean sects were only consistent in forbidding marriage and the act
   of generation. The orthodox Church, always moderate, avoided this
   extreme; but continence, even chastity in marriage, were recommended,
   and excessive shame attached to the execution of the natural desires;
   women took a foolish horror of marriage; the shocking timidity of the
   Church in everything relating to the legitimate relations of the two
   sexes shall provoke one day more than one well-founded jest.

   Following the same current of ideas the state of widowhood was looked
   upon as sacred; the widows constituted an ecclesiastical order. Woman
   must always be subject; when she has no longer a husband to obey, she
   serves the Church. The modesty of Christian ladies answered to these
   severe principles, and in many communities they did not go out without
   being veiled. The custom of the veil covering the whole figure in the
   fashion of the East did not become universal for young or unmarried
   women. The Montanists looked upon this custom as obligatory; if it did
   not prevail it was because of the opposition which the excesses of the
   Phrygian or African sectaries provoked, and especially by the influence
   of Greek and Latin countries, which had no need to found a true
   reformation of manners on this hideous mark of physical and moral
   weakness.

   Ornaments at least were entirely forbidden. Beauty is a temptation of
   Satan. Why add to the temptation? The use of jewels, of paint, of dye
   for the hair, and of transparent garments, was an offence against
   modesty. False hair was a still graver sin; it lost the benediction of
   the priest, which, falling upon dead hair taken from another head,
   could not tell where to rest. Indeed, the most modest arrangements of
   the hair were held to be dangerous. St. Jerome, going farther,
   considered women's hair as a simple nest for vermin, and recommended
   its being cut off.

   The defect of Christianity appeared to be here. It was too singularly
   moral; beauty, according to it, is to be entirely sacrificed. Now, in
   the eyes of a complete philosophy, beauty, far from being a superficial
   advantage, a danger, an inconvenience, is a gift of God, like virtue.
   It is as good as virtue; the beautiful woman expresses an aspect of the
   divine purpose, one of the designs of God, like the man of genius or
   the virtuous woman. It knows him, and hence its pride. It feels
   instinctively the treasure which it bears in its body; it knows well
   that, without mind, talent, or great virtue, it is reckoned among the
   first manifestations of God. And why forbid her from putting into use
   the gift which has been given her, to set the diamond which has been
   cut? The woman by adorning herself accomplishes a duty; she practises
   an art, an exquisite art, in one sense the most charming of arts. We do
   not allow ourselves to be misled by the smile which certain words
   provoke among frivolous people. We decree the palm of genius to the
   Greek artist who knew how to solve the most delicate of problems, to
   ornament the human body, that is to say, to adorn perfection itself;
   and we do not see only a question of frippery in the attempt to work
   together in the finest work of God, in the beauty of woman! The
   toilette of the woman, with all its refinements, is a grand art in its
   way. The centuries and the countries which have succeeded in that are
   the great centuries, the great countries; and Christianity showed, by
   the exclusion with which it marked that kind of elegance, that the
   social idea it conceived would not become the framework of a complete
   society, as, indeed, it did later on, when the revolt of people of the
   world should have broken the firm yoke primitively imposed upon the
   sect by an exalted pietism.

   It was, to tell the truth, everything which could be called luxury and
   worldly life which we see marked as forbidden. Spectacles were held as
   abominable and indecent, not only the bloody spectacles of the theatre,
   which all honest people detested, but even the more innocent
   spectacles. Every theatre, if for this only, that men and women
   assembled there to see and to be seen, is a dangerous place. There was
   no less horror for the thermæ, the gymnasia, the baths and the xysts,
   because of the nudities they produced. Christianity inherited there a
   Jewish sentiment. The public places were avoided by the Jews, because
   of circumcision, which exposed them to all sorts of disagreeables. If
   the games, the concourse, which make for a single day a mortal equal to
   the gods, and of which inscriptions preserve the memory, quite
   disappeared in the third century, Christianity was the cause of it. A
   blank was made by the disappearance of these ancient institutions; they
   taxed them with vanity. They were right; but human life is over when
   one has succeeded too well in proving to man that all is vanity.

   The sobriety of the Christians equalled their modesty. The
   prescriptions relating to meats were nearly all suppressed; the
   principle "to the pure all things are pure" prevailed. Many,
   nevertheless, imposed abstinence from things that have had life. Fasts
   were frequent, and caused among many that nervous debility which caused
   many tears to flow. Readiness to weep was considered a heavenly favour,
   the gift of tears. The Christians wept unceasingly; a sort of sweet
   sadness was their habitual condition. In the churches, gentleness,
   piety, and love were marked on their faces. The rigorists complained
   that often, in leaving the holy place, that meditative attitude gave
   place to discipline; but in general they recognised the Christians by
   nothing but their air. They had in some sort some faces apart, good
   faces, impressed by a calm, not excluding the smile of an amiable
   contentment. That made a sensible contrast to the easy appearance of
   the Pagans, which often was wanting in distinction and reserve. In
   Montanist Africa, certain practices, in particular that of making at
   every turn the sign of the cross on the forehead, revealed still more
   clearly the disciples of Jesus.

   The Christian was then essentially a separate being, vowed to a
   profession quite external to virtue, an ascetic indeed. If monastic
   life only appears about the end of the third century, it is because up
   till then the Church was a true monastery, an ideal city where perfect
   life was practised. When the century shall enter en masse into the
   Church, when the Council of Gangres in 325 shall have declared that the
   maxims of the Church upon poverty, upon renunciation of the family, and
   on virginity, are not addressed to the simple believers, the perfect
   ones shall create certain separate places, where the evangelical life,
   too high for common men, can be practised without reserve. Martyrdom
   had presented till then the means of putting in practice the most
   exaggerated precepts of Christ, particularly on the despising of the
   affections of blood relationship; the monastery will take the place of
   martyrdom, so that the counsel of Jesus may be practised somewhere. The
   example of Egypt, where the monastic life had always existed, might
   contribute to that result; but monachism was in the very essence of
   Christianity. Since the Church is opened to all, it was inevitable that
   there should be formed little churches for those who claimed to live as
   Jesus and the apostles at Jerusalem had lived.

   A great struggle was thus indicated for the future. Christian piety and
   worldly honour shall be two antagonists which will rudely fight with
   each other. The awakening of the worldly spirit shall be the awakening
   of unbelief. Honour will be revolted, and maintain that it values more
   that morality which permits a man to be a saint without being always a
   gallant man. There shall be the voice of the sirens to rehabilitate all
   those exquisite things which the Church has declared profane in the
   first days. The Church, an association of holy people, shall preserve
   that character in spite of all its transformations. The worldling shall
   be its worst enemy. Voltaire will show that these diabolic frivolities,
   so severely excluded from a pietistic society, are in their way both
   good and necessary. Father Canaye will try indeed to show that. nothing
   is more gallant than Christianity, and that no one is more a gentleman
   than a Jesuit. He will not convince Hocquincourt. In any case, the
   people of mind will be unconvertible. They will never induce Ninon de
   l'Enclos, Saint-Evremond, Voltaire, Merimée, to be of the same religion
   as Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, and the good Hermas.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXXI.

  REASONS FOR THE VICTORY OF CHRISTIANITY.

   It is by the new discipline of life which it introduced into the world
   that Christianity conquered. The world had need of a moral reformation;
   philosophy did not provide it; the established religions in the Greek
   and Latin countries were struck by incapacity to improve man. Among all
   the religious institutions of the ancient world, Judaism alone raised
   against the corruption of the times a cry of despair. Eternal and
   unique glory this, which ought to make one forget even its follies and
   its violence! The Jews are the revolutionaries of the first and second
   centuries of our era. Respect their fever! Possessed by a high ideal of
   justice, convinced that this ideal ought to be realised on this earth,
   not admitting these compositions with which those who believe in
   Paradise and hell content themselves so readily, they had a hunger for
   good, and they conceived of it under the form of a little synagogical
   life of which the Christian life is only the ascetic transformation.
   Some numerous little groups of humble and pious people, leading among
   them a pure life, and awaiting together the great day which shall be
   their triumph, and shall inaugurate upon the earth the reign of the
   saints--that is, budding Christianity. The happiness which they enjoyed
   in these little guest-chambers became a powerful attraction. The people
   threw themselves by a sort of instinctive movement into a sect which
   satisfied their innermost aspirations, and opened up infinite hopes.

   The intellectual exigencies of the time were very weak; the tender
   necessities of the heart were most imperious. Minds did not shine, but
   manners were sweetened. A religion was desired which should teach
   piety, myths which offered good examples, capable of being imitated, a
   sort of morality in action provided by the gods. An honest religion was
   desired, for Paganism was not that. Moral preaching proposes deism or
   monotheism; polytheism has never been a worship tending to morality. It
   was desired specially to have some assurances for a further life where
   the injustices of this should be repaired. The religion which promises
   immortality, and assures us that one day we shall see again those whom
   we have loved, always succeeds. "Those who have no hope" are very
   quickly conquered. A crowd of brotherhoods, where those consoling
   beliefs were professed, drew numerous adherents. Such were the Sabazian
   and Orphic mysteries in Macedonia, in Thrace the mysteries of
   Dionysius. In the second century, the symbols of Psyche took a funereal
   sense, and became a little religion of immortality, which the
   Christians adopted with earnestness. Ideas as to the other life, alas!
   as everything which is a matter of taste and sentiment, are those which
   subdue most easily the caprices of the world. The pictures which on
   this point have for a moment contented us pass quickly away; in making
   dreams beyond the tomb, we wish always something new, for nothing can
   long bear investigation. The established religion did not therefore
   give any satisfaction to the deep necessities of the age. The old god
   was neither good nor bad; he was a force. With time the adventures
   which were accounted concerning these divinities became immoral. The
   worship bordered on the grossest idolatry, sometimes the most
   ridiculous. It was not rare for philosophers in public to deliver
   themselves of attacks against the official religion, and that amid the
   applause of their auditors. The government, by wishing to mix
   themselves up with it, only brought it to the ground. The divinities of
   Greece, so long identified with the divinities of Rome, had their place
   by right in the Pantheon. The barbarian divinities suffered analogous
   identifications, and became Jupiters, Apollos, and Esculapiuses. As to
   the local divinities, they were saved by the cult of the Lares gods.
   Augustus had introduced into the religion a very considerable change,
   by restoring and regulating the cult of the Lares gods, especially the
   Lares of the streets, and by permitting to be joined to the two Lares
   consecrated by custom a third Lare, the Genius of the Emperor. The
   Lares gained by this association the epithet of August (Lares Augusti),
   and, as the local gods retained for the most part their legal right to
   their title of Lares, nearly all were thus described as August (numina
   augusta). Around this complex worship a clergy was formed, composed of
   the Flamen, a sort of archbishop representing the State, and some
   august sevirs, corporations of workmen and little tradesmen specially
   attached to Lares or local divinities. But the Genius of the Emperor
   naturally bore down its neighbours; the true religion of the State was
   the religion of Rome, of the emperor, and of the administration. The
   Lares remained very little personages. Jehovah, the only local god who
   resisted obstinately the august association, and whom it was impossible
   to transform into an innocent fetish of the cross, killed both the
   divinity of Augustus and all the other gods who lent themselves so
   easily to become the panders to tyranny. The struggle was from that
   point established between Judaism and the oddly-amalgamated cult which
   Rome sought to impose. Rome shall be stranded on this point. Rome shall
   give to the world government, civilisation, law, and the arts of
   administration; but it shall not give it religion. The religion which
   shall spread itself apparently in spite of Rome, in reality thanks to
   it, shall be in no wise the religion of Latium, or the religion patched
   up by Augustus; it shall be the religion which Rome has so often
   believed it has destroyed--the religion of Jehovah.

   We have referred to the noble efforts of philosophy to meet the
   exigencies of the soul which religion no longer satisfied. Philosophy
   had seen everything and expressed everything in exquisite language; but
   it was necessary that this should be said under a popular, that is to
   say, a religious form. Religious movements are only made by priests;
   philosophy has too much reason. The reward she offers is not tangible
   enough. The poor, the person without instruction, who cannot approach
   it, are really without religion and without hope. Man is born so
   mediocre that he is not good except when he dreams. He needs some
   illusions that he may do what he ought to do for the love of good. This
   slave has need of fear and of lies to make him perform his duty. We can
   only obtain sacrifices from the masses by promising that they shall be
   paid in return. The self-denial of the Christian is nothing after all
   but a clever calculation, a placing of the Kingdom of God before the
   vision. Reason will always have few martyrs. We only devote ourselves
   for what we believe. Now, what we believe is the uncertain, the
   unreasonable; we submit to the reasonable, we do not believe it. That
   is why reason does not impel to action, it rather impels to abstention.
   No great revolution has been produced in humanity without very distinct
   ideas, without prejudices, without dogmatism; we are not strong except
   in the condition of deceiving ourselves with the whole world. Stoicism
   besides implied an error which injured it much before the people. In
   its eyes virtue and moral sentiment are identical. Christianity
   distinguishes between these two things. Jesus loves the prodigal son,
   the harlot, souls good at bottom, although sinners. To the Stoics all
   sins are equal; sin is unpardonable. Christianity has pardon for all
   crimes. The more one has sinned, the more it is his. Constantine shall
   become a Christian because he believes that the Christians alone have
   expiation for the murder of a son by his father. The success which at
   the beginning of the second century shall attend. the hideous bullock
   sacrifices, from which people came covered with blood, proves how the
   imagination of the time was set upon finding means to appease the gods
   who were supposed to be angry. The bullock sacrifice is, among all the
   Pagan rites, that which the Christians most dreaded as competing with
   them. It was in some sects the last effort of expiring Paganism against
   the merit, each day more triumphant, of the blood of Jesus. We might
   have hoped one moment that the confraternities of cultores deorum would
   give the people the religious aliment which they needed. The second
   century saw their rise and their decadence. The religious character
   disappeared then little by little. In certain countries they lost even
   their funereal destination and became Tontines, treasuries of assurance
   and retreat, associations for mutual help. Alone, the colleges devoted
   to the worship of the Oriental gods (religious pastophores, isiastes,
   dendrophores, of the Great Mother) kept some devotees. It is evident
   that these gods spoke much more to the religious sentiment than the
   Greek and Italian gods. People grouped themselves around them; their
   faithful became quickly brothers and friends, while men scarcely
   grouped themselves at all, at least in heart, around the official gods.
   In religion there are but few sects which cannot succeed in founding
   something.

   It is so pleasant to regard ourselves as a little aristocracy of the
   truth, to believe that we possess, along with a group of the
   privileged, the treasure of goodness. Pride is found here; the Jew, the
   metuali of Syria humbled, ashamed of everything, are at bottom
   impertinent and disdainful. No affront hurts them, they are so proud
   among themselves of being the elect people. In our days such a
   miserable association of minds gives more consolation to its members
   than healthy philosophy. A mass of people find happiness in these
   chimeras, and attach their moral life to them. In its day the
   abracadabra procured religious pleasures, and with a little willingness
   we could find there a sublime theology.

   The worship of Isis had its regular inroads into Greece from the fourth
   century before Jesus Christ. All the Greek and Roman world was
   literally overrun. This worship, such as we see it represented in the
   paintings of Pompeii and Herculaneum, with its tonsured and beardless
   priests, clothed with a kind of alb, resemble much our "offices." Every
   morning the timbrel, like the clock of our parishes, calls the devotees
   to a sort of mass accompanied by a sermon, prayers for the emperor and
   the empire, sprinklings with the water of the Nile. Ite missa est. In
   the evening the salutation takes place, they wish good night to the
   goddess, they kiss her feet. There were some bizarre, some ridiculous
   processions in the streets, where the brothers carried their gods upon
   their shoulders. At other times they begged in a foreign dress, which
   made the true Romans laugh. That resembled much the brotherhoods of
   penitents in southern countries. The Isaists had their heads shaved.
   They were clad in a linen tunic, in which they wished to be buried.
   There were some miracles added to this little society, some sermons, a
   "taking of the habit," ardent prayers, baptisms, confessions and bloody
   penances. After the initiation a lively devotion took place like that
   of the Middle Ages towards the Virgin; they felt a pleasure in nothing
   but seeing the image of the goddess. The purifications, the expiations
   kept the soul awake. It established, especially among the assistants in
   these pious comedies, a tender feeling of brotherhood; they became
   father, son, brother, sister to each other. These little freemasonries,
   with some passwords, such as IChThChC of the Christians, created deep
   and secret bonds.

   Osiris, Serapis, and Anubis shared the favour of Isis. Serapis in
   particular, identified with Jupiter, became one of the Divine names
   which the most of those who aspired to a certain Monotheism, and
   especially to intimate relations with heaven, affected. The Egyptian
   god has a real presence, they see him unceasingly; he communicates with
   them by dreams and by continual apparitions; religion in that way is a
   perpetual sacred kiss between the faithful and his deity. They were
   especially women who leant towards these foreign cults. The national
   worship was cold to them. The courtesans, notably, were nearly all
   devoted to Isis and Serapis; the temples of Isis were looked upon as
   places for amorous meetings. The idols in this sort of chapels were
   adorned like the Madonnas. Women had a part in the ministry, they bore
   sacred titles. Everything showed devotion, and contributed to the
   excitement of the senses: weepings, passionate chants, dances to the
   sound of the flute, representations commemorative of the death and
   resurrection of a god. The moral discipline, without being serious, had
   the appearance of it. There were fasts, austerities, and days of
   continence. Ovid and Tibullus complain of the injury which these
   enchantments did to their amusements, in a tone which shows that the
   goddess asked nothing of these devoted beauties except the most limited
   mortifications.

   A multitude of other gods were accepted without opposition, even with
   welcome. The heavenly Juno, the Asiatic Bellona, Sabazius, Adonis, the
   goddess of Syria, had their believers. The soldiers were the vehicle of
   these different cults, thanks to the habit they had of embracing one
   after another the religions of the countries through which they passed.
   Coming home, they consecrated a temple, an altar to their recollections
   of the garrison. Hence these dedications to Jupiter of Baal-bek, to
   Jupiter of Dolica, which are found in all parts of the empire. An
   oriental god especially held for a moment in the balance the fate of
   Christendom, and became the object of one of those cults of universal
   propaganda which seize upon the entire portions of humanity. Mitra is
   in Arian primitive mythology one of the names of the sun. This name
   became among the Persians of the Achemeniidan times a god of the first
   order. We hear mention of him for the first time in the Græco-Roman
   world about the year 70 before Christ. The fashion gradually leant
   towards him; it is only in the second and third century that the
   worship of Mithra, knowingly organised upon the type of the mysteries
   which had already so deeply moved ancient Greece, obtained an
   extraordinary success.

   The resemblances of this cult to Christianity were so striking that St.
   Justin and Tertullian saw in it a Satanic plagiarism. Mithraism had
   baptism, the eucharist, the agapes, penitence, expiations and
   anointings. Its chapels much resembled little churches. It created a
   bond of brotherhood among the initiated. We have said it twenty times,
   it was the great need of the age. Congregations were desired where
   people could love each other, sustain each other, observe one another,
   some brotherhoods offering a narrow field (for man is not perfect) for
   all sorts of little vain pursuits, the inoffensive development of
   childish ambitions in the synagogues. From many other points of view,
   Mithraism resembled freemasonry. There were certain grades, orders of
   initiation, bearing odd names, some gradual trials, a fast of fifty
   days, terrors and flagellations. A lively piety was developed through
   these exercises. They believed in the immortality of the initiated, in
   a paradise for pure souls. The mystery of the cup, so like the
   Christian Supper, certain evening gatherings analogous to those of our
   pious congregations, in "caves" or "little oratories," a numerous
   clergy, to which women were admitted, some expiations by the sacrifice
   of bullocks, frightful, but thrilling, answered well to the aspirations
   of the Roman world towards a sort of materialistic religiosity. The
   immorality of the Phrygian Sabazites had not disappeared, but was
   marked by a veneer of pantheism and mysticity, sometimes by a quiet
   scepticism in the style of Ecclesiastes.

   We may say that if Christianity had been arrested in its growth by some
   mortal malady, the world would have been Mithraistic. Mithra lent
   himself to all the confusions, with Attis, with Adonis, with Sabazius,
   with Mên, who had been already in possession for a long time back, to
   make the tears of women flow. The soldiers also affected this worship.
   In going back to their homes, they carried it to the frontier on the
   Rhine and the Danube. Thus Mithraism resisted Christianity more than
   the other cults. It needed, to destroy it, the terrible blows struck at
   it by the Christian empire. It was in the year 376 that we find the
   greatest number of monuments raised by the adorers of the great goddess
   of Mithra. Some very respectable senatorial families remaining attached
   to her rebuilt at their own expense the destroyed altars, and, by force
   of legacies and foundation, essayed to give eternity to a religion
   which was moribund.

   The mysteries were the ordinary form of these exotic cults and the
   principal cause of their success. The impressions which the initiations
   left were very deep, like that of freemasonry in our day; although it
   was clumsy, it served as an aliment for the soul. It was a sort of
   first communion; one day, there was a pure being, privileged, presented
   to the pious public as a blessed one, as a saint, with the head crown,
   and a taper in the hand. Some strange spectacles, some appearances of
   gigantic puppets, some alternations of light and darkness, visions of
   the other life which they believed real, inspired a fervour of devotion
   whose souvenir was never effaced. There was mingled with them more of
   an equivocal sentiment, whose evil manners of antiquity they abused. As
   in the Catholic confraternities, they believed themselves bound by an
   oath; they held to it even when they scarcely believed it, for there
   was attached to it the idea of a special favour, of a character which
   separated them from the vulgar. All these Oriental cults involved more
   money than those of the West. The priests had there more importance
   than in the Latin cult; they formed a clergy with different orders, a
   sacred soldiery, retired from the world, having its own rules. These
   priests had a grave, and as we say now, an ecclesiastical air; they had
   the tonsure, mitres, and a separate costume.

   Religion founded like that of Apollonius of Tyana upon the belief in a
   journey upon the god to the earth had special chances of success.
   Humanity seeks for the ideal; but it wishes the ideal to be a person,
   it does not love an abstraction. A man-incarnation of the ideal, and
   whose biography would serve as a framework to all the aspirations of
   the time, that is what religious opinion demanded. The gospel of
   Apollonius of Tyana had only a half success; that of Jesus succeeded
   completely. The necessities of the imagination and the heart which the
   nations cultivated were just those to which Christianity gave a
   complete satisfaction. The objections which the Christian belief
   presents to minds led by rational culture to the impossibility of
   admitting the supernatural did not then exist. Generally it is more
   difficult to prevent a man from believing than to make him believe. No
   century indeed has ever been more credulous than the second. Everybody
   admitted the miracles to be the most ridiculous; the current mythology,
   having lost its primitive sense, reached the last limits of absurdity.
   The sense of the sacrifices which Christianity demanded from reason
   were less than Paganism supposed. To be converted to Christianity is
   not therefore an act of credulity; it is almost an act of relative good
   sense. Indeed from the rationalist's point of view Christianity might
   be looked upon as an advancement; it was the man religiously
   enlightened who adopted it. The believer in the ancient gods was the
   paganus, the peasant always inclined against progress behind his age;
   as one day perhaps in the twentieth century the last Christians will in
   their turn be called pagani, "rustics."

   On two essential points, the worship of idols and the bloody
   sacrifices, Christianity answered to the most advanced ideas of the
   time, as we would say to-day, and made a sort of junction with
   stoicism. The absence of images which in the Christian worship on the
   part of the people made a kind of accusation of atheism was pleasing to
   good minds revolted by the official idolatry. The bloody sacrifices
   involved also the most offensive ideas as to the Divinity. The Essenes,
   the Elkasaïtes, the Ebionites, and the Christians of every sect,
   inheritors in this of the ancient prophets, had on this point an
   admirable sentiment of progress. Flesh was seen to be excluded even
   from the paschal feast. Thus the pure worship was founded. The lower
   side of religion--these are the customs which have been considered to
   operate themselves. Jesus, by the rôle there has been given him, if not
   by his personal act, has marked the end of these practices. Why speak
   of sacrifices? That of Jesus is worth all the others. Of the passover?
   Jesus is the true paschal lamb. Of the Thora? The example of Jesus is
   worth much more. It is by this reasoning that St. Paul has destroyed
   the law--that Protestantism has killed Catholicism. The faith in Jesus
   has thus replaced everything. The very excesses of Christianity have
   been the principle of its force; by this dogma that Jesus has done all
   for the justification of his faithful, works have been put aside as
   useless, every other worship than the faith has been discouraged.

   Christianity had therefore an immense superiority over the religion of
   the State which Rome patronised and over the different religions she
   tolerated. The Pagans comprehended it vaguely. Alexander Severus having
   had the idea of raising a temple to Christ, they brought before him
   some old sacred texts from which it was made plain that if he followed
   out his idea all would become Christians, and that the other temples
   would be abandoned. In vain Julian shall try to apply to the official
   cult the organisation which made the strength of the Church; Paganism
   shall resist a transformation contrary to its nature. Christianity
   shall impose itself over the whole empire. The religion which Rome will
   spread in the world shall be just that which she has the most strongly
   combated, Judaism under the Christian form. Far from being surprised at
   the success in the Roman empire, it is much more astonishing that this
   revolution has been so slow in being accomplished.

   That which was deeply affected by Christianity was the maxims of the
   State, the basis of Roman polity. These maxims defended themselves
   vigorously during a hundred and fifty years, and retarded the coming of
   the worship destined to victory. But that coming was inevitable. Melito
   was right. Christianity was destined to be the religion of the Roman
   Empire. The West still showed itself refractory; Asia Minor and Syria,
   on the contrary, reckoned dense masses of Christian populations,
   increasing every day in political importance. The centre of gravity of
   the empire drew them from that side; they felt already that an
   ambitious man would have the temptation to sustain himself upon these
   crowds which mendicity placed in the hands of the Church, and which the
   Church in its turn would place in the hand of the Cwsar who should be
   the most favourable to it. The political position of the bishop does
   not date from Constantine. From the third century the bishop of the
   great towns of the east is shown us as a personage analogous to what in
   our days the bishop is in Turkey, among the Christian Greeks,
   Armenians, &c. The depôts of the faithful, the testaments, the
   tutorship of pupils, processes, all the administration, in a word, are
   confided to him. He is a magistrate alongside of the public
   magistrature, benefiting by all the faults of that institution. The
   Church in the third century is already a vast agency of popular
   interests. It is felt that one day, when the empire falls, the bishop
   will be its heir. When the State refuses to occupy itself with social
   problems, these shall solve themselves apart by means of associations
   which demolish the empire.

   The glory of Rome is to have attempted to solve the problem of human
   society without theocracy, without supernatural dogma. Judaism,
   Christianity, Islamism, and Buddhism are, on the contrary, great
   institutions, embracing the whole human life under the form of revealed
   religions. These religions are human society itself; nothing exists
   outside of them. The triumph of Christianity was the extinction of
   civil life for a thousand years. The Church is the community, if you
   will, but under a religious form. To be a member of that commune it is
   not enough to be born; a metaphysical dogma must be professed, and if
   your mind refuses to believe that dogma, so much the worse for you.
   Islamism only applies the same principle. The mosque, like the
   synagogue and the Church, is the centre of all life. The Middle Ages,
   ruled by Christianity, Islamism, and Buddhism, are indeed the era of
   the theocracy. The stroke of genius of the Renaissance has been to
   return to the Roman law, which is essentially the laic law--to return
   to philosophy, science, true art, and reason outside of all revelation.
   Let us keep it there. The supreme goal of humanity is the liberty of
   the individual. Now the theocracy and revelation never will create
   liberty. The theocracy made of the man clothed with power a functionary
   of God; reason makes of him a mainstay of the wills and the rights of
   each.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXXII.

  SOCIAL AND POLITICAL REVOLUTION ADVANCED BY CHRISTIANITY.

   Thus in degree as the empire fell Christianity arose. During the third
   century Christianity sucked ancient society like a vampire, drawing out
   all its forces and creating that general enervation against which the
   patriotic empires vainly struggled. Christianity had no need to attack
   it with lively vigour; it had only to shut itself up in its churches.
   It revenged itself by not serving the State, for it kept nearly to
   itself alone certain principles without which the State cannot prosper.
   It is the grand battle which we see to-day waged in the State by our
   Conservatives. The army, the magistracy, the public services, require a
   certain amount of seriousness and honesty. Where the classes which can
   furnish that seriousness shut themselves up in abstention, the whole
   body suffers.

   The Church in the third century, by monopolising life, drained civil
   society, bled it, made it empty. The little societies killed the great
   society. The ancient life, a life all exterior and manly; a life of
   glory, of heroism, of patriotism; a life of the forum, the theatre, and
   the gymnasium is conquered by the Jewish life--a life anti-military, a
   friend of shade, a life of pale immured people. Politics are not served
   by men too much withdrawn from the world. When a man decides to aspire
   only to heaven, he is no longer of the country here below. A nation
   cannot be made up of monks, or of Yoguis; the hatred and despisal of
   the world do not prepare for the struggle of life. India, which of all
   known countries is the most versed in asceticism, has not been since
   time immemorial anything but a land open to all conquerors. It was the
   same in some respect with Egypt. The inevitable consequence of
   asceticism is to make one consider everything which is not religious
   frivolous and inferior. The sovereign, the warrior, compared with the
   priest, are only rustic and brutal; civil order is taken for a
   vexatious tyranny. Christianity softened the manners of the ancient
   world; but, from the military and patriotic point of view, it destroyed
   the ancient world. The city and the State will not accommodate
   themselves later on to Christianity otherwise than by making it submit
   to the most profound modifications.

   "They dwell on the earth," said the author of the Epistle to Diognetes,
   "but really their country is in heaven." When they ask the martyr as to
   his country, "I am a Christian," he says. The country and the civil
   laws, behold the mother, the father, which the true Gnostic, according
   to Clement of Alexandria, ought to despise that he may sit down at the
   right hand of God. The Christian is embarrassed, incapable, when the
   affairs of the world are concerned; the Gospel found believers, not
   citizens. It was the same of Islamism and Buddhism. The advent of these
   great universal religions puts an end to the old idea of native
   country: one was no longer a Roman, an Athenian; they were Christian,
   Mussulmans and Buddhists. Men henceforth are to be taught according to
   their cult, not according to their native land: they shall divide over
   heresies, not over questions of nationality.

   This is what Marcus-Aurelius saw perfectly, and this renders him so
   favourable to Christianity. The Church appeared to him a State in a
   State. "The camp of piety," that new "system of native land founded on
   the divine Logos," had nothing to see in the Roman camp, which does not
   pretend to form subjects for heaven. The Church, in fact, avows itself
   to be a complete society, quite superior to civil society: the pastor
   is worth more than the magistrate. The Church is the native land of the
   Christian, as the synagogue is the native country of the Jew: the
   Christian and the Jew live in the country where they look upon
   themselves as strangers. The Christian has scarcely any father or
   mother. He owes nothing to the empire, but the empire owes everything
   to him, for it is the presence of the faithful scattered through the
   Roman world which stays the heavenly anger, and saves the State from
   its ruin. The Christian does not rejoice in the victories of the
   empire; the public disasters appear to him a confirmation of the
   prophecies which condemn the world to perish by the barbarians and by
   fire. The cosmopolitanism of the Stoics has as many dangers; but an
   ardent love of civilisation and of Greek culture served as the
   counterpoise to the excess of their indifference.

   In many points of view, certainly, the Christians were loyal subjects.
   They never revolted; they prayed for their persecutors. In spite of
   their complaints against Marcus-Aurelius, they did not take any part in
   the revolt of Avidius Cassius. They affected the principles of the most
   complete legitimism. God giving power to whom he pleases, it is
   necessary to obey, without examination, him who possesses it
   officially. But this apparent political orthodoxy was at bottom only
   the cult of success. "There has never been among us any partisan of
   Albin, or of Niger," said Tertullian with ostentation, under the reign
   of Septimus Severus. But, really, in what was Septimus Severus more
   legitimate than Albin, and than Pescennius Niger? He succeeded better
   than they, that is all. The Christian principle, "We must acknowledge
   him who exercises the power," ought to contribute to establish the
   worship of an accomplished fact, that is to say, the worship of force.
   Liberal policy owes nothing, and will never owe anything, to
   Christianity. The idea of representative government is the contrary of
   that which Jesus, St. Peter, and Clement of Rome expressly professed.

   The most important of civic duties, military service, the Christians
   could not fulfil. That service implied, besides the necessity of
   shedding blood, which appeared criminal to the enthusiasts, certain
   acts which timorous consciences considered idolatrous. There were, no
   doubt, many Christian soldiers in the second century; but very quickly
   the incompatibility of the two professions disclosed itself, and the
   soldier laid down his sword or became a martyr. The antipathy was
   decided; in becoming a Christian, he quitted the army. "One cannot
   serve two masters," was the principle repeated without ceasing. The
   representation of a sword or a bow on a ring was forbidden. "It is the
   same to fight for the emperor as to pray for him." The grand weakness
   which was remarked in the Roman at the end of the second century, and
   which is visible especially in the third century, has its cause in
   Christianity. Celsus perceived the truth here with wonderful sagacity.
   The military courage which, according to the German, alone can open the
   Walhalla, is not in itself a virtue in the eyes of the Christian. If it
   is employed for a good cause, it is right; if not, it is only
   barbarity. Certainly a man very brave in war may be a man of mediocre
   morality; but a society of perfect people would be so weak! By being
   too consistent, the Christian East lost all military valour. Islam has
   profited by it, and has given to the world the melancholy spectacle of
   that eternal Christian of the East, always the same in spite of the
   difference of race, always beaten, always massacred, perpetually
   offering its neck to the sabre, a very uninteresting victim, for he
   does not revolt and does not know how to hold a weapon even when one
   puts it into his hand.

   The Christian shunned likewise the magistracy, the public offices, and
   civil honours. To pursue these honours, to exercise ambition for these
   functions, or only to accept them, was to give a mark of faith in a
   world which, as principles, they declared condemned and stained by
   idolatry to the very depths. A law of Septimus Severus permits the
   "adherents of the Jewish superstition" to attain to honours with a
   dispensation from obligations contrary to their creed. The Christians
   could certainly have profited by these dispensations; they did not. To
   crown one's door with the announcement of festival days, to take part
   in the amusements and public rejoicings, was apostasy. They were even
   forbidden to go to the tribunals. Christians ought never to carry their
   cases there, they ought to hand them over to their pastors for
   arbitration. The impossibility of mixed marriages erected a wall that
   was insurmountable between the Church and the society. It was forbidden
   to the faithful to promenade in the streets, or to mingle in public
   conversations; they must live only among themselves. Even the taverns
   could not be in common: Christians on a journey went to the church, and
   there shared in the agapes, in the distributions of the remainder of
   the sacred offerings.

   A crowd of arts and trades, whose profession drew with it association
   with idolatry, were forbidden to the Christians. Sculpture and
   painting, especially, came nearly to be objectless; they were treated
   as enemies. Here is the explanation of one of the most singular facts
   of history--I mean the disappearance of sculpture in the first half of
   the third century. What Christianity killed first in the old
   civilisation was art. It slowly killed riches, but in that respect its
   action has not been less decisive. Christianity was, before everything,
   an immense economic revolution. The first became the last, and the last
   first. That was really the realisation of the kingdom of God, according
   to the Jews. One day Rab Joseph, son of Rab Josua Ben Levi, having
   fallen into a lethargy, his father asked him, when he came to himself,
   "What have you seen in heaven, my son?" "I have seen," replied Joseph,
   "the world upside down; the most powerful were in the last rank; the
   most humble in the first." "It is the normal world which you have seen,
   my son."

   The Roman empire, by humbling the nobility and by reducing almost to
   nothing the privilege of blood, increased, on the other hand, the
   advantages of chance. Far from establishing effective equality among
   the citizens, the Roman empire, opening to two knockers the doors of
   the Roman city, created a deep difference -- that of honestiores (the
   notables, the rich) and the humiliores or tenuiores (the poor). In
   proclaiming the equality of all, they introduced inequality into the
   law, especially the penal law. Poverty rendered the title of "Roman
   citizen " nearly useless, and the great majority were poor. The error
   of Greece, which had been to despise the workman and the peasant, had
   not disappeared. Christianity at first did nothing for the peasant; it
   even hurt the rural populations by the institution of the episcopate,
   in the influence and benefit of which the towns alone had part; but it
   had an influence of the first degree in the rehabilitation of the
   artisan. One of the recommendations which the Church made to the
   tradesman was to acquit himself in his occupation with taste and
   industry. The word operarius appears again; in their epitaphs the
   workman and workwoman are praised for having been good workers.

   The workman honestly gaining his livelihood every day--this was indeed
   the Christian ideal. Avarice was a supreme crime in the eyes of the
   Primitive Church. Now the most frequent avarice was simply economy.
   Almsgiving was a strict duty. Judaism had already a precept as to it.
   In the Psalms and prophetical books the ebion is the friend of God, and
   to give to the ebion is to give to God. Almsgiving in Hebrew is
   synonymous with justice (sedaka). The earnestness of pious people
   needed to be limited to justify itself in this way: one of the precepts
   of Ouscha forbids that more than a fifth of one's goods should be given
   to the poor. Christianity, which at its origin was a society of
   ebionim, fully accepted the idea that the rich, if he did not give of
   his superfluity, is keeping back the property of others. God gives all
   his creation to all. "Imitate the equality of God, and no one will be
   poor," we read in a text which was for some time held as sacred. The
   Church herself became an establishment of charity. The agapes and the
   distributions made of the superfluity of offerings kept the poor and
   travellers.

   It was the rich man who all along the line was sacrificed. Few of the
   rich entered the Church, and their position there was most difficult.
   The poor, proud of the evangelical promises, treated them with an air
   which might appear arrogant. The rich man's fortune required to be
   pardoned, as if it were some derogation from the spirit of
   Christianity. By right the kingdom of God was closed to him, at least
   unless he purified his riches by almsgiving when he did not expiate it
   by martyrdom. They held him for an egotist, who fattened on the sweat
   of others. The community of goods, if it ever existed, existed no
   longer; it was called "the apostolic life," that is to say, the ideal
   of the Primitive Church of Jerusalem was a dream lost in the distance;
   but the property of the believer was only half property; he held little
   of it, and the Church really shared it as much as he.

   It was in the fourth century that the struggle became great and
   desperate. The rich classes, nearly all attached to the ancient
   religion, fought energetically; but the poor carried the day. In the
   East, where the action of Christianity was even more complete, or
   rather, less opposed than in the West, there were scarcely any rich at
   the beginning of the middle of the fifth century. Syria, and especially
   Egypt, became quite ecclesiastical and monastic countries. The Church
   and the monastery--that is to say, the two forms of the community--were
   the only rich there. The Arabian conquest, throwing itself on these
   countries, after some battles on the frontier, found nothing more than
   a flock to lead away. Liberty of worship being once assured, the
   Christians of the East submitted to all tyrannies. In the West, the
   Germanic invasions and other causes did not allow pauperism to triumph
   completely. But human life was suspended for a thousand years. Great
   industry became impossible; consequently false ideas spread as to
   usury; all the operations of banking and assurance were interdicted.
   The Jew alone could handle money; they forced him to be rich; then they
   reproached him with that fortune to which they had condemned him. Here
   was the greatest error of Christianity. It would not have been so bad
   to say to the poor, instead of "Enrich yourselves at the expense of the
   rich," "Riches are nothing." It cut capital by the root; it forbade the
   most legitimate thing, the interest of money, by having the air of
   guaranteeing to the rich his riches; it took away its fruits from him;
   it rendered it unproductive. This fatal error spread across all the
   society of the Middle Ages, for the pretended crime of usury was the
   obstacle which opposed for more than ten centuries the progress of
   civilisation.

   The amount of work in the world diminished considerably. Some
   countries, such as Syria, where the comfortable was not connected with
   so much pleasure as pain, and where slavery was a condition of material
   civilisation, were lowered to a considerable degree in the human
   ladder. The ancient ruins remained there like the vestiges of a world
   that had disappeared and had been misunderstood. The joys of the other
   life, not acquired by work, were dwelt upon as much as that which leads
   man to action. The bird of heaven, the lily do not toil nor spin, and
   yet they occupy through their beauty a rank of the first order in the
   hierarchy of creatures. Great is the joy of the poor when they thus
   announced to him happiness without work. The mendicant whom you tell
   that the world is going to be his, and that, passing his life in doing
   nothing, he is a noble in the Church, so much so that his prayers are
   the most efficacious of all--this mendicant soon becomes dangerous. We
   see this in the movements of the last Messianists of Tuscany. The
   peasants, indoctrinated by Lazaretti, having lost the habit of work,
   did not wish to resume their habitual life. As in Galilee, as in Umbria
   in the time of Francis d'Assisi, the people imagined that they could
   conquer heaven by poverty. After such dreams they did not resign
   themselves to take up the yoke again. They acted the apostle sooner
   than take up the chain which had been broken. It is so hard to bend
   every day under a humiliating and ungrateful task.

   The goal of Christianity was not in any way the perfecting of human
   society, nor the increase of the sum of happiness of the individuals.
   Man strives to endure the least evil possible upon the earth when he
   looks seriously at the earth and the few days that he will pass there.
   But when he has been told that the earth is upon the point of
   finishing, and that life is nothing but a day's trial, the
   insignificant preface of an eternal idea, what good is there in
   beautifying it? They do not set themselves to adorn it, and to render
   comfortable the hovel where they must wait but an instant. It is
   especially in the relation of Christianity that this appears with
   clearness. Christianity eminently contributed to comfort the slave and
   to make his lot better. But it does not work directly to suppress
   slavery. We have seen that the great school of jurisconsultes, arising
   from the Antonines, is entirely possessed by this idea that slavery is
   an abuse which must be gently suppressed. Christianity never said,
   "Slavery is an abuse." Nevertheless, by its exalted idealism, it serves
   powerfully the philosophical tendency which for a long time back has
   made itself felt in the laws and manners.

   Primitive Christianity was a movement essentially religious. Everything
   which in the social organisation of the time was not associated with
   idolatry appeared to it good to keep. The idea never came to the
   Christian doctors to protest against the established fact of slavery.
   That would have been a fashion of acting in a revolutionary way
   altogether contrary to their spirit. The rights of men were not in any
   way a Christian affair. St. Paul completely recognised the legitimacy
   of a master's position. No word occurs in all the ancient Christian
   literature to preach revolt to the slave, nor to advise the master to
   manumission, nor even to agitate the problem of public law which has
   been produced among us concerning slavery. There were some dangerous
   sectaries, like the Carpocratians, who spoke of suppressing the
   differences between people. The orthodox admitted the property as
   fixed, as it had for its object a man or a thing. The terrible lot of
   the slave does not touch them nearly so much as us. For the few hours
   that life lasts what matters the condition of man? "Hast thou been
   called a slave? care not for it; if thou canst free thyself, profit by
   it. . . . The slave is the Lord's freeman; the freeman is the slave of
   Christ. In Christ, there is no more Greek nor Jew, slave nor freeman,
   male nor woman." The words servus and libertus are extremely rare on
   the Christian tombs. The slave and the freeman are equally servus Dei,
   as the soldier is miles Christi. The slave, on another side, calls
   himself proudly the freeman of Jesus.

   Submission and conscientious attachment of the slave towards the
   master, gentleness and brotherhood on the part of the slave--by this is
   bounded, in practice, the morality of primitive Christianity on this
   delicate point. The number of slaves and of freedmen was very
   considerable in the Church. Never is the master Christian, who has
   Christian slaves, counselled to free them: it is not forbidden even to
   use corporal chastisement towards them, and this is the nearly
   inevitable consequence of slavery. Under Constantine the favour of
   liberty appeared to retrograde. If the movement which dates from the
   Antonines had continued in the second half of the third century, and in
   the fourth century, the suppression of slavery would have come about as
   a legal measure and by redemption money. The ruin of the liberal
   polity, and the misfortunes of the times, caused all the ground which
   had been gained to be lost. The Fathers of the Church speak of the
   ignominy of slavery, and the baseness of slaves, in the same terms as
   the Pagans. John Chrysostom, in the fourth century, is almost the only
   doctor who formally counsels the master to enfranchise his slave as a
   good action. Later on the Church possessed slaves, and treated them
   like everybody else, that is to say, harshly. The condition of the
   Church slave was governed, indeed, by one circumstance, viz., the
   impossibility of alienating the property of the Church. Who was his
   proprietor? Who could enfranchise him? The difficulty of solving this
   question eternised ecclesiastical slavery, and brought about this
   singular result, that the Church, which really had done so much for the
   slaves, had been the last to possess slaves. The enfranchisements were
   generally made by will; now the Church had no wills to make. The
   ecclesiastical freeman remained under the patronage of a mistress who
   did not die.

   It is in an indirect fashion, and by way of consequence, that
   Christianity contributed powerfully to change the situation of the
   slave, and to suppress slavery. The rôle of Christianity in the
   question of slavery has been that of an enlightened Conservative who
   serves Radicalism by his principles, while holding very reactionary
   language. While showing the slave to be capable of virtue, heroic in
   martyrdom, equal to his master, and probably his superior in point of
   view of the Kingdom of God, the new faith made slavery impossible. To
   give a moral value to the slave is to suppress slavery. The gatherings
   in the church, and they alone, were sufficient to ruin this cruel
   institution. Antiquity had not preserved slavery, except by excluding
   the slaves from the cults of the country. If they had sacrificed with
   their masters, they would have been morally elevated. Frequenting the
   church was the most perfect lesson of religious equality. What shall be
   said of the eucharist, of martyrdom endured in common? From the moment
   that the slave has the same religion as his master, prays in the same
   temple as he, slavery is nearly at an end. The sentiments of Blandina
   and her "carnal mistress" are those of a mother and daughter. In the
   Church the master and the slave were called brethren. Even on the most
   delicate matter, that of marriage, we see some miracles--certain
   freedmen marrying noble ladies, some feminæ clarisimæ.

   As it is natural to suppose, the Christian master led his slaves more
   frequently to the faith, without committing any indiscretion which
   would people the Church with unworthy subjects. It was a good action to
   go to the slave market, and, allowing oneself to be guided by grace, to
   choose some poor creature to purchase to make sure of his salvation.
   "To purchase a slave is to gain a soul" became a current proverb. A
   kind of proselytism, more common and more legitimate, still consisted
   in receiving foundlings, who became the alumni Christians. Sometimes
   certain churches ransomed at their expense one of their members from a
   servile condition. This excited the desires of the unfortunate ones
   less favoured. The orthodox doctors did not encourage these dangerous
   pretensions: "Let them continue to serve for the glory of God, that
   they may obtain from God a much better liberty." The slave, or rather
   the freedman, rose to the most important ecclesiastical functions,
   provided that his patron or his master made no opposition.

   What Christianity founded is equality before God. Clement of Alexandria
   and John Chrysostom especially did not lose an occasion of consoling
   the slave, of proclaiming him the freeman and as noble as he, if he
   accepts his condition and serves for God willingly and from the heart.
   In its liturgy the Church has a prayer "for those who pine in bitter
   slavery." Already Judaism on the same subject had professed some
   relatively humane maxims. It had thus opened as widely as possible the
   door for ransoms. Slavery among the Hebrews was much ameliorated. The
   Essenes and the Therapeutists went further; they declared servitude
   contrary to natural law, and did entirely without servile work.
   Christianity, less radical, did not suppress slavery, but it suppressed
   the manners of slavery. Slavery is founded on the absence of the idea
   of brotherhood among men; the idea of brotherhood is the dissolving of
   it. At the beginning of the fifth century, enfranchisement and the
   ransom of captives were the acts of charity most recommended by the
   Church.

   Those who have pretended to see in Christianity the revolutionary
   doctrine of the rights of man, and in Jesus a precursor of Toussaint
   Louverture, are completely deceived. Christianity has inspired no
   Spartacus; the true Christian does not revolt. But let us hasten to say
   it, it was not Spartacus who suppressed slavery; it was much more done
   by Blandina; it is especially the ruin of the Græco-Roman world.
   Ancient slavery has never really been abolished; it has fallen, or
   rather it is transformed. The inertia into which the East sunk at the
   beginning of the complete triumph of the Church, in the fifth century,
   rendered slavery useless. The barbarian invasions in the West were an
   analogous effect. The kind of general indifference in which humanity
   was wrapped after the fall of the Roman empire led to numerous
   manumissions. The slave was a surviving victim of Pagan civilisation, a
   nearly useless remnant of a world of luxury and leisure. It was
   believed that a man could ransom his soul from the terrors of the other
   life by delivering this suffering brother here below. Slavery, besides,
   became especially rural, and implied a bond between man and the earth,
   which should one day become property. As to the philosophic principle
   that man ought not to belong to any but himself, it is much later when
   it appears as a social dogma. Seneca and Ulpian had proclaimed it in a
   theoretical way; Voltaire, Rousseau, and the French Revolution have
   made from it the basis of the new faith of humanity.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXXIII.

  THE CHRISTIAN EMPIRE.

   Some ancient and profound reasons would have it, notwithstanding the
   contrary appearances, that the empire should become Christian. The
   Christian doctrine on the origin of power seemed to be made expressly
   to become the doctrine of the Roman state. Authority loves authority.
   Some men as Conservative as the bishops came to have a terrible
   temptation to reconcile themselves with the public force, whose action
   they realised had been often exercised for good. Jesus had laid down
   the rule. The effigies on the coin was for him the supreme criterion of
   the legitimism, beyond which there was nothing to seek for. In the
   midst of Nero's reign, St. Paul wrote--"Let every one be subject to the
   higher powers; for there is no power which does not come from God. The
   powers which be are ordained of God; so that he who resisteth the
   powers that be resists the order established by God." Some years after
   Peter, or he who wrote in his name the epistle known under the name of
   Prima Petri; expresses himself in a nearly identical way. Clement is
   likewise a subject who cannot be more devoted to the Roman empire.
   Lastly, one of the features of St. Luke, as we have seen, is his
   respect for the imperial authority, and the precautions he takes not to
   wound it.

   There had, no doubt, been certain fanatical Christians who had
   thoroughly shared the Jewish rage, and waited for the destruction of
   the idolatrous town identified by them with Babylon. Such were the
   authors of the Apocalypse and the authors of the Sibylline writings.
   For them Christ and Cæsar are two irreconcilable terms. But the
   believers in the Great Churches had quite different ideas. In 70, the
   Church of Jerusalem, with the most Christian and patriotic feeling,
   abandoned the rebellious town and went to seek quietness beyond the
   Jordan. In the revolt of Bar-Coziba, the separation was still more
   marked. Not a single Christian would take part in that attempt of blind
   desperation. St. Justin, in his Apologies, never combats the principle
   of the empire; he would have the empire examine the Christian doctrine,
   prove it, countersign it in some sort, and condemn those who calumniate
   it. We have seen the first doctor of the time of Marcus-Aurelius,
   Melito, bishop of Sardis, making offers of service still more distinct,
   and representing Christianity as the foundation of an empire of
   heredity and divine right. In his treatise on the Word, preserved in
   Syriac, Melito expresses himself in the style of a bishop of the fourth
   century, explaining to Theodosius that his first duty is to procure the
   triumph of the truth (without telling us, alas! by what mark the truth
   is to be recognised). All the apologists flatter the favourite idea of
   the emperors, that of heirship in a direct line, and assure them that
   the effect of the Christian prayers will be that their sons shall reign
   after them. Only let the empire become Christian, and those persecuted
   to-day will consider that the interference of the State is perfectly
   legitimate.

   Hatred against Christianity and the empire was the hatred of people who
   should one day be beloved. Under the Severi, the language of the Church
   remains what it was under the Antonines, plaintive and tender. The
   apologists declare for a kind of legitimism, the pretension with which
   the Church always saluted the emperor at first. The principle of St.
   Paul bore its fruits. "Every power comes from God; let him who holds
   the sword hold it from God for good."

   This correct attitude as to power held quite as much to external
   necessities as to the very principles which the Church had received
   from its founders. The Church was already a grand association; it was
   essentially conservative; it needed order and legal guarantees. That is
   admirably seen in the act of Paul of Samosata, bishop of Antioch under
   Aurelian. The bishop of Antioch would already pass, at that period, for
   a high personage. The property of the Church was in his hand; a large
   number of people lived on his favours. Paul was a brilliant man,
   mystical, worldly, a great secular lord, seeking to render Christianity
   acceptable to people of the world and to the authorities. The pietists,
   as would have been expected of them, considered him heretical and
   dismissed him. Paul resisted and refused to leave the episcopal
   mansion. It is by an act like this that the haughtiest sects are
   caught, for who could regulate a question of property or enjoyment if
   not the civil authority? The question was laid before the emperor, who
   was at Antioch at the time, and we see there this original spectacle of
   an unbelieving sovereign and persecutor charged with deciding who was
   the true bishop. Aurelian showed in these circumstances a layman's
   remarkably good sense. He made them bring to him the correspondence of
   the two bishops, marked him who was in relation with Rome and Italy,
   and concluded that he was the bishop of Antioch.

   The theological argument which took place in this affair Aurelian would
   attribute to certain objections, but one fact became plain, and that
   was that Christianity could not live without the empire, and that, on
   the other hand, the empire could do nothing better than adopt
   Christianity as its religion. The world wished a religion of
   congregations, of churches or synagogues, of chapels; a religion where
   the essence of the worship was reunion, association, brotherhood.
   Christianity fulfilled all these conditions. Its admirable worship, its
   pure morality, its clergy skilfully organised, assured its future.

   Frequently, in the third century, this historical necessity made itself
   realised. It was seen, especially in the time of the Syrian emperors,
   that their character as strangers and the baseness of their origin
   brought under their shelter certain prejudices; and, in spite of their
   vices, they inaugurated a breadth of ideas and a tolerance unknown till
   then. The same thing appears again under Philip the Arabian, in the
   East under Zenobia, and generally under the emperors whose origin was
   outside of Roman patriotism.

   The struggle redoubled in fury when the great reformers, Diocletian and
   Maximian, believed they could give the empire a new life. The Church
   triumphed by its martyrs; Roman pride bent; Constantine saw the
   internal strength of the Church, the populations of Asia Minor, of
   Syria, Thrace, Macedonia, and, in a word, of the oriental part of the
   empire, already more than half Christian. His mother, who had been a
   servant in a tavern at Nicomedia, dazzled his eyes with an empire of
   the East, having its centre at Nicea, and whose sinews should be the
   favour of the bishops and those multitudes of poor enrolled in the
   Church, who, in the large towns, created opinion. Constantine
   inaugurated what he called "the peace of the Church," and this was
   really the domination of the Church. From the Western point of view
   this astonishes us; for the Christians were still, in the West, only a
   weak minority; in the East, Constantine's policy was not only natural,
   but imperative, Julian's reaction was a caprice without result. After
   the struggle came close union and love. Theodosius inaugurated the
   Christian empire--that is to say, the thing which the Church, in its
   long life, has most longed for--theocratic empire, of which the Church
   is the essential framework, and which, after having been destroyed by
   the barbarians, remained the eternal dream of the Christian conscience,
   at least in Roman countries. Many, in fact, believed that with
   Theodosius the goal of Christianity was reached. The empire and
   Christianity were identified to such a point, the one with the other,
   that many doctors looked on the end of the empire as the end of the
   world, and applied to this event the apocalyptic images of the last
   catastrophe. The Oriental Church, which was not troubled in its
   development by the barbarians, never withdrew from that ideal;
   Constantine and Theodosius remained its two poles; they hold the same
   yet, at least in Russia. The great social enfeeblement, which was the
   necessary consequence of such a regime, soon showed itself. Devoured by
   monachism and theocracy, the Eastern Empire was like a prey offered to
   Islam; the Christian in the East became a creature of a lower order. We
   arrive accordingly at this singular result, that the countries which
   have created Christianity have been the victims of their work.
   Palestine, Syria, Egypt, Cyprus, Asia Minor, Macedonia, are to-day
   countries lost to civilisation, subjected to the very hard yoke of an
   unchristian race.

   Fortunately things came about in the East in a different manner. The
   Christian empire of the West soon perished. The city of Rome received
   from Constantine the heaviest blow which had ever struck it. What
   succeeded with Constantine, no doubt, was Christianity; but this was,
   before all the East. The East--that is to say, the half of the empire
   speaking Greek--had, after the death of Marcus-Aurelius, taken more and
   more the upper hand over the West, speaking Latin. The East was more
   free, more lively, more civilised, more political. Already Diocletian
   had removed the centre of affairs to Nicomedia. By building a New Rome
   on the Bosphorus, Constantine reduced ancient Rome to be nothing more
   than the capital of the West. The two halves of the empire became thus
   nearly strangers to each other. Constantine was the real author of the
   schism between the Latin and the Greek churches. We may say, also, that
   he was the distant cause of Islamism. Christians speaking Syriac and
   Arabic, persecuted or looked upon askance by the emperors of
   Constantinople, became an essential element in the future clientèle of
   Mahomet.

   The cataclysms which followed the division of the two empires, the
   invasions of the barbarians, who spared Constantinople and fell upon
   Rome with their whole force, reduced the ancient capital of the world
   to a limited, often humble, rôle. That ecclesiastical primacy of Rome,
   which shone so clearly in the second and third centuries, survived no
   longer since the East had a separate existence and capital. The
   Christian empire was the empire of the East, with its oecumenical
   councils, its orthodox emperors, its courtly clergy. That lasted till
   the eighth century. Rome, during this time, took its revenge by the
   earnestness and profoundness of its spirit of organisation. What men
   were St. Damasius, St. Leo, and Gregory the Great! With admirable
   courage, the Papacy wrought for the conversion of the barbarians; it
   drew them to her, made them her clients, her subjects.

   The chef-d'oeuvre of its policy was its alliance with the Carlovingian
   House, and the bold stroke by which it re-established in that family
   the empire of the West--dead since 324. The empire of the West, in
   fact, was only destroyed in appearance. Its secrets lived in the higher
   Roman clergy. The Church of Rome kept in some sort the seal of the old
   empire, and it used it to authenticate surreptitiously the unheard-of
   act of Christmas Day of the year 800. The dream of the Christian empire
   recommenced. With the spiritual power was needed a secular arm, a
   temporal vicar. Christianity, not having in its nature that military
   spirit which is inherent in Islamism, for example, could not draw an
   army from its bosom; it was necessary, therefore, to demand it from
   outside, in the empire, among the barbarians, in a royalty constituted
   by the bishops. From that to the Mussulman caliphate there is an
   infinite distance. Even in the Middle Ages, when the Papacy admitted
   and proclaimed the idea of a Christian army, neither the pope nor his
   legates had ever been military chiefs. A holy empire, with a barbarian
   Theodosius, holding the sword to protect the Church of Christ--that was
   the ideal of the Latin Papacy. The West only escaped, thanks to
   Germanic indocility and the paradoxical genius of Gregory VII. The pope
   and the emperor quarrelled to the death: the nationalities whom the
   Christian empire of Constantinople had stifled were able to develop
   themselves in the West, and a door was opened for liberty.

   That liberty was in almost nothing the work of Christianity. The
   Christian royalty came from God: the king made by the priests is the
   Lord's Anointed. Now the king of divine right can scarcely well be a
   constitutional king. The throne and the altar become thus two
   inseparable terms. The theocracy is a virus from which they are not
   purged. Protestantism and the Revolution were necessary that we should
   arrive at the possibility of conceiving of a liberal Christianity, and
   that liberal Christianity, without pope or king, has not yet had trial
   enough for one to have the right to speak of it as of an accomplished
   and durable fact in the history of humanity.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XXXIV.

  ULTERIOR TRANSFORMATIONS.

   Thus a religion made for the internal comfort of quite a small number
   of elect ones became, by an unheard-of chance, the religion of millions
   of men constituting the most active part of humanity. It is especially
   in the victories of religious orders that it is true to say that the
   conquered make the law to the conquerors. The crowds by entering into
   the little churches of saints carried with them their imperfections,
   sometimes their impurities. A race by embracing a religion which has
   not been made for it transformed itself according to the demands of its
   imagination and its heart.

   In the primitive Christian conception a Christian was perfect; the
   sinner, simply because he was a sinner, ceased to be a Christian. When
   entire towns came to be converted en masse everything was changed. The
   precepts of devoutness and evangelical self-denial became inapplicable;
   some advice was given designed only for those who aspire to perfection.
   And where is this perfection to be realised? The world, such as it was,
   absolutely excluded it; he who in the world practised the Gospel to the
   letter played the part of a dupe and an idiot. The monastery remains.
   Logic demanded its rights. The Christian morality, the morality of a
   little church and people retired from the world, created itself the
   means which was necessary for it. The Gospel must join with the
   convent; a Christianity having its complete organisations cannot do
   without convents--that is to say, places where the evangelical life,
   impossible elsewhere, can be practised. The convent is the perfect
   church; the monk is the true Christian. Thus the most effectual works
   of Christianity have only been executed by the monastic orders. These
   orders, far from being a leprosy which should attack from the outside
   the work of Jesus, were the internal and inevitable consequences of the
   work of Jesus. In the West they had more advantages than
   inconveniences, for the Germanic conquest maintained in the face of the
   monk a powerful military caste; the East, on the contrary, was really
   consumed by a monachism which had only the most deceptive appearance of
   Christian perfection.

   A mediocre morality, and a natural leaning towards idolatry, such were
   the gloomy dispositions which brought into the Church the masses who
   entered it partly by force after the close of the fourth century. Man
   does not change in a day; baptism has not instantaneous miraculous
   effects. These Pagan multitudes, scarcely evangelised, remained what
   they were before their conversion; in the East wicked, egotistical,
   corrupt; in the West gross and superstitious. As to what regards
   morality, the Church had only to maintain its rules already written in
   books held to be canonical. As to what regards superstition, the task
   was much more delicate. Changes in religion are in general only
   apparent. Man, whatever his conversions or apostasies may be, remains
   faithful to the first worship which he has practised, and more or less
   loved. A multitude of idolaters, in no way changed at heart, and
   transmitting the same instincts to their children, entered the Church.
   Superstition began to flow in full stream in the religious community
   which up till that time had been most exempt from it.

   If we except some Oriental sects, the primitive Christians were the
   least superstitious of men. The Christian, the Jew, might be fanatics,
   they were not superstitious as a Gaul or a Paphlagonian were. Among
   them were no amulets, no images of saints, no object of worship beyond
   the divine hypostases. The converted Pagans could not lend themselves
   to such a simplicity. The worship of the martyrs was the first
   concession forced by human weakness from the gentleness of a clergy who
   wished to be all in all to gain all to Jesus Christ. The holy bodies
   had miraculous virtues, they became talismans, the places where they
   reposed were marked by a holiness more special than the other
   sanctuaries consecrated to God. The absence of all ideas to the laws of
   nature soon opened the door to an unbridled thaumaturgy. The Celtic and
   Italian races, which formed the basis of the population of the West,
   are the most superstitious of races. A crowd of beliefs, which the
   first Christianity would have considered sacrilegious, thus passed into
   the Church. It did what it could; its efforts to improve and to elevate
   the gross catechumens form one of the most beautiful pages of human
   history. During five or six centuries the Councils were occupied in
   combating the ancient naturalistic superstitions; but the priests went
   beyond that. St. Gregory the Great took his part in it, and counselled
   the missionaries not to suppress the rites and the holy places of the
   Anglo-Saxons, but only to consecrate them to the new worship.

   Thus a singular phenomenon came about; the thick vegetation of Pagan
   fables and beliefs which primitive Christianity believed itself called
   upon to destroy was preserved to a large extent. Far from succeeding
   like Islam in suppressing the times of ignorance, that is to say, the
   former souvenirs, they concealed them under a light Christian varnish.
   Gregory of Tours is as superstitious as Elian or Elius Aristides. The
   world in the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries was
   more grossly Pagan than it had ever been. Up till the advancement in
   primary instruction at the present day, our peasants had not abandoned
   a solitary one of their little Gallic gods. The worship of the saints
   has been the cover under which polytheism has been established. This
   encroachment of the idolatrous spirit has sadly dishonoured modern
   Catholicism. The follies of Lourdes and Salette, the multiplication of
   images, the Sacred Heart, the vows, the pilgrimages, make of
   contemporary Catholicism, at least in certain countries, a religion as
   material as a worship such as that of Syria combated by John
   Chrysostom, or suppressed by the edicts of the emperor. The Church had,
   in fact, two attitudes in regard to the Pagan cults--sometimes a
   struggle to the death, like that which took place in Aphaca and in
   Phoenicia; sometimes a compromise, the old creed accepting more or less
   complacently a Christian shade. Every Pagan who embraced Christianity
   in the second or third century had a horror of his old religion: he who
   baptized him asked him to detest his ancient gods. It was not the same
   with the Gallic peasant, with the Frank or Anglo-Saxon warrior; his old
   religion was such a small affair that it was not worthy of being hated
   or seriously opposed.

   The complacency which Christianity, become the religion of crowds,
   showed for the ancient cults, it had also for many Greek prejudices. It
   seems to have been ashamed of its Jewish origin, and tried to conceal
   it. We have seen the Gnostics and the author of the Epistle to
   Diognetes affecting to believe that Christianity was born
   spontaneously, without any relation with Judaism. Origen and Eusebius
   did not dare to say so, for they knew the facts too well; but St. John
   Chrysostom, and, in general, the fathers who had received a Hellenic
   education, did not know the true beginnings of Christianity, and did
   not wish to know them. They rejected all the Judeo-Christian and
   millenarian literature; the orthodox Church eagerly sought their works:
   books of this sort were not known except when they were translated into
   Latin or the Oriental tongues. The Apocalypse of John escaped only
   because it held by its roots in the very heart of the canon. Some
   essays of Unitarian Christianity, without metaphysic or mythology--of a
   Christianity little distinguished from Jewish rationalism, such as were
   the attempts of Zenobia and Paul of Samosata--were cut to the ground.
   These attempts would have produced a simple Christianity, a
   continuation of Judaism, something analogous to what Islam produced. If
   they had succeeded, they would have no doubt prevented the success of
   Mahomet among the Arabs and Syrians. What fanaticism would thus have
   been shunned! Christianity is an edition of Judaism accommodated to the
   Indo-European taste; Islam is an edition of Judaism accommodated to the
   taste of the Arabs. Mahomet did nothing in short but return to the
   Judeo-Christianity of Zenobia, by a reaction against the metaphysical
   polytheism of the Council of Nicea and the Councils which followed.

   The separation, more and more deep, between the clergy and the people
   was another consequence of the conversions en masse which took place in
   the fourth and fifth centuries. These ignorant crowds could not but
   listen. The Church came to be little more than a clergy. Far from this
   transformation having contributed to elevate the intellectual average
   of Christianity, it lowered it. Experience proves that little Churches
   without clergy are more liberal than the large. In England, the Quakers
   and the Methodists have done more for ecclesiastical liberality than
   the Established Church. Contrary to what happened in the second
   century, we see this good and reasonable authority of the Episcopi and
   Presbyteri keeping back excesses and follies; henceforth those things
   which shall be law among the clergy, these are the demands of the
   basest party. The Councils obeyed the maniacal crowds in their deep
   fanaticism. In all the Councils it is the most superstitious dogma
   which carries the day. Arianism, which had the rare merit of converting
   the Germans before their entrance into the empire, and which could have
   given to the world a Christianity susceptible of becoming rational, was
   stifled by the grossness of a clergy which willed the absurd. In the
   Middle Ages this clergy became a feudalism. The democratic Book par
   excellence, the Gospel, is confiscated by those who claim to interpret
   it, and those prudently conceal its boldness.

   The lot of Christianity has therefore been almost to founder in its
   victory, like a ship which nearly sinks by the fact of the number of
   passengers who crowd it. Never has a founder had votaries who have so
   little resembled him as Jesus. Jesus is much more a great Jew than a
   great man; his disciples have made out that he was more of an
   anti-Jew--a God-man. The additions made to his work by superstition,
   metaphysics and politics, have entirely masked the Great Prophet--so
   much so, that reform of Christianity consists apparently in suppressing
   the graces which our Pagan ancestors have added to it to return to
   Jesus as he was. But the gravest error which can be committed in
   religious history is to believe that religions are to be valued for
   themselves in an absolute manner. Religions are to be estimated by the
   people who accept them. Islamism has been useful or fatal according to
   the races who have adopted it. Among the debased peoples of the East
   Christianity is a very mediocre religion, inspiring very little virtue.
   It is among our Western races--Celtic, Germanic and Italian--that
   Christianity has been really fruitful.

   A product entirely Jewish in its origin, Christianity has gradually
   come to be stripped, with time, of all which it holds by its origin, so
   much so that the theory of those who consider it the Aryan religion par
   excellence is true from many points of view. During the centuries we
   have imported into it our ways of feeling, all our aspirations,
   qualities, and defects. The exegesis according to which Christianity
   should be carved from the interior of the Old Testament is the falsest
   in the world. Christianity has been the rupture with Judaism--the
   abrogation of the Thora. St. Bernard, Francis d'Assisi, St. Elizabeth,
   St. Theresa, Francis de Sales, Vincent de Paul, Fenélon and Channing
   were nothing like Jews. These are people of our race, feeling with our
   hearts, thinking with our brain. Christianity has been the traditional
   notion upon which they have embellished their poem, but the genius is
   their own. St. Bernard interpreting the Psalms is the most romantic of
   men. Every race attaching itself to the discipline of the past claims
   it, makes it its own. The Bible has thus borne fruits which are not its
   own; Judaism has only been the wild-stock upon which the Aryan race has
   produced its flower. In England, in Scotland, the Bible has become the
   national book of the Aryan branch which resembles the Hebrews least.
   This is how Christianity, so notoriously Jewish in origin, has been
   able to become the national religion of the European races, which have
   sacrificed to it their ancient mythology. The renunciation of our old
   ethnic traditions in favour of Christian holiness, a renunciation
   little serious at bottom, has been apparently so absolute that it has
   taken nearly fifteen hundred years to produce this result as an
   accomplished fact. The grand awakening of national minds which was
   produced by it in the nineteenth century, this kind of resurrection of
   dead races, of which we are the witnesses, cannot fail to bring the
   recollection of our abdication before the sons of Shem, and to provoke
   in that respect some reaction. Although assuredly no one beyond the
   cabinets of comparative mythology could longer think of recalling the
   Germanic, Pelasgian, Celtic and Slav Mythologies, it would have been
   much better for Christianity if those dangerous images had been
   suppressed altogether, as was done in the establishment of Islam. Races
   which claim nobility and originality in everything are not wounded by
   being in religion the vassals of a despised family.

   The impetuous Germanists have not concealed their shame, some
   Celto-maniacs have manifested the same feeling. The Greeks, finding
   again their importance in the world by the souvenirs of ancient
   Hellenism, have no longer concealed the fact that Christianity has been
   for them an apostasy. Greeks, Germans, and Celts have consoled
   themselves by saying that if they have accepted Christianity they have
   at least transformed it, and made it their national property. It is not
   less true that the modern principle of races has been hurtful to
   Christianity. The religious action of Judaism is apparently colossal.
   We see the defects of Israel at the same time as its greatness. We have
   been ashamed of being made Jewish in the same way that fanatical German
   patriots have believed themselves obliged to treat so badly the
   seventeenth and eighteenth French centuries, to which they owe so much.

   Another cause has strongly undermined, in our days, the religion which
   our ancestors practised with such perfect contentment.

   The negation of the supernatural has become an absolute dogma for every
   cultured spirit. The history of the physical and moral worlds would
   appear to us like a development having its causes in itself and
   excluding miracle. That is to say, the intervention specially reflected
   wills. Now from Christianity's point of view, the history of the world
   is nothing but a series of miracles. The creation, the history of the
   Jewish people, the rule of Jesus, all passed through the crucible of
   the most liberal exegesis, leave a residuum of the supernatural, which
   no operation can suppress or transform. The Semitic-Monotheistic
   religions are at bottom enemies of physical science, which would appear
   to them a diminution, nearly a denial, of God.

   God has done everything and does everything still; that is their
   universal explanation. Christianity, not having carried this dogma to
   the same exaggerations as Islam, implies revelation; that is to say, a
   miracle, a fact such as science has never proved. Between Christianity
   and science the struggle is therefore inevitable; one of the two
   adversaries must succumb.

   From the thirteenth century, the moment when, following upon the study
   of the works of Aristotle, Averroès, the scientific spirit, commenced
   to awake in the Latin countries, up to the sixteenth century, the
   Church, using the public strength, succeeded in defeating her enemy,
   but in the seventeenth century scientific discovery has been too
   striking to be stifled. The Church is still strong enough to trouble
   gravely the life of Galileo, to disquiet Descartes, but not to prevent
   their discoveries from becoming the law of the intellectual. In the
   eighteenth century reason triumphs; about the year 1800 A.D. scarcely
   any educated man believed in the supernatural. The reactions which have
   followed have not been hindrances of any consequence. If many timid
   minds, fearing great social questions, have refused to be logical, the
   people in the town and country are wandering more and more from
   Christianity, and the supernatural loses some of its adherents every
   day.

   What has Christianity done to put itself on guard against the
   formidable assault which shall sweep it away if it does not abandon
   certain desperate positions? The reform of the sixteenth century was
   assuredly a deed of wisdom and conservatism. Protestantism diminished
   the supernatural daily; it returned in a sense to the primitive
   Christianity, and reduced to a small matter the idolatrous and Pagan
   part of the creed. But the principle of miracle, especially in what
   regards the inspiration of "the books," was preserved. This reform,
   besides, could not extend over all Christendom; it has gained life
   through rationalism, which will probably suppress the matter to be
   reformed before the reformation is made. Protestantism will only save
   Christianity if it arrives at complete rationalism, if it make a
   junction with all free spirits, whose programme may perhaps thus be
   summed up:--

   "Great and splendid is the world, and, in spite of all the obscurities
   which surround it, we see that it is the fruit of a deep tendency
   towards good--a supreme goodness. Christianity is the most striking of
   those efforts, which are drawn up in history for the birth of an ideal
   of light and justice. Let it be that the first slip has been Jewish,
   Christianity has become with time the common work of humanity; each
   race has given to it the special gift with which it has been endowed,
   whatever was best in it. God is not exclusively present there, but he
   is more present there than in any other religious or moral development.
   Christianity is, in fact, the religion of civilised people; each nation
   admits it in different senses, according to its degree of intellectual
   culture. The free-thinker, who is satisfied at once, is in his right;
   but the free-thinker constitutes a highly respectable individual case;
   his intellectual and moral position cannot yet be that of a nation or
   of humanity.

   "Let us preserve then Christianity with admiration for its high moral
   value, for its majestic history, for the beauty of its sacred books.
   These books assuredly are books. We must apply to them the rules of
   interpretation and criticism we apply to all books, but they constitute
   the religious archives of humanity; even the weak parts which they
   include are worthy of respect. It is the same with dogma; let us
   revive, without making ourselves their slaves, those formulas under
   which fourteen centuries have adored the Divine wisdom. Without
   admitting either particular miracle or limited inspiration, let us bow
   before the supreme miracle of this great Church, the inexhaustible
   mother of unceasingly varied manifestations. As to worship, let us seek
   to eliminate from it some shocking dross; let us hold it in any case as
   a secondary thing, not having any other value than the sentiments which
   are infused into it."

   If so many Christians have entered into such sentiments, we may hope
   for a future for Christianity. But, the Protestant liberal
   congregations apart, the great Christian masses have in no way modified
   their attitude. Catholicism continues with a species of desperate fury
   to bury itself in the miraculous; orthodox Protestantism remains
   immovable. During this time popular rationalism, the inevitable
   consequence of the advancement in public instruction and democratic
   institutions, caused the temples to be deserted and multiplied purely
   civil marriages and funerals. We shall not bring back the people of the
   large cities to old churches, and the people of the country will not go
   there from habit. Now, a Church does not exist without people, the
   Church is the place for the people. The Catholic party on the other
   hand has committed in these last years so many faults that its
   political power is nearly gone. A tremendous crisis will take place in
   the bosom of Catholicism. It is probable that a part of that great body
   will persevere in its idolatry, and remain at the side of the modern
   movement like a counter-current of stagnant and dead water. Another
   party shall live, and, abandoning the supernatural errors, shall unite
   itself to liberal Protestantism, to enlightened Israelitism, to ideal
   philosophy, to march towards the conquest of pure religion in spirit
   and in truth. What is beyond doubt, whatever may be the religious
   future of humanity, is that the place of Jesus shall be very high. He
   has been the founder of Christianity, and Christianity remains the bed
   of the great religious river of humanity; some tributaries coming from
   the most opposite points in the horizon have mingled with it. In this
   confluence no source can say, "This water is mine." But let us not
   forget the primitive brook of the beginnings, the spring on the
   mountains, the upper course whence a river, becoming at once as large
   as the Amazon, flowed at first into a bend of the earth of little
   extent. It is the picture of this higher course which I have wished to
   draw; happy shall I be if I have presented in its truth what there was
   on these high summits of vigour and force--sensations, sometimes hot,
   sometimes icy, of divine life and fellowship with heaven. The creators
   of Christianity occupy with good right the first rank in the homage of
   men. These men were very inferior to us in the knowledge of the real;
   but they have never been equalled in conviction, in devotion. Now it is
   that which makes the foundation. The solidity of a construction is in
   proportion to the amount of virtue, that is to say of sacrifices, which
   have been laid as its foundations.

   In this edifice, demolished by time, what excellent stones besides are
   there which could be re-employed, such as they are, to the profit of
   our modern constructions. What better than Messianistic Judaism could
   point us to irrefragable hope and a blessed future--faith in a
   brilliant destiny for humanity under the government of an aristocracy
   of the righteous? Is the kingdom of God not the perfect expression of
   the final goal which the idealist pursues? The Sermon on the Mount
   remains the completed code of it; reciprocal love, gentleness,
   goodness, disinterestedness will be always the essential laws of
   perfect life. The association of the weak is the legitimate solution of
   the larger part of the problems which the organisation of humanity
   suggests. Christianity can give upon this point some lessons to all the
   ages. The Christian martyr will remain up to the end of time the type
   of the defender of the rights of conscience. At last the difficult and
   dangerous art of governing minds, if it is one day recovered, shall be
   upon the models furnished by the first Christian doctors. They had some
   secrets which can be learned only in their school. There have been
   professors of virtue more austere, perhaps firmer, but there never have
   been like masters in the science of goodness. The joy of the soul is
   the grand Christian art, to such an extent that civil society has been
   obliged to take precautions lest humanity should bury itself there. The
   fatherland and the family are the two great natural forms of human
   associations. They are both necessary, but they are not sufficient.
   There needs to be maintained alongside of them the place for an
   institution where one may receive nourishment for the soul, comfort,
   advice; where charity can be organised, where one shall find spiritual
   masters or directors. That is called the Church. We shall never pass
   from that without the danger of reducing life to a desperate dryness,
   above all for women. What is needful is that ecclesiastical society
   should not enfeeble civil society, that it should be only a liberty,
   that it should display no temporal power, that the State should not
   concern itself with it, nor control it, nor patronise it. During two
   hundred and fifty years Christianity gave in these little free reunions
   faultless models.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * AO: [1]1
     * IAO: [2]1
     * IAo, ADoNAI, CLBAoTh, eLoAI: [3]1
     * IChThUS: [4]1 [5]2 [6]3 [7]4
     * IChThChC: [8]1
     * LBRACAX: [9]1
     * U: [10]1
     * O: [11]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Galli cantos, gall plausus : [12]1
     * HIC EST ATTALIS CHRISTIANUS.: [13]1
     * Catatumbas: [14]1
     * Christianus sum.: [15]1 [16]2
     * Civitas sacrosancta: [17]1
     * Concilium Galliaruin: [18]1
     * Credo quia absurdum.: [19]1
     * Ecclesia: [20]1
     * Episcopi: [21]1
     * Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo.: [22]1
     * Fallit te incautum pietas tua: [23]1
     * Fiunt non nascuntur, Christiani: [24]1
     * Flamen: [25]1
     * Hymnum dicat turba fratrum: [26]1
     * Ite missa est: [27]1
     * Lare: [28]1
     * Lares: [29]1 [30]2 [31]3 [32]4 [33]5 [34]6 [35]7 [36]8
     * Lares Augusti: [37]1
     * Nihil vos moramur, Patres conscripti.: [38]1
     * O filii et filiæ: [39]1
     * Peregrinus: [40]1
     * Presbyteri: [41]1 [42]2
     * Prætorium: [43]1
     * Quod semper, quod ubique: [44]1
     * Tontines: [45]1
     * Victimæ paschali: [46]1
     * ad sanctos ad martyres: [47]1
     * agnomina: [48]1
     * alumni: [49]1
     * archiereus: [50]1
     * arcosolia: [51]1
     * arcosolium: [52]1
     * areæ: [53]1
     * augustates: [54]1
     * carmen antelucanum: [55]1
     * civitas: [56]1
     * civitates: [57]1
     * cloaca: [58]1
     * collegia illicita: [59]1
     * comes: [60]1
     * consolamentum: [61]1
     * cubicula: [62]1
     * cultores deorum: [63]1
     * dicaster: [64]1
     * dies stationum: [65]1
     * ecclesia: [66]1 [67]2 [68]3 [69]4 [70]5
     * episcopi: [71]1 [72]2
     * ex opere operato: [73]1
     * ex æquo: [74]1
     * favor libertatis: [75]1
     * feminæ clarisimæ: [76]1
     * flamen civitatis: [77]1
     * flamen duumvir: [78]1
     * fossor: [79]1
     * gymnasia: [80]1
     * honestiores: [81]1
     * humilior: [82]1
     * humiliores: [83]1
     * illuminati: [84]1
     * imperator: [85]1
     * in extremis: [86]1
     * in galli cantu: [87]1
     * juris-consulti: [88]1
     * lares: [89]1 [90]2
     * libertus: [91]1
     * lingua vulgata: [92]1
     * loculi: [93]1
     * loculus: [94]1
     * matricularii: [95]1
     * miles Christi: [96]1
     * ne prostituatur: [97]1
     * numen: [98]1
     * numina augusta: [99]1
     * officium: [100]1
     * operarius: [101]1
     * pagani: [102]1
     * paganus: [103]1 [104]2
     * pancratium: [105]1 [106]2
     * penates: [107]1
     * presbyteri: [108]1 [109]2
     * presbyterium: [110]1
     * pro prætore: [111]1
     * prætorium: [112]1
     * scholæ: [113]1
     * servus: [114]1
     * servus Dei: [115]1
     * sevirs: [116]1
     * soror: [117]1
     * spina: [118]1
     * tenuiores: [119]1
     * thermæ: [120]1
     * triclinium: [121]1
     * Æquanimitas: [122]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * Esprit: [123]1
     * Littérateurs: [124]1
     * belles-lettres: [125]1
     * bien portants: [126]1
     * bizarrerie: [127]1
     * bizarreries: [128]1
     * chef d'oeuvre: [129]1 [130]2
     * chef-d'oeuvre: [131]1
     * chef-d'oeuvres: [132]1
     * chefs d'oeuvres: [133]1
     * clientèle: [134]1 [135]2 [136]3
     * coterie: [137]1
     * coup de grâce: [138]1
     * employés: [139]1
     * en masse: [140]1 [141]2 [142]3 [143]4 [144]5
     * enceinte: [145]1
     * esprit: [146]1
     * flambeaux: [147]1
     * noblesse: [148]1
     * par excellence: [149]1 [150]2 [151]3 [152]4
     * raison d'être: [153]1 [154]2
     * régime: [155]1 [156]2 [157]3 [158]4 [159]5 [160]6
     * rôle: [161]1 [162]2 [163]3 [164]4 [165]5 [166]6 [167]7 [168]8
     * éclat: [169]1
     * élite: [170]1 [171]2
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [172]vii  [173]viii  [174]1  [175]2  [176]3  [177]4  [178]5  [179]6
   [180]7  [181]8  [182]9  [183]10  [184]11  [185]12  [186]13  [187]14
   [188]15  [189]16  [190]17  [191]18  [192]19  [193]20  [194]21  [195]22
   [196]23  [197]24  [198]25  [199]26  [200]27  [201]28  [202]29  [203]30
   [204]31  [205]32  [206]33  [207]34  [208]35  [209]36  [210]37  [211]38
   [212]39  [213]40  [214]41  [215]42  [216]43  [217]44  [218]45  [219]46
   [220]47  [221]48  [222]49  [223]50  [224]51  [225]52  [226]53  [227]54
   [228]55  [229]56  [230]57  [231]58  [232]59  [233]60  [234]61  [235]62
   [236]63  [237]64  [238]65  [239]66  [240]67  [241]68  [242]69  [243]70
   [244]71  [245]72  [246]73  [247]74  [248]75  [249]76  [250]77  [251]78
   [252]79  [253]80  [254]81  [255]82  [256]83  [257]84  [258]85  [259]86
   [260]87  [261]88  [262]89  [263]90  [264]91  [265]92  [266]93  [267]94
   [268]95  [269]96  [270]97  [271]98  [272]99  [273]100  [274]101
   [275]102  [276]103  [277]104  [278]105  [279]106  [280]107  [281]108
   [282]109  [283]110  [284]111  [285]112  [286]113  [287]114  [288]115
   [289]116  [290]117  [291]118  [292]119  [293]120  [294]121  [295]122
   [296]123  [297]124  [298]125  [299]126  [300]127  [301]128  [302]129
   [303]130  [304]131  [305]132  [306]133  [307]134  [308]135  [309]136
   [310]137  [311]138  [312]139  [313]140  [314]141  [315]142  [316]143
   [317]144  [318]145  [319]146  [320]147  [321]148  [322]149  [323]150
   [324]151  [325]152  [326]153  [327]154  [328]155  [329]156  [330]157
   [331]158  [332]159  [333]160  [334]161  [335]162  [336]163  [337]164
   [338]165  [339]166  [340]167  [341]168  [342]169  [343]170  [344]171
   [345]172  [346]173  [347]174  [348]175  [349]176  [350]177  [351]178
   [352]179  [353]180  [354]181  [355]182  [356]183  [357]184  [358]185
   [359]186  [360]187  [361]188  [362]189  [363]190  [364]191  [365]192
   [366]193  [367]194  [368]195  [369]196  [370]197  [371]198  [372]199
   [373]200  [374]201  [375]202  [376]203  [377]204  [378]205  [379]206
   [380]207  [381]208  [382]209  [383]210  [384]211  [385]212  [386]213
   [387]214  [388]215  [389]216  [390]217  [391]218  [392]219  [393]220
   [394]221  [395]222  [396]223  [397]224  [398]225  [399]226  [400]227
   [401]228  [402]229  [403]230  [404]231  [405]232  [406]233  [407]234
   [408]235  [409]236  [410]237  [411]238  [412]239  [413]240  [414]241
   [415]242  [416]243  [417]244  [418]245  [419]246  [420]247  [421]248
   [422]249  [423]250  [424]251  [425]252  [426]253  [427]254  [428]255
   [429]256  [430]257  [431]258  [432]259  [433]260  [434]261  [435]262
   [436]263  [437]264  [438]265  [439]266  [440]267  [441]268  [442]269
   [443]270  [444]271  [445]272  [446]273  [447]274  [448]275  [449]276
   [450]277  [451]278  [452]279  [453]280  [454]281  [455]282  [456]283
   [457]284  [458]285  [459]286  [460]287  [461]288  [462]289  [463]290
   [464]291  [465]292  [466]293  [467]294  [468]295  [469]296  [470]297
   [471]298  [472]299  [473]300  [474]301  [475]302  [476]303  [477]304
   [478]305  [479]306  [480]307  [481]308  [482]309  [483]310  [484]311
   [485]312  [486]313  [487]314  [488]315  [489]316  [490]317  [491]318
   [492]319  [493]320  [494]321  [495]322  [496]323  [497]324  [498]325
   [499]326  [500]327  [501]328  [502]329  [503]330  [504]331  [505]332
   [506]333  [507]334  [508]335  [509]336  [510]337  [511]338  [512]339
   [513]340  [514]341  [515]342  [516]343  [517]344  [518]345  [519]346
   [520]347  [521]348  [522]349  [523]350  [524]351  [525]352  [526]353
   [527]354  [528]355  [529]356  [530]357  [531]358  [532]359  [533]360
   [534]361  [535]362  [536]363  [537]364  [538]365  [539]366  [540]367
   [541]368  [542]369  [543]370  [544]371  [545]372
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p14.2
   2. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-p2.1
   3. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-p16.1
   4. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-p9.1
   5. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-p10.1
   6. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-p10.2
   7. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p14.1
   8. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p5.2
   9. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-p16.2
  10. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-p10.3
  11. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-p10.2
  12. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p10.6
  13. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p24.1
  14. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p19.2
  15. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p12.1
  16. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p12.2
  17. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-p1.2
  18. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p3.2
  19. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#ix-p7.1
  20. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-p6.1
  21. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-p7.2
  22. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-p13.1
  23. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-p6.1
  24. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-p4.1
  25. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.10
  26. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p10.5
  27. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p5.1
  28. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.5
  29. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.1
  30. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.2
  31. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.3
  32. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.4
  33. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.6
  34. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.8
  35. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.12
  36. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.13
  37. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.7
  38. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-p7.1
  39. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p10.2
  40. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-p32.1
  41. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiii-p4.1
  42. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-p7.3
  43. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p26.1
  44. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p3.1
  45. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p3.2
  46. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p10.1
  47. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p21.1
  48. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-p6.1
  49. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p18.1
  50. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p6.1
  51. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p24.1
  52. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p19.1
  53. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p21.6
  54. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p6.4
  55. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p10.3
  56. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p5.1
  57. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p7.1
  58. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-p21.1
  59. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-p4.1
  60. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-p10.1
  61. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-p7.1
  62. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p21.2
  63. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p3.1
  64. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-p25.1
  65. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p8.1
  66. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p10.1
  67. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p10.3
  68. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p10.4
  69. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p2.1
  70. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p2.2
  71. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p10.5
  72. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p10.6
  73. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p11.1
  74. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-p16.1
  75. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#v-p5.2
  76. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p17.2
  77. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p6.2
  78. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p6.3
  79. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p21.5
  80. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-p7.2
  81. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p9.1
  82. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-p12.1
  83. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p9.2
  84. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p15.2
  85. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-p9.1
  86. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-p9.1
  87. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p10.4
  88. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-p11.1
  89. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-p4.1
  90. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-p11.2
  91. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p15.2
  92. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-p7.2
  93. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p20.2
  94. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p20.1
  95. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p18.1
  96. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p15.4
  97. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#v-p5.1
  98. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-p4.3
  99. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.9
 100. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p9.1
 101. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p9.4
 102. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p11.2
 103. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p4.1
 104. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p11.1
 105. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-p3.1
 106. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-p3.2
 107. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-p4.2
 108. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p10.2
 109. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p3.2
 110. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p3.3
 111. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p6.1
 112. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-p1.2
 113. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p21.3
 114. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p15.1
 115. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p15.3
 116. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p2.11
 117. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p15.1
 118. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p21.1
 119. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p9.3
 120. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-p7.1
 121. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p21.4
 122. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-p1.2
 123. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-p11.3
 124. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-p1.2
 125. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#ix-p8.1
 126. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-p9.2
 127. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-p19.1
 128. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-p11.1
 129. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-p7.1
 130. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p4.1
 131. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-p10.1
 132. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-p9.1
 133. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvii-p9.1
 134. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-p3.1
 135. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-p16.1
 136. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-p8.1
 137. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-p26.1
 138. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p35.1
 139. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-p3.1
 140. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-p16.3
 141. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-p3.1
 142. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-p9.1
 143. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-p2.1
 144. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-p7.1
 145. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-p6.1
 146. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-p11.2
 147. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-p7.1
 148. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-p6.1
 149. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-p11.1
 150. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-p1.2
 151. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-p7.4
 152. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-p9.1
 153. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p3.1
 154. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-p19.1
 155. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-p11.1
 156. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-p13.1
 157. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-p6.1
 158. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-p28.1
 159. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-p12.1
 160. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-p6.1
 161. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-p7.1
 162. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-p7.1
 163. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xii-p3.1
 164. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvii-p3.1
 165. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-p8.1
 166. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-p12.1
 167. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-p17.1
 168. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-p9.1
 169. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-p4.1
 170. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-p8.1
 171. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-p18.1
 172. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iii-Page_vii
 173. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iii-Page_viii
 174. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iii-Page_1
 175. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_2
 176. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_3
 177. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_4
 178. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_5
 179. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_6
 180. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_7
 181. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_8
 182. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_9
 183. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_10
 184. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_11
 185. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#iv-Page_12
 186. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#v-Page_13
 187. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#v-Page_14
 188. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#v-Page_15
 189. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#v-Page_16
 190. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#v-Page_17
 191. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#v-Page_18
 192. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#v-Page_19
 193. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_20
 194. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_21
 195. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_22
 196. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_23
 197. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_24
 198. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_25
 199. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_26
 200. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_27
 201. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_28
 202. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_29
 203. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vi-Page_30
 204. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-Page_31
 205. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-Page_32
 206. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-Page_33
 207. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-Page_34
 208. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-Page_35
 209. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-Page_36
 210. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-Page_37
 211. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-Page_38
 212. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#vii-Page_39
 213. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_40
 214. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_41
 215. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_42
 216. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_43
 217. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_44
 218. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_45
 219. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_46
 220. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_47
 221. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_48
 222. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_49
 223. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_50
 224. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_51
 225. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_52
 226. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_53
 227. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_54
 228. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_55
 229. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_56
 230. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_57
 231. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#viii-Page_58
 232. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#ix-Page_59
 233. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#ix-Page_60
 234. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#ix-Page_61
 235. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#ix-Page_62
 236. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#ix-Page_63
 237. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_64
 238. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_65
 239. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_66
 240. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_67
 241. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_68
 242. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_69
 243. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_70
 244. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_71
 245. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_72
 246. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#x-Page_73
 247. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-Page_74
 248. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-Page_75
 249. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-Page_76
 250. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-Page_77
 251. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-Page_78
 252. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-Page_79
 253. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-Page_80
 254. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-Page_81
 255. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xi-Page_82
 256. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xii-Page_83
 257. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xii-Page_84
 258. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xii-Page_85
 259. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xii-Page_86
 260. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xii-Page_87
 261. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xii-Page_88
 262. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xii-Page_89
 263. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiii-Page_90
 264. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiii-Page_91
 265. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiii-Page_92
 266. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiii-Page_93
 267. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiii-Page_94
 268. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiii-Page_95
 269. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_96
 270. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_97
 271. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_98
 272. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_99
 273. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_100
 274. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_101
 275. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_102
 276. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_103
 277. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_104
 278. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_105
 279. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_106
 280. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xiv-Page_107
 281. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xv-Page_108
 282. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xv-Page_109
 283. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xv-Page_110
 284. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xv-Page_111
 285. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xv-Page_112
 286. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xv-Page_113
 287. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xv-Page_114
 288. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xv-Page_115
 289. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_116
 290. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_117
 291. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_118
 292. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_119
 293. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_120
 294. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_121
 295. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_122
 296. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_123
 297. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_124
 298. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_125
 299. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvi-Page_126
 300. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvii-Page_127
 301. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvii-Page_128
 302. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvii-Page_129
 303. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvii-Page_130
 304. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvii-Page_131
 305. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvii-Page_132
 306. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xvii-Page_133
 307. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-Page_134
 308. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-Page_135
 309. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-Page_136
 310. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-Page_137
 311. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-Page_138
 312. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-Page_139
 313. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xviii-Page_140
 314. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_141
 315. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_142
 316. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_143
 317. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_144
 318. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_145
 319. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_146
 320. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_147
 321. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_148
 322. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_149
 323. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_150
 324. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_151
 325. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_152
 326. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_153
 327. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_154
 328. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_155
 329. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xix-Page_156
 330. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_157
 331. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_158
 332. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_159
 333. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_160
 334. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_161
 335. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_162
 336. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_163
 337. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_164
 338. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_165
 339. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xx-Page_166
 340. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-Page_167
 341. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-Page_168
 342. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-Page_169
 343. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-Page_170
 344. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-Page_171
 345. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-Page_172
 346. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxi-Page_173
 347. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_174
 348. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_175
 349. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_176
 350. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_177
 351. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_178
 352. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_179
 353. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_180
 354. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_181
 355. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_182
 356. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_183
 357. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_184
 358. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_185
 359. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_186
 360. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_187
 361. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_188
 362. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_189
 363. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_190
 364. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_191
 365. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_192
 366. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_193
 367. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxii-Page_194
 368. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiii-Page_195
 369. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiii-Page_196
 370. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiii-Page_197
 371. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiii-Page_198
 372. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiii-Page_199
 373. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_200
 374. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_201
 375. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_202
 376. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_203
 377. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_204
 378. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_205
 379. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_206
 380. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_207
 381. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_208
 382. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_209
 383. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_210
 384. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_211
 385. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_212
 386. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_213
 387. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_214
 388. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_215
 389. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_216
 390. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_217
 391. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_218
 392. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxiv-Page_219
 393. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_220
 394. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_221
 395. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_222
 396. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_223
 397. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_224
 398. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_225
 399. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_226
 400. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_227
 401. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_228
 402. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_229
 403. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_230
 404. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_231
 405. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_232
 406. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_233
 407. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_234
 408. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxv-Page_235
 409. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_236
 410. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_237
 411. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_238
 412. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_239
 413. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_240
 414. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_241
 415. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_242
 416. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_243
 417. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_244
 418. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_245
 419. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_246
 420. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_247
 421. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_248
 422. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_249
 423. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvi-Page_250
 424. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvii-Page_251
 425. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvii-Page_252
 426. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvii-Page_253
 427. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvii-Page_254
 428. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvii-Page_255
 429. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvii-Page_256
 430. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvii-Page_257
 431. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxvii-Page_258
 432. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-Page_259
 433. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-Page_260
 434. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-Page_261
 435. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-Page_262
 436. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-Page_263
 437. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-Page_264
 438. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-Page_265
 439. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxviii-Page_266
 440. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_267
 441. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_268
 442. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_269
 443. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_270
 444. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_271
 445. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_272
 446. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_273
 447. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_274
 448. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_275
 449. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_276
 450. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_277
 451. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_278
 452. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxix-Page_279
 453. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_280
 454. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_281
 455. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_282
 456. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_283
 457. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_284
 458. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_285
 459. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_286
 460. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_287
 461. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_288
 462. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_289
 463. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxx-Page_290
 464. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-Page_291
 465. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-Page_292
 466. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-Page_293
 467. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-Page_294
 468. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-Page_295
 469. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-Page_296
 470. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-Page_297
 471. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-Page_298
 472. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxi-Page_299
 473. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_300
 474. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_301
 475. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_302
 476. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_303
 477. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_304
 478. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_305
 479. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_306
 480. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_307
 481. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_308
 482. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_309
 483. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_310
 484. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_311
 485. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_312
 486. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_313
 487. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_314
 488. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_315
 489. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxii-Page_316
 490. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-Page_317
 491. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-Page_318
 492. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-Page_319
 493. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-Page_320
 494. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-Page_321
 495. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-Page_322
 496. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiii-Page_323
 497. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_324
 498. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_325
 499. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_326
 500. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_327
 501. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_328
 502. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_329
 503. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_330
 504. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_331
 505. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_332
 506. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_333
 507. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_334
 508. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_335
 509. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_336
 510. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxiv-Page_337
 511. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_338
 512. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_339
 513. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_340
 514. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_341
 515. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_342
 516. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_343
 517. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_344
 518. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_345
 519. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_346
 520. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_347
 521. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_348
 522. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_349
 523. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_350
 524. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxv-Page_351
 525. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-Page_352
 526. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-Page_353
 527. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-Page_354
 528. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-Page_355
 529. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-Page_356
 530. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-Page_357
 531. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-Page_358
 532. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvi-Page_359
 533. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_360
 534. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_361
 535. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_362
 536. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_363
 537. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_364
 538. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_365
 539. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_366
 540. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_367
 541. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_368
 542. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_369
 543. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_370
 544. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_371
 545. file:///ccel/r/renan/marcus/cache/marcus.html3#xxxvii-Page_372
