     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Introduction to the New Testament
      Creator(s): Berkhof, Louis
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Bible
      LC Call no: BS 2330.B4
     __________________________________________________________________

                       Introduction to the New Testament

  by Louis Berkhof

   Eerdmans, 1915

   Scanned and proofread by Mike Randall
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE
     __________________________________________________________________

   This little work on New Testament Introduction is the result of labor
   done in and for the class-room, and is primarily intended for my own
   students. It is not and does not pretend to be a work of original
   research, but depends in a large measure on the labors of such men as
   Davidson, Reuss, Weiss, Westcott, Lightfoot, Godet, Holtzmann,
   Julicher, Zahn, e. a. The indebtedness to these will be evident from
   its pages.

   In method of treatment I have partly gone my own way, both in virtue of
   principles that are not generally recognized in works of Introduction
   and for practical considerations. As far as the limits of the work
   allowed, the directions given by Dr. Kuyper in his Encyclopaedia of
   Sacred Theology have been followed; not only the human but also the
   divine side of the Sacred Scriptures has been treated.

   It has been my constant endeavor in writing this book, to make it a
   work that would introduce the students to the books of the New
   Testament, as they have in fact been transmitted to the Church, and not
   as some critic or other would have them be. Hence critical questions,
   though not disregarded, do not loom as large on its pages as they often
   do in works on Introduction; the positive constructive element has a
   decided precedence over the apologetic; and the human factor that
   operated in the origin and composition of the Scriptures, is not
   studied to the neglect of the divine.

   A limited number of copies was printed, partly in deference to the
   expressed wish of some of my present and past students, and partly
   because I desire to use it as a text-book in the future, there being
   none of the smaller works on Introduction, such as those of Dods,
   Pullan, Kerr, Barth, Peake e. a., however excellent some of them may be
   in their own way, that gave me what I desired. If the book may in some
   small measure be instrumental in leading others to a greater
   appreciation and an ever better understanding of the New Testament
   writings, I shall be very grateful indeed.

   L. BERKHOF.

   Grand Rapids, Mich., November 30, 1915.
     __________________________________________________________________

PROLEGOMENA.

  1. NAME AND IDEA.

   The name Introduction or Isagogics (from the Greek eisagoge) did not
   always denote what it does today. As it is used by the monk Adrianus
   (circa 440) and by Cassiodorus (circa 570), it designates a
   conglomeration of rhetorical archaeological, geographical and
   historical matter such as might be helpful in the interpretation of
   Scripture. In course of time the connotation of the word changed.
   Michaelis (1750) was the first one to employ it in something like its
   present sense, when he entitled his work, devoted to the literary
   historical questions of the New Testament, Einleitung in die gottlichen
   Schriften des neuen Bundes. The study of Introduction was gradually
   limited to an investigation of the origin, the composition, the
   history, and the significance of the Bible as a whole (General
   Introduction), or of its separate books (Special Introduction). But as
   a designation of this discipline the name Introduction did not meet
   with general approval. It was pointed out--and correctly so--that the
   name is too comprehensive, since there are other disciplinae that
   introduce to the study of the Bible; and that it does not express the
   essential character of the discipline, but only one of its practical
   uses.

   Several attempts have been made to supply a name that is more in
   harmony with the central contents and the unifying principle of this
   study. But opinions differed as to the essential character of the
   discipline. Some scholars, as Reuss, Credner and Hupfeld, emphasizing
   its historical nature, would designate it by a name something like that
   already employed by Richard Simon in 1678, when he styled his work,
   "Critical History of the Old Testament. Thus Hupfeld says: "Der
   eigentliche und allein richtige Name der Wissenschaft in ihrem heutigen
   Sinn ist demnach Geschichte der heiligen Schrif ten Alten und Neuen
   Testaments." Begriff und Methode des sogenannten biblischen Finleitung
   p. 12. Reuss arranged his work entirely on this principle. It was
   objected however, by several scholars that a history of the Biblical
   literature is now, and perhaps for all time an impossibility and that
   such a treatment necessarily leads to a co-ordination of the canonical
   and the apocryphal books. And this is just what we find in the History
   of Reuss. Hence the great majority of New Testament scholars, as Bleek,
   Weiss, Davidson, Holtzmann, Julicher, Zahn e.a. prefer to retain the
   old name, either with or without the qualification,
   "historical-critical."

   Another and important stricture on the name suggested by Hupfeld, is
   that it loses sight of the theological character of this discipline.
   Holtzmann correctly says: "Als Glied des Organismus der theologischen
   Wissenschaften ist die biblische Einleitung allerdings nur vom Begriffe
   des Kanons aus zu begreif en, nur in ihm findet sie ihre innere
   Einheit, "Historisch-critische Finleitung in das Neue Testament p. 11.
   This special consideration also leads Kuyper to prefer the name Special
   Canonics. Encyclopaedie der Heilige Godgeleerdheid III p. 22 ff.
   Ideally this name is probably the best; it is certainly better than the
   others, but for practical reasons it seems preferable to abide by the
   generally recognized name Introduction. There is no serious objection
   to this, if we but remember its deficiency, and bear in mind that verba
   valent usu.

  2. FUNCTION.

   What is the proper function of this discipline? According to De Wette
   it must answer the questions: "Was ist die Bibel, und wie ist sie
   geworden was sie ist ?" Hupfeld objects to the first question that it
   has no place in a historical inquiry; hence he would change it a little
   and state the problem as follows: "Was waren die unter den Namen des
   Bibel vereinigten Schriften ursprunglich, und wie sind sie geworden was
   sie jetzt sind ?" Begriff u. Meth. p. 13. It is now generally
   understood and admitted that the study must investigate the questions
   of the authorship, the composition, the history, the purpose and the
   canonicity of the different books of the Bible.

   A difference of opinion becomes apparent, however, as soon as we ask,
   whether the investigation should be limited to the canonical books or
   should include the Apocrypha as well. The answer to that question will
   necessarily depend on ones standpoint. They who regard Introduction as
   a purely historical study of Hebrew and Old Christian literature, will
   hold with Raibiger and Reuss that the apocryphal books must also
   receive due consideration. On the other hand, they who desire to
   maintain the theological character of this discipline and believe that
   it finds its unity in the idea of the canon, will exclude the Apocrypha
   from the investigation.

   A similar difference obtains with reference to the question, whether it
   is only the human or also the divine side of the canonical books that
   should be the object of study. It is perfectly obvious that, if the
   discipline be regarded as a purely historical one, the divine factor
   that operated in the composition of the books of the Bible and that
   gives them their permanent canonical significance, cannot come in
   consideration. The Word of God must then be treated like all purely
   human compositions. This is the stand taken by nearly all writers on
   Introduction, and Hupfeld believes that even so it is possible to
   maintain the theological character of the discipline. Begriff u. Meth.
   p. 17. It appears to us, however, that this is impossible, and with
   Kuyper we hold that we should not only study the human, but should also
   have regard to the divine side of the Biblical books, notably to their
   inspiration and canonical significance.

   Lastly the conception of the final aim of this study also varies. Many
   scholars are of the opinion that it is the final purpose of
   Introduction to determine in a historico-critical way what part of the
   Biblical writings are credible and therefore really constitute the Word
   of God. Human reason is placed as an arbiter over the divine
   Revelation. This, of course, cannot be the position of those who
   believe that the Bible is the Word of God. This belief is our starting
   point and not our goal in the study of Introduction. Thus we begin with
   a theological postulate, and our aim is to set forth the true character
   of Scripture, in order to explain, why the Church universal honors it
   as the Word of God; to strengthen the faith of believers; and to
   vindicate the claims of the canonical books over against the assaults
   of Rationalism.

   To define: Introduction is that Bibliological discipline that
   investigates the origin, composition, history and purpose of the
   Scriptural writings, on their human side; and their inspiration and
   canonical significance, on the divine side.

  3. LEADING PRINCIPLES.

   There are certain fundamental principles that guide us in our
   investigation, which it is desirable to state at the outset, in order
   that our position may be perfectly clear. For the sake of brevity we do
   not seek to establish them argumentatively.

   1. For us the Bible as a whole and in all its parts is the very Word of
   God, written by men indeed, but organically inspired by the Holy
   Spirit; and not the natural product of the religious development of
   men, not merely the expression of the subjective religious
   consciousness of believers. Resting, as it ultimately does, on the
   testimony of the Holy Spirit, no amount of historical investigation can
   shake this conviction.

   2. This being our position, we unflinchingly accept all that the
   various books of the Bible tell us concerning their authorship,
   destination, composition, inspiration, etc. Only in cases where the
   text is evidently corrupt, will we hesitate to accept their dicta as
   final. This applies equally to all parts of the Word of God.

   3. Since we do not believe that the Bible is the result of a purely
   natural development, but regard it as the product of supernatural
   revelation, a revelation that often looks beyond the immediate present,
   we cannot allow the so-called zeitgeschichtliche arguments the force
   which they are often supposed to have.

   4. While it is the prevailing habit of many New Testament scholars to
   discredit what the early Church fathers say respecting the books of the
   Bible, because of the uncritical character of their work, we accept
   those early traditions as trustworthy until they are clearly proven
   unreliable. The character of those first witnesses warrants this
   position.

   5. We regard the use of working-hypotheses as perfectly legitimate
   within certain limits. They may render good service, when historical
   evidence fails, but even then may not go contrary to the data at hand,
   and the problematic character of the results to which they lead must
   always be borne in mind.

   6. It is not assumed that the problems of New Testament Introduction
   are insignificant, and that all the difficulties that present
   themselves can easily be cleared up. Whatever our standpoint, whatever
   our method of procedure in studying these problems, we shall sometimes
   have to admit our ignorance, and often find reason to confess that we
   know but in part.

  4. ENCYCLOPAEDIC PLACE

   There is little uniformity in Theological Encyclopaedias with respect
   to the proper place of this discipline. They all correctly place it
   among the Exegetical (Bibliological) group of Theological disciplinae,
   but its relation to the other studies of that group is a matter of
   dispute. The usual arrangement is that of Hagenbach, followed in our
   country by Schaff, Crooks and Hurst and Weidner, viz.: Biblical
   Philology, dealing with the words, and Biblical Archaeology, in its
   broadest sense, with the things of the Bible; Biblical Introduction,
   treating of the fortunes, and Biblical Criticism, supplying the test of
   Scripture; Biblical Hermeneutics, relating to the theory, and Biblical
   Exegesis, pertaining to the practice of interpretation. The order of
   Rabiger is unusual: Hermeneutics, Linguistics, Criticism, Antiquities,
   Biblical History, Isagogics, Exegesis, and Biblical theology. The
   disposition of Kuyper and Cave is preferable to either one of these.
   They place Introduction (Canonics) first, as pertaining to the formal
   side of Scripture as a book and then let the studies follow that have
   reference to the formal and material side of the contents of the Bible.

  5. HISTORICAL REVIEW.

   Although the beginnings of New Testament Isagogics are already found in
   Origen, Dionysus and Eusebius; and in the time of the Reformation some
   attention was devoted to it by Paginus, Sixtus of Siene and Serarius
   among the Roman Catholics; by Walther of the Lutherans; and by the
   Reformed scholars, Rivetus and Heidegger;--Richard Simon is generally
   regarded as the father of this study. His works were epoch-making in
   this respect, though they had reference primarily to the language of
   the New Testament. He minimized the divine element in Scripture.
   Michaelis, who in his, Einleitung in die gottlichen Schriften des neuen
   Bundes, 1750, produced the first Introduction in the modern sense,
   though somewhat dependent on Simon, did not altogether share his
   rationalistic views. Yet in the succeeding editions of his work he
   gradually relaxed on the doctrine of inspiration, and attached no value
   to theTestimonium Spiritus Sancti.

   The next significant contribution to the science was made by Semler in
   his, Abhandlung von freier Untersuchung des Kanons, 1771-75. He broke
   with the doctrine of inspiration and held that the Bible was not, but
   contained the Word of God, which could be discovered only by the inner
   light. All questions of authenticity and credibility had to be
   investigated voraussetzungslos. Eichhorn also departed decidedly from
   traditional views and was the first to fix attention on the Synoptic
   problem, for which he sought the solution in his Urevangelium, 1804-27.
   At the same time the Johannine problem was placed in the foreground by
   several scholars, especially by Bretschneider, 1820. An acute defender
   of the traditional views arose in the Roman Catholic scholar Hug. who
   fought the rationalistic critics with their own weapons.

   Meanwhile the Mediating school made its appearance under the leadership
   of Schleiermacher. The critics belonging to that school sought a mean
   between the positions of Rationalism and the traditional views. They
   were naturally divided into two sections, the naturalistic wing,
   inclining towards the position of Semler and Eichhorn; and the
   evangelical wing, leaning decidedly toward traditionalism. Of the first
   class De Wette was the ablest exponent, though his work was
   disappointing as to positive results; while Credner, following in
   general the same line, emphasized the historical idea in the study of
   Introduction. The other wing was represented by Guericke, Olshausen and
   Neander.

   The Tubingen school of New Testament criticism took its rise with F. C.
   Baur, 1792-1860 who applied the Hegelian principle of development to
   the literature of the New Testament. According to him the origin of the
   New Testament, too, finds its explanation in the three-fold process of
   thesis, antithesis and synthesis. There was action, reaction and
   compromise. Paul defended his position in the four great epistles
   (Romans, I and II Corinthians and Galatians), the only genuine
   productions of the apostle. This position is assailed by the
   Apocalypse, the sole work of John. And all the other writings of the
   New Testament were written by others than their reputed authors in the
   interest of reconciliation, the fourth Gospel and the first Epistle of
   John issuing in the blending of the different parties. Among the
   immediate followers of Baur we have especially Zeller, Schwegler and
   Kostlin. The further adherents of the school, such as Hilgenfeld,
   Hoisten and Davidson, modified the views of Baur considerably; while
   later German scholars, as Pfleiderer, Hausrath, Holtsmann, Weizsacker
   and Julicher, broke with the distinctive Tubingen theory and indulged
   independently in rationalistic criticism. The wildest offshoot of the
   Tubingen school was Bruno Bauer, who rejected even the four epistles
   regarded as genuine by F. C. Baur. He had no followers in Germany, but
   of late his views found support in the writings of the Dutch school of
   Pierson, Naber, Loman and Van Manen, and in the criticism of the Swiss
   scholar Steck.

   Opposition to the radicalism of the Tubingen school became apparent in
   two directions. Some scholars, as Bleek, Ewald Reuss without intending
   a return to the traditional standpoint discarded the subjective element
   of the Tubingen theory, the Hegelian principle of thesis, antithesis
   and synthesis, in connection with the supposed second century struggle
   between Petrine and Pauline factions. Ritschl also broke away from the
   Tubingen tendency, but substituted an equally subjective principle of
   criticism by applying his favorite Werthurtheile to the authentication
   of the books of the Bible. He had, as he claimed, no interest in saving
   mere objective statements. What had for him the value of a divine
   revelation was regarded as authentic. Some of his most prominent
   followers are Harnack, Schurer and Wendt.

   An evangelical reaction against the subjective Tubingen vagaries also
   made its appearance in Ebrard, Dietlein, Thiersch, Lechier and the
   school of Hofmann, who himself defended the genuineness of all the New
   Testament books. His disciples are Luthardt, Grau, Nosgen and Th. Zahn.
   The works of Beischlag and B. Weiss are also quite conservative.
   Moreover the writings of such men as Lightfoot, Westcott, Ellicott,
   Godet, Dods, Pullan e. a. maintain with great ability the traditional
   position respecting the books of the New Testament.

  6. SELECT LITERATURE

   Including the Works referred to in the Text. In order that the list may
   serve as a guide for students, both the edition and the value of the
   books are indicated.
     __________________________________________________________________

    I. BOOKS ON INTRODUCTION, BIBLE DICTIONARIES AND RELATED WORKS.

   ALEXANDER, The Canon of the Old and New Testaments, Philadelphia 1851.
   Conservative.

   ANDREWS, The Life of our Lord upon the Earth, New York 1894. Excellent
   for chronological and historical discussions.

   BAIJON, Geschiedenis van de Boeken des Nieuwen Verbonds, Groningen
   1901. Scholarly with a liberal point of view.

   BARTH, Finleitung in das Neue Testament, Gutersloh 1908; 2d edit. since
   published. Conservative and good.

   BAUR, Church History of the first three Centuries, London 1878-79.
   Brilliant but written with a rationalistic tendency.

   BERNARD, The Progress of Doctrine in the New Testament, New York 1864;
   4th edit. 1878. A conservative and valuable work.

   BLASS, Crammatik des neutestamentlichen Griechisch, Gottingen 1911.
   Supercedes Winer and Buttmann, but does not render them worthless. An
   excellent work.

   BLEEK, Einleitung in das Neue Testament, 4th edit. by Mangold, Berlin
   1886. Eng. transl. by W. Urwick, London 1870. One of the best works on
   N. T. Introd. Standpoint, moderately liberal.

   BUCKLEY, Introduction to the Synoptic Problem, London 1912. Proceeds on
   the Combinations-hypothese.

   CLARK, GEO. W., Harmony of the Acts of the Apostles, Philadelphia 1897.
   A very useful work.

   DAVIDSON, S., Introduction to the Study of the New Testament, London
   1894. Scholarly, but extremely rationalistic and verbose.

   DAVIS, A Dictionary of the Bible, Philadelphia 1903. The best one
   volume Dictionary of the Bible.

   DEISSMANN, Light from the Ancient East, London 1911. Very valuable for
   the new light it sheds on the language of the N. T.

   DEISSMANN, St. Paul, a Study in Social and Religious History, London
   1912. A vivid and delightful portrayal of Paul and his world.

   DODS, An Introduction to the New Testament, London. A useful manual.

   FARRAR, The Life and Work of St. Paul, London 1879. Instructive and
   written in a beautiful style, but not always characterized by sobriety.

   GODET, Introduction to the New Testament, I Pauline Epistles, Edinburgh
   1894; II The Collection of the Four Gospels and the Gospel of St.
   Matthew, Edinburgh 1899. Scholarly and conservative; devotes much space
   to the contents of the books.

   GODET, Bijbelstudien over het Nieuwe Testament, Amsterdam. Contains
   introductions to the Gospels and the Apocalypse.

   GREGORY, D. S., Why Four Gospels, New York 1907. The work of a
   conservative scholar, valuable in differentiating the Gospels.

   GREGORY, C. R., Canon and Text of the New Testament, New York 1907. A
   scholarly and moderately conservative work.

   HASTINGS, Dictionary of the Bible, dealing with its Language,
   Literature and Contents, New York 1900-04. Contains valuable
   introductions to the books of the Bible. Those pertaining to the New
   Testament are characterized by greater moderation than those relating
   to the Old; the latter are often extremely rationalistic, the former
   usually moderately conservative.

   HAUSRATH, History of New Testament Times: The Life of Jesus 2 vols.,
   Edinburgh 1878-80; The Life of the Apostles 4 vols., Edinburgh 1895. A
   learned work, full of information, but extremely rationalistic.

   HILL, Introduction to the Life of Christ, New York 1911. A concise
   statement of the problems that enter into a study of the Life of
   Christ.

   HOLDSWORTH, Gospel Origins. New York 1913. Though differing somewhat
   from the work of Buckley, it also advocates the Combinations-hypothese.

   HOLTZMANN, Historisch-critische Finleitung in das Neue Testament,
   Freiburg 1892. Perhaps the most important representative of the
   rationalistic position in New Testament study. Very learned, and rich
   in historical matter.

   JULICHER, Einleitung in des Neue Testament, Leipzig 1906. A scholarly
   work, written from the rationalistic point of view.

   KING, The Theology of Christ's Teaching, New York 1903. Conservative
   and very instructive; weak in genetic treatment.

   KERR, Introduction to New Testament Study, New York 1892. A
   conservative manual.

   KUYPER, Encyclopaedie der Heilige Godgeleerdheid, Amsterdam 1894.

   LUTHARDT, St. John the Author of the Fourth Gospel, Edinburgh 1875. An
   able conservative defense, containing a large Bibliography by C. R.
   Gregory.

   MCGIFFERT, The Apostolic Age, New York 1910. A scholarly but
   rationalizing work.

   MOFFAT, An Introduction to the Literature of the New Testament. New
   York 1911. Very able, but vitiated by rationalistic principles.

   NORTON, Genuineness of the Gospels (abridged), Boston 1890. An able
   defense of the Gospels. The author adheres to the Traditions-hypothese.

   PEAKE, A Critical Introduction to the New Testament, New York 1910.
   Well written, able, but following the line of negative criticism.

   PULLAN, The Books of the New Testament, London 1901. A very useful
   manual; conservative.

   PURVES, Christianity in the Apostolic Age, New York 1900. The work of a
   scholar. In point of view the antipode of McGiffert s book.

   RAMSAY, Historical Commentary on the Galatians, London 1899.

   RAMSAY, St. Paul the Traveler and the Roman Citizen, London 1903.

   RAMSAY, The Church in the Roman Empire, London 1893.

   RAMSAY, Luke the Physician (and other Studies), New York 1908. The
   works of Ramsay have a charm of their own: they are original and
   informing, based on large historical and arch~eological knowledge, and,
   on the whole, written in a conservative spirit.

   REAL-ENCYOLOPAEDIE, Hauck, Leipzig 1896-1909. Contains very valuable
   material for New Testament study, but many of its articles are marred
   by their destructive tendency.

   REUSS, History of the New Testament, Boston 1884. The work of a great
   scholar; its method is peculiar; its standpoint moderately
   rationalistic.

   SALMON, Historical Introduction to the Books of the New Testament, New
   York 1889. The antipode of Davidson's Introduction; very able, but
   suffering from want of method.

   SCHURER, Geschichte des Jiidischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi,
   Leipzig 1901-1911. The greatest work on the subject, but, on account of
   its liberal tendency, to be used with care.

   SIMCOX, Writers of the New Testament, London 1890. Contains a lucid
   discussion of the style of the N. T. writers.

   STEVENS, Johannine Theology, New York 1894.

   STEVENS, Pauline Theology, New York 1903. Both works are stimulating
   and helpful, but must be used with discrimination.

   URQUHART, The Bible, its Structure and Purpose, New York 1904.

   URQUHART, The New Biblical Guide, London. Written by a staunch defender
   of the Bible, in popular style. Often helpful, especially the last
   work, in clearing up difficulties; but sometimes too confident and
   fanciful.

   VAN MELLE, Inleiding tot het Nieuwe Testament, Utrecht 1908. A very
   good manual; conservative in spirit.

   VON SODEN, Urchristliche Literaturgeschichte, Berlin 1905.
   Rationalistic.

   WEISS, Manual of Introduction to the New Testament, London 1888. One of
   the best Introductions to the New Testament. Moderately conservative.

   WEISS, Theology of the New Testament, Edinburgh 1892-3. On the whole
   the best work on the subject.

   WESTCOTT, Introduction to the Study of the Gospels, Boston 1902. Very
   helpful in differentiating the Gospels; defends the
   Traditions-hypothese.

   WESTCOTT, The Canon of the New Testament, London 1881. One of the best
   works on the Canon of the N.T.

   WESTCOTT and HORT, The New Testament in the original Greek;
   Introduction and Appendix, New York 1882. The indispensible companion
   to the Greek Testament, if one desires the reasons for the readings
   adopted.

   WREDE, The Origin of the New Testament, London 1909. Very brief and
   radical.

   WRIGHT, A Synopsis of the Gospels in Greek, London 1903. The most able
   presentation of the Traditions- hypothese.

   ZAHN, Einleitung in das Neue Testament, Leipzig 1900; 3. Aufi. 1906;
   Eng. transl. Edinburgh 1909. A work of immense learning; the best on N.
   T. Introduction from the conservative side.

    II. COMMENTARIES.

   ALEXANDER, Commentaries on Matthew, New York 1867; Mark, New York 1870;
   Acts 4th edit. New York 1884. Valuable works, containing sound learning
   and thoroughly conservative.

   ALFORD, The Greek Testament, Cambridge 1894; Vol I, 7th edit.; Vol. II,
   7th edit.; Vol. III, 5th edit.; Vol. IV, 5th edit. A truly great work;
   brief, lucid, scholarly, conservative, embodying the results of German
   scholarship, yet with a measure of independence, though in some parts
   leaning rather much on Meyer. Still very useful, though not up to date.
   Contains valuable Prolegomena.

   BARDE, Kommentaar op de Handelingen der Apostelen, Kampen 1910. A good
   commentary, written in a conservative spirit.

   BEET, Commentaries on Romans, 10th edit.;I and II Corinthians, 7th
   edit.; Galatians, 6th edit.; and Ephesians, Philip pians, Colossians,
   3d edit., all London 1891-1903. Good commentaries by a Methodist
   scholar; conservative, but must be used with care, especially in
   passages pertaining to election, the doctrine of the last things, e. a.

   BIESTERVELD, De Brief van Paulus aan de Colossensen, Kampen 1908. An
   excellent work.

   BROWN, J., Expositions of Galatians, Edinburgh 1853; Hebrews, Edinburgh
   1862; and I Peter, Edinburgh 1866. Sound works of a Puritan divine,
   learned but somewhat diffuse.

   CALVIN, Commentaries in Opera, Vols. 24-55. There is a fairly good
   English translation of the Calvin Translation Society. Calvin was
   undoubtedly the greatest exegete among the Reformers. The value of his
   exegetical work is generally recognized by present day scholars.

   EADIE, Commentaries on Galatians, 1869; Ephesians, 1883; Colossians,
   1884; Philippians, 1884; Thessalonians, 1877, all at Edinburgh. Able
   and reliable works of a Presbyterian scholar.

   EDWARDS T. C., Commentary on I Corinthians, 3d edit. London 1897. A
   good and learned commentary, though sometimes a little over-strained.

   ELLICOTT, Commentaries on I Corinthians, Andover 1889; Galatians, 1867;
   Ephesians, 1884; Philippians and Colossians, 1861; Thessalonians, 1866;
   Pastoral Epistles, 1869, all at London. Very able grammatical
   commentaries; conservative.

   Expositor s Greek Testament, London 1912. A very scholarly work on the
   order of Alford s Greek Testament; being more recent, it supersedes the
   latter. Standpoint is on the whole moderately conservative; it contains
   valuable introductions.

   GODET, Commentaries on Luke, 1875; John, 1877; Romans, -1886; I
   Corinthians, 1886-7, all at Edinburgh. Very able and reliable.

   GREYDANUS, De Openbaring des Heeren aan Johannes, Doesburg. A good
   popular commentary.

   HODGE, Commentaries on Romans, 2d edit. 1886; I Corinthians, 1860; II
   Corinthians, 1860; Ephesians, 1886. Admirable commentaries, especialy
   the one on Romans.

   International Critical Commentary, New York, in course of publication.
   Some volumes of exceptional value; others of inferior merit.
   Characterized by a rationalistic tendency, especially the volumes on
   the 0. T.

   LANGE, A Commentary on the Holy Scriptures, Critical, Doctrinal and
   Homiletical. On the whole a useful work; New Testament far better than
   the Old. Often suffers for want of clearness, and sometimes loses
   itself in mystical speculations. Its Homiletical material has little
   value.

   LIGHTFOOT, Commentaries on Galatians, 1895; Philippians, 1895;
   Colossians and Philemon, 1895, all at London. Very able commentaries,
   containing valuable dissertations. Conservative.

   MEYER (Lunemann, Huther and Dusterdieck), Commentary on the New
   Testament, New York 1890. Meyer is recognized as the prince of
   grammatical commentators. Parts of Vol. 8 and Vols. 9, 10, 11, contain
   the work of Lunemann, Huther and Dusterdieck, which though good, is not
   up to the standard of Meyer s work. Standpoint: moderately
   conservative. Last German edition by Weiss, Haupt e. a. is no more the
   work of Meyer.

   OLSHAUSEN, Commentary on the New Testament, New York 1860-72. Quite
   good. Excells in organic interpretation of Scripture; but its mysticism
   often runs wild.

   Pulpit Commentary, London 1880 sqq. This, as its name indicates, is far
   more homiletical than exegetical; yet it contains some real exposition.

   STIER, The Words of the Lord Jesus, New York 1864. Very useful, but
   often fanciful and diffuse; devout, but frequently characterized by too
   great a desire to find a deeper meaning in Scripture.

   STRACK UND ZOCKLER, Kurzgefasster Commentar zu den Schriften des Alten
   und Neuen Testaments, sowie zu den Apokryphen, Munchen 1886-93. One of
   the best recent German commentaries. Moderately conservative.

   VINCENT, Word Studies in the New Testament, New York 1887-91. Contains
   some useful material.

   WESTCOTT, Commentaries on the Gospel of John, 1890; the Epistle to the
   Hebrews, 1892; and the Epistles of John, 1905, all at London. All very
   scholarly and reliable.

   ZAHN, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament (several co-laborators), Erlangen
   1903 sqq., still in course of publication. Will constitute one of the
   best conservative commentaries of the New Testament.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Gospels in General
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE TITLE OF THE GOSPELS

   The shortest form of the title is kata Matthaion, kata Marchon, etc.
   The Textus Receptus and some of the Mnn. have to kata Matthaion
   euanngelion; but the greater part of the Mjj. read euanngelion kata
   Matthaion, etc.

   The word euanngelion passed through three stages in the history of its
   use. In the older Greek authors it signified a reward for bringing good
   tidings; also, a thankoffering for good tidings brought. Next in later
   Greek it indicated the good news itself. And finally it was employed to
   denote the books in which the gospel of Jesus Christ is presented
   historic form. It is used very extensively in the New Testament, and
   always in the second sense, signifying the good news of God, the
   message of salvation. This meaning is also retained in the title of the
   gospels. The first trace of the word as indicating a written gospel is
   found in the didache, the Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, discovered
   in 1873 and in all probability composed between the years 90 and 100 A.
   D. This contains the following exhortation in 15: 3: "And reprove one
   another not in wrath but in peace, as ye have it in the Gospel. Here
   the word euanngelion evidently refers to a written record. It is very
   explicitly and repeatedly applied to a written account of the life of
   Christ about the middle of the second century. The plural euanggelia,
   signifying the four Gospels, is first found in Justin Martyr, about 152
   A. D.

   The expression kata Matthaion, kata Marchon, etc., has often been
   misinterpreted. Some maintained that kata simply indicated a genitive
   relation so that we should read: the Gospel of Matthew, the Gospel of
   Mark, etc. But if this is the idea intended, why was not the simple
   genitive used, just as it is employed by Paul, when he expresses a
   similar idea, to euanngelion mou, Rom. 2:16; 16:25? Moreover, it cannot
   be maintained that the preposition kata is equivalent to the Hebrew
   Lamedh of possession, for the Septuagint never renders this by kata.
   Others inferred from the use of this expression that the Gospels were
   not written by the person named but were shaped after the Gospel as
   they preached it. But on this interpretation it seems very peculiar
   that the second and third Gospels were not called kata Petron and kata
   Paulon, seeing that they were fashioned after their type of preaching.
   The expression must be explained from the Church's consciousness that
   there is but one Gospel of Jesus Christ, and indicates that in these
   writings we have that Gospel, as ti was shaped (i. e. in writing) by
   the persons whose names they bear.

   That the early Church caught the idea of the unity of the Gospel is
   quite evident. It is true, the plural of euanngelion is sometimes
   employed, but the singular prevails. Justin Martyr speaks of the
   Memoirs that are called Gospels, but he also expresses himself thus:
   "the precepts in what is called the Gospel," "it is written in the
   Gospel." Irenaeus in one of his writings states his theme as: "The
   Gospel is essentially fourfold." Clement of Alexandria speaks of "the
   Law, the Prophets and the Gospel," and Augustine, of "the four Gospels,
   or rather, the four books of the one Gospel."

   The English word Gospel is derived from the AngloSaxon godspell,
   composed of god=God and spel=story, thus indicating the story of the
   life of God in human flesh. It is not improbable, however, that the
   original form of the Anglo-Saxon word was godspell, from god=good and
   spel=story, this being a literal translation of the Greek euanngelion.
   It denotes the good tidings of salvation in Christ for a perishing
   world.

    THE NUMBER OF THE GOSPELS RECOGNIZED BY THE EARLY CHURCH

   In view of the fact that the first Christian century produced many
   Gospels besides those which are included in our canon, and that many at
   the present day deny the authority of some or all of our Gospels, it is
   important to know, how many the early Church received as canonic. The
   apostolic fathers, though often quoting the Gospels do not mention
   their authors, nor do they enumerate them. They testify to the
   substance and canonicity of the Gospels therefore, but not, except
   indirectly, to their authenticity and number. In all probability the
   earliest evidence that the Church of the first ages accepted the four
   Gospels that we now possess as canonic, is furnished by the Peshito,
   which most likey dates from the first half of the second century. And
   being a translation, it points to the fact that even before its origin
   our four Gospels were received into the canon, while all others were
   left out. Another early witness is found in the Muratorian Fragment, a
   mutilated work of which the real character cannot now be determined,
   and that was probably written about 170 A. D. It commences with the
   last words of a sentence that seemingly belongs to a description of
   Marks Gospel, and then tells us that "Lukes Gospel stands third in
   order, having been written by Luke, the physician, the companion of
   Paul." After making this statement it proceeds to assign the fourth
   place to "the Gospel of John, a disciple of the Lord." The conclusion
   seems perfectly warranted that the first two Gospels, of which the
   description is lost, are those of Matthew and Mark. An important
   witness, really the first one to a fourfold Gospel, i. e. to a Gospel
   that is four and yet is one, is Tatian, the Assyrian. His Diatessaron
   was the first harmony of the Gospels. The exact date of its composition
   is not known; the meaning of its name is obviously [the Gospel ]by the
   Four. This, no doubt, points to the fact that it was based on four
   Gospels, and also implies that these four were our canonical Gospels,
   since they constituted the only collection in existence that needed no
   other description than "the Four." The testimonny of Eusebius is in
   harmony with this when he says "Tatian, the former leader of the
   Encratites, having put together in some strange fashion a combination
   and collection of the Gospels, gave it the name of the Diatessaron, and
   the work is still partially current." Church History, IV, 29. Very
   important testimony to our four Gospels is found in the writings of
   Irenaeus (c. 120-200) and of Tertullian (c. 150-130). The former was a
   disciple of Polycarp, who in turn had enjoyed the personal instruction
   of the apostle John. He preached the Gospel to the Gauls and in 178
   succeeded Pothinus as bishop of Lyons. In one of his books he has a
   long chapter entitled: "Proofs that there can be neither more nor fewer
   than four Evangelists." Looking at the Gospels as a unit, he called
   them "the Gospel with four Faces." And he searched to find mystic
   reasons for this quadruple form, thus showing how strongly he and his
   age were persuaded that there were but four canonical Gospels. He
   compares the quadriform Gospel (tetramorphon) to the four regions of
   the earth, to the four universal spirits, to the cherubim with four
   faces, etc. The testimony of Tertullian is equally explicit. This
   famous church father received a liberal education at Rome, lived on in
   heathen darkness until about his thirtieth or fortieth year, when he
   was converted and entered the ministry. Embittered by the treatment he
   received at the hands of the Church, he went into the fold of the
   Montanists about the beginning of the third century. He wrote numerous
   works in defense of the Christian religion. In his work against Marcion
   he says, after stating that the Gospel of Luke had been maintained from
   its first publication: "The same authority of the apostolic churches
   will uphold the other Gospels which we have in due succession through
   them and according to their usage, I mean those of [the apostles]
   Matthew and John; although that which was published by Mark may also be
   maintained to be Peters, whose interpreter Mark was: for the narrative
   of Luke also is generally ascribed to Paul: since it is allowable that
   that which scholars publish should be regarded as their masters work."
   Just as those that went before him Tertullian appealed to the testimony
   of antiquity as proving the canonicity of our four Gospels and the
   other Scriptural books; and his appeal was never gainsaid. Another
   significant testimony is that of Origin, the great teacher of
   Alexandria of whom Eusebius records that in the first book of his
   commentaries on the Gospel of Matthew he asserts that he knows of only
   four Gospels, as follows: "I have learnt by tradition concerning the
   four Gospels, which alone are uncontroverted in the Church of God
   spread under heaven, that according to Matthew, who was once a publican
   but afterwards an apostle of Jesus Christ, was written first; . . .
   that according to Mark second; . . . that according to Luke third; . .
   . that according to John last of all." Church History VI, 25. Eusebius
   himself, who was the first historian of the Christian Church, in giving
   a catalogue of the New Testament writings, says: "First then we must
   place the holy quaternion of the Gospels."

   From the testimony which we have now reviewed the conclusion seems
   perfectly warranted that the Church from the earliest times knew four
   and only four canonical Gospels; and that these four are the same that
   she has recognized ever since. It is true that the heretic Marcion
   acknowledged only the Gospel of Luke, and this in mutilated form, but
   his attitude toward the Gospels finds a ready explanation in his
   dogmatic bias.

    THE LITERARY CHARACTER OF THE GOSPELS.

   The Gospels have a literary character all their own; they are sui
   generis. There is not another book or group of books in the Bible to
   which they can be compared. They are four and yet one in a very
   essential sense; they express four sides of the one euangelion of Jesus
   Christ. In studying them the question naturally arises, how we must
   conceive of them. Now we need not argue that they are not mere
   collections of myths and fables, with or without a historical basis, as
   many Rationalists would have us believe. Nor is it necessary to show at
   length that they are not four biographies of Jesus. If their authors
   intended them to be such, they would be very disappointing indeed.
   There is, however, another misconception against which we must warn,
   because it is quite prevalent in the circles of those who accept these
   writings unquestionably as a part of the Word of God, and since it is a
   positive hindrance to a true understanding of these priceless records.
   We refer to the conviction that the writers of the Gospels were minded
   to prepare for following generations more or less complete histories of
   the life of Christ. In reading these writings we soon find that, looked
   at as histories, they leave a great deal to be desired. In the first
   place they tell us comparitively little of that rich and varied life of
   Christ, of which they knew so much, Cf. John 20: 30; 21: 25. The
   historical facts narrated by John f. i. only represent the work of a
   few days. His Gospel would thus be a life of Jesus with yawning gaps.
   The same is true of the other Gospels. In the second place the
   materials, except those at the beginning and at the end of Christs life
   are not arranged in chronological order. Any possible doubt that we may
   have on this point is soon dispelled, when we compare the Gospels. The
   same facts are often narrated in altogether different connections.
   Closely allied with this is a third feature that deserves attention.
   The casual relation of the important events that are narrated is not
   traced, except in a few instances, and yet this just what one expects
   in histories. And finally if they were really meant to be histories,
   why was it necessary that we should have four of them?

   The harmonists generally proceeded on the erroneous conception to which
   we refer. They were aware indeed that there were great lacunae in all
   the Gospels, but thought they might remedy matters by supplying from
   one Gospel what was wanting in the other. Thus the relation of the
   Gospels to one another was conceived of as supplemental. But their work
   was doomed to failure; it did violence to the exquisite compositions on
   which they operated, and marred the characteristic beauty of those
   literary productions. They were always uncertain asa; to the true order
   of events, and did not know which one of the evangelists was the best
   chronological guide. Some preferred Matthew, others chose Mark, and
   still others followed Luke. And after all their efforts to combine the
   four Gospels into one continuous narrative with the facts arranged in
   the exact order in which they occurred, their work must be pronounced a
   failure. The Gospels are not histories of the life of Christ, nor do
   they, taken together, form one history.

   But what are they, if they are neither biographies nor histories? They
   are four pen-pictures, or better, a four fold portraiture of the
   Saviour a fourfold representation of the apostolic kerugma; fourfold
   witness regarding our Lord. It is said that the great artist Van Dyke
   prepared a threefold portrait of Charles I for the sculptor, that the
   latter might fashion an absolutely faithful likeness of the king. These
   three portraits were necessary; their differences and agreements were
   all required to give a true representation of the monarch. So it is in
   the case of the Gospels. Each one of them gives us a certain view of
   the Lord, and only the four taken together present to us his perfect
   likeness, revealing him as the Saviour of the world. The apostolic
   cherugma had taken a wide flight. Its central content was the cross and
   the resurrection. But in connection with this the words and deeds of
   the Saviour and his history also formed the subject of the apostles
   preaching. And when this apostolic cherugma was reduced to writing, it
   was found necessary to give it a fourfold form, that it might answer to
   the needs of four classes of people viz. to those of the Jews, to those
   of the Romans, to those of the Greeks and to those of the people who
   confessed Christ as Lord; needs that were typical of the spiritual
   requirements of all future ages. Matthew wrote for the Jews and
   characterized Christ as the great King of the house of David. Mark
   composed his Gospel for the Romans and pictured the Saviour as the
   mighty Worker, triumphing over sin and evil. Luke in writing his Gospel
   had in mind the needs of the Greeks and portrayed Christ as the perfect
   man, the universal Saviour. And John, composing his Gospel for those
   who already had a saving knowledge of the Lord and stood in need of a
   more profound understanding of the essential character of Jesus,
   emphasized the divinity of Christ, the glory that was manifested in his
   works. Each Gospel is complete in itself and acquaints us with a
   certain aspect of the Lords life. Yet it is only the fourfold Gospel
   that furnishes us with a complete, a perfect image of him whom to know
   is life eternal. And it is only, when we grasp the different features
   that are mirrored in the Gospels and see how they blend harmoniously in
   that noblest of all lives, the life of Christ, that we have found the
   true harmony of the Gospels.

    THE SYNOPTIC PROBLEM.

   The first three Gospels are known as the Synoptics, and their authors
   are called the Synoptists. The name is derived from the Greek sun and
   opsis, and is applied to these Gospels, since they, as distinguished
   from the fourth, give us a common view of the life of our Lord. But
   notwithstanding the great similarity by which these Gospels are
   characterized, they also reveal very striking differences. This
   remarkable agreement on the one hand, and these manifest
   dissimilarities on the other, constitute one of the most difficult
   literary problems of the New Testament. The question is, whether we can
   account for the origin of these Gospels in such a manner that we can
   explain both the close resemblances and the often surprising
   differences.

   In the first place the general plan of these Gospels exhibits a
   remarkable agreement. Only Matthew and Luke contain a narrative of the
   infancy of our Lord and their accounts of it are quite distinct; but
   the history of Christs public ministry follows very much the same order
   in all the Synoptics. They treat successively of the Lords preparation
   for the ministry, John the Baptist, the baptism, the temptation, the
   return to Galilee, the preaching in its villages and cities, the
   journey to Jerusalem, the entrance into the Holy City, the preaching
   there, the passion and the resurrection. The details that fit into this
   general plan are also arranged in quite a uniform manner, except in
   some places, especially of the first Gospel. The most striking
   differences in the arrangement of the material results from the
   narrative of a long series of events connected with the Galilean
   ministry, which is peculiar to Matthew and Mark, Matt. 14:22-- 16:12;
   Mark 6: 45--8: 26; and from the history of another series of events
   related to the journey to Jerusalem that is found only in Luke 9:
   51--18:14.

   But there is not only similarity in the broad outlines of those
   Gospels; the particular incidents that are narrated are also in many
   cases the same in substance and similar if not identical in form. The
   amount of agreement that we find in this respect is represented by
   Norton, Genuineness of the Gospels p. 373, and by Westcott,
   Introduction to the Study of the Gospels p. 201, in the following
   manner: If the total contents of the Gospel is represented by 100, the
   following result is obtained:

   Mark has    7 peculiarities and--93 coincidences
   Matthew has 42 peculiarities and--58 coincidences
   Luke has    59 peculiarities and--41 coincidences

   If the extent of all the coincidences be represented by 100 their
   proportionate distribution will be:

   Matthew, Mark and Luke 53
   Matthew and Luke       21
   Matthew and Mark       20
   Mark and Luke          6

   Still another estimate, viz, that by verses, is suggested by Reuss,
   History of the New Testament, I p. 177:

   Matthew out of a total of 971 verses has 330 peculiar to him.
   Mark out of a total of 478 verses has 68 peculiar to him.
   Luke out of a total of 1151 verses has 541 peculiar to him.

   The first two have 170 to 180 verses that are lacking in Luke; Matthew
   and Luke, 230 to 240 wanting in Mark; Mark and Luke about 50 wanting in
   Matthew. The number common to all three is 330 to 370.

   The preceding statements refer to the subject-matter of the Synoptics.
   Taken by itself this might give us an exaggerated idea of the
   similarity of these Gospels. As a corrective it is necessary to bear in
   mind that the verbal coincidences, though they are remarkable indeed,
   are nevertheless considerably less than one would expect. Dr. Schaff
   and his son, after some calculations based on Rushbrookes Synopticon,
   get the following results:

   "The proportion of words peculiar to the Synoptics is 28,000 out of
   48,000, more than one-half.
   In Matthew 56 words out of every 100 are peculiar.
   In Mark 40 words out of every 100 are peculiar.
   In Luke 67 words out of every 100 are peculiar.
   The number of coincidences common to all three is less than the number
   of divergences.
   Matthew agrees with the other two gospels in 1 word out of 7.
   Mark agrees with the other two gospels in 1 word out of 4.
   Luke agrees with the other two gospels in 1 word out of 8.

   But comparing the Gospels two by two, it is evident that Matthew and
   Mark have most in common, and Matthew and Luke are most divergent.

   One-half of Mark is found in Matthew.
   One-fourth of Luke is found in Matthew.
   One-third of Mark is found in Luke.

   The general conclusion from these figures is that all three Gospels
   widely diverge from the common matter, or triple tradition, Mark the
   least so and Luke the most (almost twice as much as Mark). On the other
   hand, both Matthew and Luke are nearer Mark than Luke and Matthew to
   each other." Church History, I p. 597.

   In connection with the preceding we should bear in mind that these
   verbal agreements are greatest, not in the narrative, but in the
   recitative parts of the Gospels. About one fifth of them is found in
   the narrative portion of the Gospel, and four fifths in the recital of
   the words of our Lord and others. This statement will create a false
   impression, however, unless we bear in mind the proportion in which the
   narrative parts stand to the recitative element, which is as follows:

           Narrative
                    Recitative
   Matthew
           25
                    75
   Mark
           50
                    50
   Luke
           34
                    66

   From what has now been said it is perfectly clear that the Synoptics
   present an intricate literary problem. Is it possible to explain the
   origin in such a manner that both the resemblances and differences are
   accounted for? During the last century many scholars have applied
   themselves with painstaking diligence to the arduous task of solving
   this problem. The solution has been sought along different lines;
   several hypotheses have been broached, of which we shall name only the
   four most important ones.

   In the first place there is what has been called (though not altogether
   correctly) ~the mutual dependance theory (Benutzungshypothese,
   Augustine, Bengel, Bleek, Storr). According to this theory the one
   Gospel is dependent on the other, so that the second borrowed from the
   first and the third from both the first and the second. On this theory,
   of course, six permutations are possible viz.:

   Matthew, Mark, Luke.
   Matthew, Luke, Mark.
   Mark, Matthew, Luke.
   Mark, Luke, Matthew.
   Luke, Matthew, Mark.
   Luke, Mark, Matthew.

   In every possible form this theory has found defenders, but it does not
   meet with great favor at present. True, it seems to account for the
   general agreement in a very simple manner but serious difficulties
   arise when one seeks to determine which one of the Gospels was first,
   which second and which third. This is perfectly evident from the
   difference of opinion among the adherents of this hypothesis. Again it
   fails to account for the divergencies; it does not explain why one
   writer adopts the language of his predecessor(s) up to a certain point,
   and then suddenly abandons it. Of late it is tacitly admitted, however,
   that it does contain an element of truth.

   In the second place the hypothesis of oral tradition
   (Traditions-hypothese, Gieseler, Westcott, Wright), should be
   mentioned. This theory starts from the supposition that the Gospel
   existed first of all in an unwritten form. It is assumed that the
   apostles repeatedly told the story of Christs life, dwelling especially
   on the most important incidents of his career, and often reiterating
   the very words of their blessed Lord. These narratives and words were
   eagerly caught up by willing ears and treasured in faithful and
   retentive memories, the Jews making it a practice to retain whatever
   they learnt in the exact form in which they received it. Thus a
   stereotyped tradition arose which served as the basis for our present
   Gospels. Several objections have been urged against this theory. It is
   said that, as a result of the apostles preaching in the vernacular, the
   oral tradition was embodied in the Aramaic language, and hence cannot
   account for the verbal coincidences in the Greek Gospels. Again it is
   urged that the more stereotyped the tradition was, the harder it
   becomes to account for the differences between the Synoptics. Would
   anyone be apt to alter such a tradition on his own authority? Moreover
   this hypothesis offers no explanation of the existence of the two-fold,
   the triple and the double tradition, i. e. the tradition that is
   embodied in all three of the Gospels and that which is found only in
   two of them. The majority of scholars have now abandoned this theory,
   although it has ardent defenders even at present. And no doubt, it must
   be taken into account in the solution of this problem.

   In the third place we have the hypothesis of one primitive Gospel
   (Urevangeliums-Hypothese) from which all three of the Synoptists drew
   their material. According to G. E.Lessing this Gospel, containing a
   short account of the life of Jesus for the use of traveling
   missionaries, was written in the popular language of Palestine.
   Eichhorn, however, following him, held that it was translated into
   Greek, worked over and enriched in various ways, and soon took shape in
   several redactions, which became the source of our present Gospels.
   There is very little agreement among, the defenders of this theory
   regarding the exact character of this original source. At present it
   finds little favor in scientific circles, but has been discarded for
   various reasons. There is absolutely no trace of such an original
   Gospel, nor any historical reference to it, which seems peculiar in
   view of its unique significance. And if the existence of such a source
   be postulated, how must the arbitrary alteration of it be explained,
   how did these different recensions come into existence. It is evident
   that by this theory the problem is not solved, but simply shifted to
   another place. Moreover while in its original form this hypothesis
   accounted very well for the agreement, but not for the differences
   found in the Synoptics, in its final form it was too artificial and too
   complicated to inspire confidence and to seem anything like a natural
   solution of the Synoptic problem.

   In the fourth place the so-called double source, or two document theory
   (Combinations-hypothese, Weisse, Wilke, Holtzmann, Wendt) deserves
   mention since it is the favorite theory of New Testament scholars
   today. This hypothesis holds that, in order to explain the phenomena of
   the Gospels, it is necessary to postulate the existence of at least two
   primitive documents, and recognizes the use of one Gospel in the
   composition of the others. The form in which this theory is most widely
   accepted at present isthe following: The Gospel of Mark was the first
   one to be written and, either in the form in which we now have it, or
   in a slightly different form was the source of the triple tradition.
   For the double tradition, which is common to Matthew and Luke, these
   writers used a second source that, for want of definite knowledge
   regarding it, is simply called Q (from the German Quelle). This Q may
   have been the logia of Matthew mentioned by Papias, and was probably a
   collection of the sayings of our Lord. The differences between Matthew
   and Luke in the matter of the double tradition finds its explanation in
   the assumption that, while Matthew drew directly from Q, Luke derived
   the corresponding matter from Q and other sources, or from a primitive
   Gospel based on Q. On the last supposition the relation of Matthew and
   Luke to Q would be as follows:

   But even so the use of some inferior sources by both Matthew and Luke
   must be assumed. The double source theory presupposes the existence of
   a rather large precanonical literature.

   There are some evident objections to this theory also. The assumption
   that the logia of Matthew was anything else than the Hebrew or Aramaic
   original of our Greek Matthew is a baseless supposition; it has no
   historical foundation whatever. Furthermore the theory offers no
   explanation of the fact that the writers in some cases faithfully
   copied their original and in others altered the text rather freely or
   even departed from it entirely. And by postulating the development of a
   somewhat extensive Gospel literature previous to the composition of
   Matthew and Luke, it has naturally led to the position that our Gospels
   were written late, and therefore in all probability not by their
   reputed authors. Moreover it also requires us to believe that Luke
   included the Gospel of Mark in the number of the attempted Gospel
   stories which his Gospel was meant to supercede.

   None of the theories broached up to the present time has proved
   satisfactory. There is still a great deal of uncertainty and confusion
   in the study of the Synoptic problem; we do not seem to be nearer to
   its solution now than we were fifty years ago. The great aim has always
   been to explain the origin of the Synoptics without taking into account
   the supernatural factor that entered into their composition. Now we do
   not doubt the value of these studies; they have already taught us a
   good many things regarding the origin of these Gospels; but they have
   proven themselves insufficient to lead to a final solution of the
   problem. It is, of course, folly to rule this problem out of existence
   by simply appealing to the supernatural agency of the Holy Spirit. It
   is true, if one believes in the mechanical inspiration of the Bible,
   there is no Synoptic problem. This is quite different, however, for
   those who believe that the Scriptures have been inspired in an organic
   way. The more naturally we conceive of the origin of these writings,
   the better it is, if we only do not lose sight of the operation of the
   divine factor, of the directing, the guiding influence of the Holy
   Spirit. Cf. Kuyper, Encyclopedie III p. 51 f. It is hardly sufficient
   to say with Urquhart, New Biblical Guide VII p. 357, that the key to
   the problem is found in the fact that the Synoptic Gospels are all the
   work of one author, and that each book is serving a distinct purpose.
   Yet this statement contains two important truths that we should
   continually bear in mind.

   In any attempt to account for the similarities of the synoptics great
   allowance should be made for the influence of oral tradition It is very
   natural to suppose that, since the apostles for some time labored
   together at Jerusalem with Peter at the head, a particular, perhaps
   Petrine type of tradition became the common property of these early
   preachers and of their first hearers. And because the life of Christ
   entered as a very important element into the life of his apostles, and
   they felt the supreme significance of his words, it is also reasonable
   to assume that they aimed at inculcating the teachings of our Lord on
   their hearers in the exact form in which He gave it. It is equally
   rational to suppose that, at a comparatively early time, the desire to
   escape the uncertainty that always attends oral transmission, led to
   the composition of brief gospel narratives, containing especially the
   sayings and discourses of our Lord. These suppositions are entirely in
   harmony too with the opening verses of the Gospel of Luke: "Forasmuch
   as many have taken in hand to draw up a narrative concerning those
   matters which have been fulfilled among us, even as they delivered them
   unto us, who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the
   word, it seemed good to me also, etc." Some of these early documents
   may have been written in Aramaic and others in Greek. The groundwork
   thus furnished and drawn upon by the writers of our Gospels, explains
   in a very natural way most of the agreements that are found in the
   Synoptics. And those that cannot be accounted for in that manner may
   have resulted directly from the guiding influence of the Holy Spirit,
   who led the writers also in the choice of their words. These three
   Gospels are in a very real sense the work of one Author.

   In seeking to explain the differences that are found in the Synoptic
   Gospels, we should bear in mind first of all that they are no
   histories, but memoirs, historical arguments. In composing them each
   one of the writers had his own purpose. Matthew, writing for the Jews,
   made it his aim to present Christ as the King, the great Son of David;
   Mark, intending his Gospel for the Romans, endeavored to draw a vivid
   picture of the powerful Worker, conquering the forces of evil; and
   Luke, addressing the Greeks and adjusting his Gospel to their needs,
   sought to describe Christ as the universal Saviour, as a person with
   wide sympathies. This diversity of aimaccounts to a great extent for
   the variations exhibited in the Gospels, i. e. for omissions on the one
   hand and additions on the other, for differences in the distribution
   and arrangement of the material, etc. The writers of the Gospels
   selected from the great mass of early traditions the material that was
   suited to their purpose and used it to advantage. The difference
   between the Synoptics is not accidental, is not the result of the
   chance use of certain sources. And where the identical teachings of
   Christ are sometimes found in different forms, we should remember,
   first, that the Lord may have uttered the same truth at different times
   in varying forms; and secondly, that the Synoptists do not always give
   the identical words of the Saviour, but were so guided by the Holy
   Spirit that they do give an exact representation of the Lords
   teachings, perhaps in a form better adapted to their purpose than the
   original would have been. Cf. Kuyper, Diet. Dogm., Locus de Sacra
   Scriptura II p. 131 f.; Gregory, Why Four Gospels; Van Leeuwen,
   Literatuur en Schriftuur p. 14 ff.; Urquhart, New Biblical Guide VII p.
   328-428.

   For further study of the Synoptic Problem we refer to; Norton,
   Genuineness of the Gospels; Westcott, Introduction to the Study of the
   Gospels; Arthur Wright, A Synopsis of the Gospels in Greek; Holdsworth,
   Gospel Origins; Buckley, Introduction to the Synoptic Problem; Hill,
   Introduction to the Life of Christ; Reuss, History of the New Testament
   I p. 163-218 (where the most important German literature is referred
   to) ; and the various Introductions of Davidson, Weiss, Zahn, Julicher,
   Salmon, e. a.

    THE RELATION OF THE GOSPEL OF JOHN TO THE SYNOPTICS.

   After pointing out the remarkable agreement between the synoptic
   Gospels and referring to some of the attempted explanations of this
   feature, we must consider the equally striking difference that exists
   between the Synoptics on the one hand and the Gospel of John on the
   other. This difference is so great that even untrained minds
   immediately feel it. Hence the question naturally arises: How can we
   account for it? This is in substance the Johannine problem. The
   differences that are found may conveniently be arranged under two
   heads: 1. Differences touching the external course of events in the
   Lords ministry; and 2. Differences in regard to the form and contents
   of Christs teaching.

   I. Differences touching the external course of events in the Lord's
   ministry.

   a. According to the Synoptics the principal scene of the Lords activity
   is Galilee. He repairs to this Northern province soon after the
   imprisonment of John the Baptist, and apparently does not return to
   Judea until the last Passover. The representation that is found in the
   Gospel of John is quite different. Very little is said about the
   Galilean ministry, while the activity of Christ in Judea looms large on
   his pages. Most of the work of which John speaks was done at Jerusalem.

   b. The first three Gospels mention but one Passover in their narrative
   of Christs public ministry, viz. that at the end of his life. This led
   many to the conviction that the Lord's public ministry was limited to a
   period of one year. In the Gospel of John, on the other hand, we find
   three Passovers definitely mentioned, while a fourth is probably
   refferred to in 5:1. Judging by this the length of the Lords ministry
   was at least two and possibly three years.

   c. The people with whom Jesus deals primarily are not the same in the
   Synoptics and in the Gospel of John. In the first three Gospels we see
   Jesus moving along the Galilean peasantry and preaching to them the
   gospel of the Kingdom, while in the fourth the Jews (by which John
   means the leaders of the people, i. e. Chief Priests, Scribes and
   Pharisees) are generally in the foreground, and certain individuals,
   that are not named, or are merely names, in the Synoptics, are very
   prominent, such as Philip, Nathanael, the Samaritan woman, Mary
   Magdalena and Thomas.

   d. The attitude of the Jews towards Jesus appears to be quite different
   in the synoptic Gospels and in the Gospel of John. According to the
   Synoptics Jesus meets with great success at first. The multitudes flock
   unto him, are delighted to hear him and marvel at his teachings and
   work. And it is only after He has clearly shown that He had not come to
   establish an earthly kingdom that their enthusiasm dies away, and that
   He begins to prepare his disciples for his coming suffering and death.
   The Gospel of John makes it appear that from the beginning of Christs
   ministry at Jerusalem the hearts of the Jews were filled with a hatred
   that gradually grew, reaching its highest pitch after the raising of
   Lazarus, and that finally issued in the crucifixion of the Lord of
   glory.

   e. There are also several details in which the Gospel of John does not
   agree with the Synoptics. We shall only mention a couple of the most
   important examples. In the synoptic Gospels we find the cleansing of
   the temple at the end of Christ's public ministry, while John places
   this at the very beginning. Then there is also a the representaion of
   the of the Lord's death. The Synoptics convey the impression that
   Christ ate the Passover in the evening of the 14th of Nisan, and was
   therefore crucified on the 15th; while the Gospel of John seems to say
   with equal explicitness that He ate it a day in advance of the regular
   time and died at the very hour, when the symbolic Paschal lamb was
   slain.

   II. Differences in respect to the form and contents of our Lord's
   teaching.

   a. There is a striking diversity in the form in which the teaching of
   Jesus is cast. In the Synoptics we have short incisive sayings of the
   Lord, which in some cases are and in others are not connected with what
   immediately precedes or follows. In the Gospel of John, on the other
   hand, we find long and labored discourses, closely connected with the
   signs, the miracles of our Lord. The first three Gospels contain a
   goodly number of parables, which are strangely absent from the fourth
   Gospel, where we have have instead a few allegories, such as the Door
   of the Sheepfold, the good Shepherd, and the true Vine. The style of
   the Gospel of John too is quite different from that of the Synoptics.
   It is a more Hebraic style, in which the statements are brief, the
   construction is simple and the sentences are usually connected with the
   conjunction and. This style is carried through also in the discourses
   of Christ, so that in some cases it is very hard, if not impossible, to
   tell just where the words of the Lord come to an end and those of the
   evangelist begin, or vice versa. Notice this especially in the third
   chapter.

   b. There is an equally great difference in the contents of the Lords
   teaching. In the Synoptics the central theme on which Christ dwells is
   the Kingdom of God. He speaks of its origin, its nature, its subjects,
   its King, its requirements, its righteousness, its enemies and its
   future glory. In vain do we turn to the fourth Gospel for a
   corresponding line of thought. The Kingdom of God is mentioned but once
   there, viz, in the conversation of our Lord with Nicodemus. Christ
   himself is the main theme of the discourses found in the Gospel of
   John. The Lord speaks of his heavenly origin, of his essential
   character and of his return to glory. He presents himself to the Jews
   as the Messiah, the Son of God, the heavenly manna, the water of life,
   the true liberator, the light of the world, the good Shepherd, the
   resurrection and the life, etc. In the Synoptics we find that Jesus
   only occasionally, and then towards the end of his ministry, speaks of
   himself. In connection with this we may remark that the self-revelation
   of Christ both by his words and works differs greatly in the Synoptics
   and in the fourth Gospel. In the former Jesus begins by speaking of the
   Kingdom and makes little mention of the King. Only gradually does He
   reveal his true character and it is not until He is well along in the
   course of his public ministry that Peter is led up to the confession:
   "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." Only in the last week
   of his life does Jesus throw off all reserve and speaks clearly of
   himself as the Messiah sent from God. In the Gospel of John however,
   everything is quite clear from the beginning. John the Baptist points
   to Christ as "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world ;"
   to the Samaritan woman Jesus says: "I am He ;" and to the Jews
   attending the unnamed feast he speaks clearly of the unique relation in
   which He stands to the Father. This is closely connected with another
   fact. In the synoptic Gospels the humanity of Christ is made very
   prominent. We behold him there primarily as the Saviour who is taken on
   our nature, shares in our infirmities, and is tempted even as we are,
   though without sin. The fourth Gospel, on the other hand, brings the
   divinity of Christ into strong re1ief. We notice this at the very
   beginning of the Gospel: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
   was with God, and the Word was God." It strikes us in the signs which
   Christ gave to reveal his glory, and in the discourses that speak at
   length of his essential nature, of his descending out of glory, his
   being in glory, and his returning to the glory that He possessed from
   the foundation of the world; and it rings in our ears as we listen to
   the confession of Thomas: "My Lord and my God."

   There are many critics at the present time who magnify these
   differences into discrepancies, and find in them a ground on which to
   reject the authorship of John. They maintain that the fourth Gospel is
   a treatise written with marked theological bias, inspired by the
   controversy about the person of Christ in the second century. The great
   stumbling block for them is the very clear teaching contained in this
   Gospel respecting the divinity of Christ. This, they hold, could only
   be the fruit of theological preconceptions. And the great desire on the
   part of the author to establish this beyond the shadow of a doubt is
   said to explain a good many of the other special features that
   characterize this gospel. This explanation contains both a falsehood
   and a truth.

   A careful study of the Gospel of John, a study that takes its true
   character in consideration, does not bear out the contention that
   several of the differences between the Gospel of John and the Synoptics
   amount to discrepancies. Neither does it reveal differences that cannot
   be accounted for in a perfectly natural way. We desire to point out
   first of all that there are not only dissimilarities but also
   correspondences between these Gospels. The incidents that we find
   mentioned in all the Gospels are the following: The baptism of John ,
   the feeding of the five thousand, the walking on the sea, the anointing
   at Bethany, the triumphal entry, the last supper, the betrayal, the
   trial, the crucifixion, the burial and the resurrection. Of course in
   some cases the details of the narrative vary. Besides these parallel
   narratives there are many passages in which we find imagery, sayings or
   words that find their counterpart in the synoptic Gospels. Davidson
   says that about one-third of the matter in John agrees with that in the
   Synoptics.

   It is evident from the foregoing that the diversity is greater than the
   similarity, and the great question is: How must we account for the
   differences? In pointing out the way in which we must look for a
   solution of this problem we call attention to several particulars.

   1. We should not lose sight of the true character of John's writing.
   Neither it nor the other Gospels are meant to be complete histories of
   what the Lord did and said during his life in the flesh. If this were
   its claim, it would be disappoint in the extreme, since all that John
   narrates happened in a few days. Like the Synoptics the Gospel of John
   is a pen-picture of the Lord, is a witness to him from a particular
   point of view, and represents a phase of the apostolic cherugmai. We
   must allow for the principle of selection and of selective arrangement
   in the composition of this work. It was John's aim to describe the Lord
   from a particular point of view. Hence he chose from the great mass of
   apostolic tradition, whether oral or written, the materials that suited
   his purpose best, and arranged them in the most effective way, taking
   in consideration as much as possible the chronological order in which
   the events occurred. This general truth must be borne in mind
   continually, if we would understand the differences between the Gospel
   of John and the Synoptics.

   2. The great controlling factor, however, in the construction of this
   Gospel, was the aim of the writer. Therefore it is necessary that we
   have some understanding of this. Happily we need not guess at it,
   because John himself tells us what purpose he had in writing his
   Gospel. He says in 20: 31: "But these things are written that ye might
   believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye
   might have life through His name." According to this statement the
   apostle had a twofold aim, the one theoretical and the other practical,
   the one his proximate, the other his ulterior aim. The theoretical aim
   of the evangelist was twofold: he wanted to show in a convincing manner
   that the historical Jesus was the Christ sent from God for the
   salvation of the world; and that this Christ was not a mere man, but
   the very Son of God, who in his pre-existent state shared in the divine
   glory, a glory which He radiated even while He dwelt among men in the
   form of a servant, and that would again shine forth in heavenly
   splendor after He had finished his task. It was the desire of the
   writer further, to present this Christ, this Son of God, to his readers
   in such a manner that they might be led to believe in him, and that
   they, being united to him the fountain of life by faith, might have
   life everlasting. With this end in view John, of course, selected those
   signs and discourses of the Lord that were best adapted to bring out
   his glory and to lead others to faith in him. He almost seems to tell
   us this himself, when he concludes his narrative of the first miracle
   performed by our Lord at Cana with the words: "This beginning of
   miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory; and
   his disciples believed on Him." John views the miracles of which he
   speaks as shmeiathat exhibit the divine greatness of Christ. And he
   limits himself almost exclusively to those of which he can say
   definitely that they led men to believe on Christ, or of which Christ
   himself points out the symbolic significance in His discourses, as:
     * The changing of water into wine at Cana ("and his disciples
       believed on Him.") The healing of the rulers son at Cana
       (Capernaum) ("and himself believed and his whole house.")
     * The healing of the impotent man at the pool Bethesda (Christ the
       restorer of life).
     * The feeding of the five thousand near Bethsaida (Christ the
       spiritual food, the heavenly manna).
     * The restoring of the blind mans sight at Jerusalem (Christ the
       light of the world).
     * The raising of Lazarus at Bethany (Christ the resurrection and the
       life).

   In harmony with his aim too the evangelist records such discourses of
   the Lord as serve to explain the shmeia to bring. out the unique
   relation in which Christ stands to the Father, to accentuate Christs
   authority, to emphasize the divine character of his mission. etc.
   Moreover he introduces several individuals to show us how Jesus labored
   tol bring them to the conviction that He was the Christ, the Sons of
   God, as f. i. Nathanael, Nicodemus, the Samaritan woman and Thomas.

   Now if we bear these things in mind, many of the differences between
   this Gospel and the Synoptics are immediately explained. The aim of
   John being what it is, he naturally speaks of Christ rather than of the
   Kingdom of God, introduces whatever accentuates the divinity of our
   Lord, and brings out as much as possible that Christ revealed himself
   as the Messiah from the very beginning of his public career. But doing
   this in a historical way, he cannot represent the Galilean peasants but
   only the eaders of the Jews at Jerusalem as the recipients of this
   revelation, for it was only to them, who were versed in the Scriptures,
   that Christ spoke so explicitly from the outset, and it was primarily
   for them that He expressed his thought in profound discourses rather
   than in parables. This in turn determines the time of which John speaks
   in his gospel and also explains how it is that he mentions so many
   feasts, because it was almost exclusively on these occasions that Jesus
   visited Jerusalem and came in contact with the Scribes and the Chief
   Priests. It also sheds light on the difference in the attitude of the
   Jews toward Jesus. For a long time the Galileans were attached to
   Christ and marveled at his words and works; the spirit of opposition
   was aroused in them especially towards the end of Christs labors among
   them and mostly by the machinations of the Pharisees that came from
   Jerusalem. The leaders of the Jews in Judea, on the other hand, hated
   Jesus almost from the beginning of his public ministry. Their hatred
   kept pace with the knowledge they received of Christ.

   3. Every attempt at solving the Johannine problem must also make
   allowance for the fact that John was acquainted with the other Gospels
   and avoided as much as was conistent with his aim the repitition of
   facts that were already generally known. We have no doubt that John had
   read the other Gospels before he wrote his own. There are certain
   features in his Gospel that we can understand only on that supposition.
   According to 21:19 John wrote his Gospel after the death of Peter and
   therefore comparatively late. Now he certainly would not be such a
   stranger in his own world of thought as not to know the Gospels that
   had already been composed. Then we find that in several places the
   evangelist trusts to the previous knowledge of his readers. He does not
   describe the institution of the Lords supper in his Gospel; yet he
   clearly assumes in 6: 5 1-58 that his readers were acquainted with it.
   Though he does not give a description of the ascension, he proceeds on
   the assumption that this fact is well known, 6:62; 20:17. Cf. further
   1:40; 3:24; 6:70, etc. In several cases in which the persons introduced
   in the Gospel misunderstand the Lord, the writer does not deem it
   necessary to explain for his readers what Jesus really meant, because
   he knew that they themselves were able to correct the mistake, Cf. 7:
   35, 36; 3:4; 4:15; 6:52. It is a very weighty consideration in this
   connection too that John does not deign to answer objections that are
   brought against the Messiahship of Christ. Notice f. i. 1:45, 46; 7:41,
   42; 7: 52. The evangelist does not give a single hint of the solution
   of the difficulty thus raised repeatedly. We can understand this only
   on the supposition that he was aware of the fact that his readers knew
   from the other Gospels how to solve the problem. John evidently read
   the other Gospels and this explains how he could avoid to such a great
   extent what they had already brought to the knowledge of the people.

   4. Finally we must also bear in mind that the individuality of the
   author is stamped his literary production. John was a profound
   meditative spirit, who drank deeply at the fountain of life. He
   searched for the mainspring of action in the career of our Saviour; he
   pondered on the hidden background of the mysterious, the wonderful life
   of his Master. He was the best qualified of all the apostles to
   describe the divine greatness of the Lord. And it was no small
   achievement of his, that he presented the profoundest truths in the
   most simple manner. The simplicity of its language is a very striking
   feature of the fourth Gospel. It is due in part, no doubt, to Johns
   idiosyncracy, and in part to his habit of contemplating Christianity in
   its most fundamental relations. It need not surprise us that we find
   the same style in the discourses of Christ, for in these also the style
   is to a great extent Johns. Neither John nor the other evangelists
   always give us the exact words of Jesus. It is true that he generally
   employs direct discourse in introducing the words of the Saviour, but
   this is merely an oriental custom and does not imply that the words
   were used exactly in that way. But the Spirit of God so guided the
   writer that he reproduces, though possibly in a slightly different
   form, the exact truths which Jesus sought to inculcate on his hearers.
   And this Spirit, which is also the Spirit of Christ, vouching for these
   words, makes them just as really the words of Christ, as if they had
   been an exact reproduction of the words Jesus had used in addressing
   the Jews.

    THE INSPIRATION OF THE GOSPELS.

   During the past century the human origin of the Gospels has been
   carefully investigated. With a great deal of patience and ingenuity
   every chapter and verse of these writings has been scrutinized and
   referred to its supposed ultimate source. The discussion of the divine
   factor that operated in the composition of these books, however, has
   been conspicuously absent from these studies. And this neglect is not
   the result of chance, but of a very deliberate plan. A large number of
   scholars today do not believe in any special inspiration of these
   writings; others, who do not wish to deny their divine inspiration,
   nevertheless maintain that their claim to this prerogative should be
   waived in the historical investigation of their origin.

   In the preceding century many were wont to label the Gospels sneeringly
   as fictitious narratives, written by a few religious fanatics, who
   deliberately lied about Jesus. This crude and baseless opinion does not
   meet with great favor today. People intuitively recoil from that
   position and feel that they must take a more respectful attitude
   towards the Gospels. They now regard these as the product of the
   reverent and in part unconscious invention of the Church; or as the
   expression of the corporate consciousness and the corporate mood of the
   first Christian community. Even so, of course, they are simply human
   productions that contain besides a large quota of truth a great deal of
   mythical and lengendary matter.

   Over against this position we hold that the Gospels were written by men
   who were inspired by the Holy Spirit, and that they are therefore
   absolutely trustworthy and authoritative accounts of the life of our
   Lord. They are inspired records. They constitute one of the most
   precious fruits of the apostolic inspiration, since they are one and
   all the literary embodiment of the apostolic chrugma. The substance of
   what the apostles preached is contained in these writings. Now as well
   as the prophets in the old dispensation, the apostles in the new were
   inspired by the Holy Spirit. This is quite evident from the New
   Testament. Consider the promises which our Lord gave to His disciples:
   Matt 10:19,20 ".... for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye
   shall speak; for it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father
   that speaketh in you." John 14:26, "But the Comforter, which is the
   Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, He shall teach you
   all things and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have
   said unto you." John 16:13,14, "Howbeit when the Spirit of truth is
   come, He will guide you into all truth; for He shall not speak of
   himself; but whatsoever He shall hear, that shall He speak; and He will
   show you things to come. He shall glorify me; for He shall receive of
   mine, and shall show it unto you." Notice too that these promises found
   their initial fulfilment on the day of Pentecost. We read in Acts 2:4:
   "And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with
   other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance." And after this day
   the apostles were conscious of being guided by the Spirit of God. Paul
   says in I Cor. 2:11-13, "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save
   the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no
   man, but the Spirit of God. Now we have received, not the spirit of the
   world, but the Spirit which is of God; that we might know the things
   which are freely given us of God. Which things also we speak, not in
   the words which mans wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost
   teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual." And in II Cor.
   13: 2b, 3, "--and being absent now I write to them which heretofore
   have sinned, and to all other, that, if I come again, I will not spare;
   since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you-ward is
   not weak, but is mighty in you." These few passages, which might easily
   be multiplied, must suffice for the present.

   Some who admit the inspiration of the prophets, do not believe the
   apostles were also inspired, because in their case they do not hear the
   familiar formula "thus saith the Lord," nor behold the characteristic
   phenomena that accompanied the inspiration of the prophets. They do not
   distinguish between different kinds of inspiration. There are
   especially three points of interest between the inspiration of the
   prophets and that of the apostles.

   1. Under the Old Covenant the Holy Spirit did not yet dwell in the
   Church, but operated on believers from without. So it was also in the
   case of the prophets. The Holy Spirit took possession of them,
   sometimes suppressed their personality to a. certain degree, and then
   employed their consciousness for his purpose. In the new dispensation,
   however, He took up his abode in The Church, and first of all in the
   apostles, who were to be the Churchs foundation; and then, identifying
   himself to a great extent with their conscious life, used them as
   instruments to produce his revelation.

   2. In the case of the prophets it was the entrance of a foreign
   element, a foreign power into their lives, and something extraordinary
   in their career that impelled them to prophesy. It was a power that
   they could not resist, because it became as a fire burning within them.
   With the apostles, on the other hand, it was the indwelling Spirit in
   connection with their official task that led them to speak the Word of
   God. The inspiration of the prophets was intermittent; that of the
   apostles, continuous in the performance of their regular apostolic
   duties.

   3. The prophets often spoke of unknown and unseen things, while the
   apostles discoursed on things which they knew and saw. In connection
   with this the Holy Spirit did not operate through the same faculty in
   both the prophets and the apostles. In the former it was the
   imagination, in the latter the understanding, especially memory and
   reflection, that constituted the medium of divine revelation. Hence the
   prophets generally spoke in poetic and in symbolic language, while the
   apostles as a rule clothed their thought in ordinary prose. In the case
   of the Gospels the inspiration of the apostles has above all the
   character of a hupomnesis. Cf. John 14:26.

   This apostolic inspiration gave birth to the cherugma of the apostles,
   but does not yet account for the infallible records we have of this in
   the Gospels. Besides the apostolic we must take into consideration a
   seperate graphical or transcriptive inspiration, if we would fully
   understand the divine origin of the Gospels. The authors were led by
   the spirit of God in composing these writings, in giving to the
   preaching of the apostles a definite written form. They were guided in
   the selection of their material and its proper arrangement, and in the
   choice of their words and expressions, so that their records are truly
   a part of the Word of God for the Church of all ages.

   The question naturally arises, whether we have any reasons to think
   that the Gospels were so inspired. In answer would say that we have,
   though we do not flatter ourself with the idea that these reasons would
   convince anyone who is disinclined to accept the Scriptures as the very
   Word of God.

   1. The contents of the Gospels testify to their divine origin. We find
   in them a fourfold portraiture of the Saviour. There are many
   differences in the individual pictures, yet together they form a grand
   unity. Four writers, each one portraying the life of Christ in his own
   way, to a great extent without knowing each others writings or drawing
   on them, so that their individual portraits blend perfectly into a
   harmonious whole,--it is marvelous, it can only be understood, if we
   assume that these four writers were all guided unerringly by the same
   superintending Spirit. The Gospels are really the work of one author.
   And the life that is pictured in them is a divine life, unfathomable,
   mysterious, far surpassing human understanding. And yet that
   incomparable, that divine life has been so faithfully portrayed, with
   such a profound insight into its real character and hidden depths, in
   such a simple, natural, artless manner, that it has been the marvel of
   ages. Could man, unaided by higher power, describe such a life? No,
   only they who were inspired by the Holy Spirit, were equal to the task.

   2. Taking for granted the inspiration of the Old Testament, which is
   conclusively proved by the words of Jesus and the apostles we feel that
   it calls for an inspired complement. It covers the period of
   preparation that is prophetic of a future completion, the time in which
   the Church was in its infancy, that points forward to the maturity of a
   coming age. It is filled with prophecies that await fulfilment; it
   contains the shadow that is cast before the coming body, growing more
   distinct as the ages roll on, until at last it seems as if the body
   will presently appear, yet it does not--the Old Testament requires a
   compliment. And in harmony with it this too must be inspired. Of what
   avail would the inspiration of the Old Testament be, if that in which
   it culminates is not inspired. The divine surety would be wanting.

   3. At least two of our Gospels were written by apostles who in speaking
   to their contemporaries, were inpired by the Spirit of God. Now it
   would be an anomaly that they should be guided by the Holy Spirit in
   their oral witnessing to Christ, and be without that divine guidance in
   perpetuating their testimony for all future ages. It was the will of
   God that people until the end of the world should believe on him
   through the word of the apostles, John 17: 20; I John 1: 3. Hence it
   was of the greatest importance that there should be an infallible
   record of their testimony.

   4. There are some Scripture passages that point to the inspiration of
   the gospel records. The older Lightfoot, (Works IV p. 1193, 114; XII p.
   7, and following him Urquhart, The Bible its Structure and Purpose I
   Ch. 5), find a proof for the inspiration of Lukes Gospel in 1: 3, where
   they would translate the words parecholouthechoti anothen by "having
   had perfect understanding of all things from above." This
   interpretation is favored by the fact that anothen has this meaning in
   eight of the thirteen times that it occurs in the New Testament, and in
   three of the remaining instances means again, while it is translated
   "from the beginning" only here and in Acts 26:4. The expressed purpose
   of Luke in writing his Gospel also falls in exceedingly well with the
   rendering from above. It is, he writes to Theophilus, that you may have
   the certainty of those things in which you have been instructed." Yet
   the verb paracholoutheo, meaning, to follow up carefully, and thus, to
   obtain knowledge, argues decisively against it. What is of greater
   significance for us, is the fact that the Gospel of Luke is quoted as e
   graphe in I Tim. 5:18, where we read: "For the Scripture saith, Thou
   shalt not muzzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn, and, The laborer
   is worthy of his hire." The only place in the entire Bible where the
   last words are found, is Luke 10: 7. Finally we call attention to II
   Peter 3:15, 16, where the apostle says: ". . . even as our beloved
   brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him hath written
   unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking of these things; in
   which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are
   unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures,
   unto their own destruction." Here we find that the writings of Paul are
   placed on a level with other inspired writings, which Peter calls, "the
   other Scriptures." There is good reason to believe that this expression
   refers to the books of the Old Testament, and to those of the New
   Testament that were already composed, when Peter wrote his second
   epistle, among which we may also reckon the Gospels of Matthew and
   Luke.

   5. The fact that the early Church from the very beginning accepted
   these Gospels as canonical, is also a proof of their inspired
   character, for in it the communal consciousness of the Church expressed
   itself in regard to these writings; and it is said of believers in
   their corporate existence that they, taught by the Holy Ghost, know all
   things. Dean Alford says: "The apostles being raised up for the special
   purpose of witnessing to the gospel history,--and these memoirs having
   been universally received in the early Church as embodying that their
   testimony, I see no escape left from the inference that they come to us
   with inspired authority. The Greek Testament, Vol. I, Prolegomena
   Section VI.

   6. Finally the Holy Spirit testifies in the heart of every believer to
   the divine character of the Gospels, so that they feel assured that
   these writings contain the veryWord of God. Under the influence of the
   Holy Spirit they realize that these Gospels too minister to the deepest
   needs of their spiritual life, they realize their infinite value,
   marvel at their exquisite beauty and find in them ever increasingly the
   words of everlasting life. Thus they cannot but speak their "Amen" to
   the contents of these books.

    THE CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE GOSPELS AS A WHOLE.

   The Gospels are of course, closely related to the Old Testament
   Scriptures. They describe in a vivid manner the initial stage of the
   fulness of time, showing how all the prophecies that pointed to Christ
   and to a new and more spiritual dispensation began to be fulfilled.
   Rather than enlarge on this relation, however, we shall here briefly
   describe the peculiar function of the Gospels in the New Testament
   revelation. These writings are related to the rest of the New
   Testament, as the Pentateuch is to the following books of the Old
   Testament. Both are of a fundamental character, laying foundations on
   which an imposing superstructure is raised. In the case of the Gospels
   this is clearly indicated by the opening words of Luke in the Acts of
   the Apostles: "The former treatise have I written, Theophilus, of all
   that Jesus began both to do and to teach." In this passage the word
   erxato is not pleonastic, as was held by some, but emphatic. According
   to this word the Gospel contained the narrative only of what Jesus
   began to do and to teach, which would prove to be the solid foundation
   and the germinating principle of all that He would continue to do on
   earth (through His apostles) and in heaven. The Gospels mark but an
   initial stage in New Testament revelation; they lack finality.

   The form, the method and the substance of Christs teaching in the
   Gospels,--it all bears the stamp of an incipient stage. Everyone that
   reads the Gospels and compares them with the epistles is struck by the
   simple manner in which Christ presents his teachings to the multitude.
   He gave his instruction primarily in the form of parables and
   proverbial sayings. Now it is the essence of proverbial speech that it
   detaches itself from particular occasions, and is therefore best
   adapted to the expression of general fundamental truths. Because
   parables and proverbs set forth the truth in a lively and concrete way,
   they were very appropriate in teaching those that were just initiated
   in the spiritual truths of the new dispensation. Since they generally
   disclose the truth but partially, they stimulate the spirit of inquiry.
   A very suitable way of instructing beginners indeed! We notice that the
   disciples gradually longed for a different form of instruction, and
   towards the end of his life Christ says to them: "These things have I
   spoken unto you in proverbs, but the time cometh, when I shall no more
   speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of the
   Father." John 16:25.--The method of Jesus' work points to the same
   general conclusion. His teaching has a fragmentary character. He speaks
   a word here and a word there, discourses now with this person and then
   with that one, just as a missionary among the gentiles is apt to do,
   expressing the deepest truths in a sporadic way. Important doctrines
   were thus uttered without any attempt to relate them to other truths.
   All this is in perfect harmony with the initial character of Christ's
   work.--The contents of Christs teaching also are primitive and
   fundamental. Many of the most important truths are indeed taught in the
   Gospels, but they are not elaborated, nor set forth in all their
   significance, as f. i. the doctrine of the atonement, of justification
   by faith, of the forgiveness of sins, of the Kingship of Christ, etc.
   Other truths were suppressed, because, as the Lord himself says, even
   the best of his hearers were not yet able to bear them, John 16:12. The
   works of Christ were also initiatory. His miracles contained within
   them. the promise of still greater works in the future. He says to his
   disciples: "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do
   also, and greater works than these shall he-do, because I go unto my
   Father," John 14:12.

   Now the writers of the Gospels simply narrated this initial work of
   Christ, as they remembered it. They do not make mention of the greater
   works that followed after Christ had gone to heaven, nor do they
   (except in very rare instances) reflect on or seek to interpret the
   life and teachings of the Saviour. This remains to be done in later
   writings.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Gospel of Matthew
     __________________________________________________________________

  CONTENTS [1]

   The Gospel of Matthew may be divided into five parts:

   I. The Advent of the Messiah, 1: 1-4: 11. Matthew proves by the legal
   genealogy that Christ was the Son of David, the child of the promise;
   that, in harmony with the prophecies, He was born of a virgin at
   Bethlehem and his way was prepared by John the Baptist; and records his
   baptism and temptation.

   II. The Public proclamation of Messiah's Kingdom, 4: 12 16: 12. Here we
   find Jesus, after John is taken captive, choosing his first disciples
   and beginning his work in Galilee, 4: 12-4: 25. Then follows a splendid
   example of Christ's teaching in the Sermon on the Mount, in which the
   law of the New Kingdom is promulgated, and its righteousness and life
   are contrasted with those of Pharisees and Scribes, 5-7. This is
   followed by the description of a series of miracles, interspersed with
   brief teachings of the Lord and the calling of Matthew, giving clear
   evidence of the power and mercy of Jesus and establishing his authority
   to set up the New Kingdom and to proclaim its laws, 8: 1-9: 38. Next we
   have a catalogue of the twelve apostles and their commission to
   announce the coming Kingdom to the house of Israel, 10. It is brought
   out that the teachings and miracles of Jesus lead to serious
   questionings on the part of John the Baptist, to open opposition from
   the side of Pharisees and Scribes, and to the interference of his
   relatives, 11: 1-12 :50; that as a result Christ substitutes parabolic
   for plain teaching, 13: 1-53; and that the opposition finally
   culminmates in his rejection by the synagogue of Nazareth, by Herod and
   by the spiritual leaders of the people, both of Jerusalem and of
   Galilee, leading in every instance to the withdrawal of his gracious
   works and also to an exposition and condemnation of the hypocracy and
   wickedness of the leaders of the nation. 13: 54-16: 12.

   III. The Distinct and Public Claim of Messiahship, 16: 13-23: 39. In
   this section the evangelist shows, how Christ instructs his disciples
   regarding the Messiahship. The Lord calls forth their explicit
   confession of him as Messiah, 16: 13-20; and teaches them in a
   threefold form that He must suffer and die, but will rise again. In
   connection with these announcements we have the narrative of the
   transfiguration and the healing of the epileptic demoniac, and
   instruction regarding the civil and religious relations and duties of
   the disciples, such as the payment of the temple tribute, the
   self-denying, humble, loving and forgiving spirit of true discipleship,
   divorce, the proper attitude toward children, the danger of earthly
   possessions, the gracious character of the reward in God's Kingdom, and
   the ministering spirit demanded in his followers, 16: 21-20: 28. At
   Jerusalem also He now makes his claim, entering the city as the Son of
   David and assuming Messianic authority in the temple. He brings out
   clearly the future rejection of Israel, answers the test questions of
   his enemies and pronounces a sevenfold woe on Pharisees and Scribes,
   20: 29-23: 39.

   IV. The Sacrifice of Messiah the Priest, 24: 1-27: 66. Matthew
   demonstrates that Christ, now that He is rejected by the Jews, prepares
   his disciples for his sacrificial death by unfolding the doctrine of
   his future coming in glory and by teaching them the true posture of his
   followers in waiting for the day of his coming, 24: 1-25: 46. He then
   describes how Christ brought his sacrifice, after eating the Paschal
   lamb, being betrayed by Judas, condemned by the Sanhedrin and Pilate,
   and dying on the cross, 26:1 27: 66.

   V. The Truimph of Messiah the Saviour and King. The author brings out
   that Jesus by rising again from the dead fully established his claim to
   the Messiahship. Abundant evidence of the resurrection is furnished and
   it is clearly shown that in the end Christ is clothed with Messianic
   authority.

    CHARACTERISTICS

   1 As to form we find, in the first place, a characteristically Jewish
   numerical arrangement of things in this Gospel. The genealogy in ch. 1
   consists of three groups of generations of fourteen each. There are
   seven beatitudes ch. 5; seven petitions in the Lord's prayer ch. 6; a
   group of seven parables ch. 13; and seven woes on Pharisees and Scribes
   ch. 23. As to the style of Matthew, in the second place, may be said
   that it is smoother than that of Mark, though not so vivid. But it is
   tinged with Hebraisms, less indeed than the language of Luke, but more
   than that of Mark. It is rather impersonal, lacking in individuality.
   Its individualism of language consists mostly in the frequent use of
   certain words and phrases. The Hebraistic formulae of transition chai
   egeneto and chai idou occur repeatedly, and the simple tote is
   constantly used, especially with a historical tense. Further the
   following characteristic expressions are found: he basileia ton ouranon
   instead of the more common he b. tou theou; hina plerothe to rethen
   hupo churiou dia tou prophetou, or an abbreviated form of this
   expression; and hopos instead of hina.

   2. The arrangement of the material in this Gospel also differs
   considerably from that in the other Synoptics. The narrative is not
   continuous, but is interrupted by five great discourses, such as are
   not found in the Gospels of Mark and Luke, viz, the Sermon on the
   Mount, chs. 5-7; the charge to the apostles, ch. 10; the parables of
   the Kingdom, ch. 13; the discourse on the church, ch. 18; and the final
   eschatological discourses of Christ on the last judgment, chs. 23-25.
   After every one of these discourses we find the words: "And it came to
   pass, when Jesus had ended (made an end of, finished) these sayings,
   etc.

   3. As to contents the following peculiarities deserve our attention: In
   the first place the Gospel of Matthew has a more Jewish aspect, than
   the other Synoptics. Its predominant subject is, the Messiah and his
   Kingdom. The discourses of which we spoke all have reference to this
   Kingdom, and it is clearly brought out that the mission of Christ is to
   the Jews only and that the establishment of His rule will be a
   restoration of the fallen throne of David. Cf. the genealogy ch. 1 and
   also 2:2; 10:5, 6; 15:24; 19:28, etc. Yet we must not think that it
   positively excludes the idea of salvation for the gentiles; it clearly
   holds out a hope to them and even announces that the Kingdom will be
   taken from Israel on account of its unfaithfulness. Cf. 2:1-13; 8:
   10-12; 15:28; 21:43; 22:1-14. In the second place the first Gospel
   alludes to the Old Testament more frequently than any other: It
   emphasizes the fact that the New Testament reveals the fulfilment of
   Old Testament promises; that Christ was born, revealed himself and
   labored as the prophets of old had foretold. Matthew contains more than
   40 quotations, while Mark has 21 and Luke, 22. The characteristic use
   of hina (hopos) plerothe in quotations proves that Matthew had an eye
   for the divine teleology in history. And in the third place Matthew
   looks at things in their grand general aspect and pays less attention
   to the minor details on which Mark so much loves to dwell.

    AUTHORSHIP

   The superscription ascribes the first Gospel to Matthew. That this
   embodies the opinion of the early Church is evident from the testimony
   of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origen, Eusebius and several others, who all
   point to Matthew as the author. The Gospel itself shows unmistakably,
   by its Jewish physiognomy, that its author was a Jew, yea even that he
   was a Palestinian Jew, for he quotes from the Hebrew and not from the
   Septuagint. It contains no direct evidence, however to the authorship
   of Matthew, though there are a couple points of difference between it
   and the other Synoptics that are best explained on the assumption that
   Matthew wrote it. When we compare the lists of the twelve apostles in
   Mt. 10:2-4; Mk. 3: 16-19; and Luke 6:14- 16, we notice that only in the
   first Gospel the name Matthew is followed by the less honorable
   qualification "the publican ;" and that it has the order, "Thomas and
   Matthew" instead of, "Matthew and Thomas.'

   The apostolic authorship of this gospel is denied by several
   rationalistic critics, such as Davidson; Julicher and Baljon. Their
   reasons for rejecting it are the following:

   (1). Legend, misunderstanding and irrelevancy are very prominent in
   this Gospel, which would not be the case if the writer had been an eye
   and ear witness of Jesus. The reference is to such narratives as the
   story of the wise men, the flight into Egypt, and the slaughter of the
   innocents, ch. 2; the doublet of the miraculous feeding, 14:16-21; 15:
   32-38; the story of Jesus riding into Jerusalem on two animals, 21: 2,
   7; the opening of the graves at the resurrection of Christ, 27: 52; the
   setting of a watch at the sepulchre and the bribing of them, etc. (2).
   The Gospel of Matthew is too closely dependent on Mark, not merely in
   choice of matter and arrangement but in verbal detail, to be the work
   of an apostle. (3). The author never indicates by the use of the
   pronouns I or we that he was an eye witness of the things which he
   narrates.

   In answer to these objections it may be said that one's disbelief in
   miracles does not prove them false, and that the seeming difficulties
   to which reference is made easily yield to good exegesis. The
   dependence of Matthew on Mark (instead of the reverse as the Tubingen
   school believed) is indeed accepted by a great number of scholars
   today, but is not absolutely proven. And even if it were, it would be
   no disparagement for Matthew. The impersonal objective style is the
   prevailing one in the historical books of the Bible and is irrelevant
   as an objection to the authorship of the apostle.

   Our information regarding Matthew is very scanty. We read of him first
   in connection with the call to follow Jesus, Mt. 9: 9, 10; Mk. 2:14,
   15; Lk. 5 : 27-29. There is no reason to doubt that the Matthew of the
   first Gospel is the Levi of the second and third. Possibly his name was
   changed by the Lord after his call to the discipleship, just as those
   of Peter and Paul. In Mark he is said to be the son of Alphaeus, whom
   some identify with Alphaeus the father of the apostle James. But this
   identification does not commend itself to us, since we may assume that,
   if James and Matthew had indeed been brothers, this would have been
   stated in their case as well as it is in those of Andrew and Peter and
   John and James. He belonged to the despised class of publicans and
   hence cannot have been a very strict Jew. When Jesus called him, he
   made a great feast for the Lord, to which he also invited many
   publicans and sinners. Clement of Alexandria describes him as a
   rigorous ascetic, living "on seeds and herbs and without flesh." It is
   not impossible that by a very natural reaction his sinful life changed
   into one of great austerity. A veil of obscurity is cast over the
   apostolic career of Matthew. Tradition has it that he remained at
   Jerusalem with the other apostles for about twelve years after the
   death of the Lord, laboring among his fellow-countrymen. When the work
   was done, it is said, he preached the Gospel to others, according to
   the popular opinion in Ethiopia. He probably died a natural death.

    COMPOSITION

   I. Original Language. A hotly debated question is that regarding the
   language in which Matthew originally wrote his Gospel. The difficulty
   of the problem arises from the fact that external testimony and
   internal evidence seem to disagree. As a result the camp is very much
   divided, some scholars ardently defending a Hebrew, others with equal
   zeal a Greek original. The earliest testimony in regard to this matter
   is that of Papias and runs as follows: "Matthew composed the oracles
   (logia) in the Hebrew dialect, and everyone interpreted them as he was
   able." It is clear from the original that in these words the emphasis
   falls on the phrase "in the Hebrew language." But Papias does not stand
   alone in this assertion; a similar statement is found in Irenaeus:
   "Matthew among the Hebrews did also publish a Gospel in writing in
   their own language." Pantaenus is said to have gone to India, where he
   found "the writing of Matthew in Hebrew letters." Origen quoted by
   Eusebius also says that "the first Gospel was written by Matthew . . .
   who delivered it to the Jewish believers, composed in the Hebrew
   language." Eusebius himself makes the following statement: "For
   Matthew, having first preached to the Hebrews, when he was about to go
   to other people, delivered to them in their own language the Gospel
   written by himself." Jerome also states that "Matthew wrote a Gospel of
   Jesus Christ in Judea in the Hebrew language and letters for the
   benefit of those of the circumcision who believed. Who afterwards
   translated it into Greek, is uncertain." To these testimonies might be
   added those of Athanasius, Cyril of Jerusalem, Epiphanius, Ebedjesu and
   Chrysostom.

   On the other hand it is pointed out that the present Greek Gospel does
   not impress one as a translation, but has all the appearance of an
   original work, since: (1.) The hypothesis of a translation fails to
   account for the identity seen in certain parts of the Synoptic Gospels.
   (2.) While the author himself indeed quotes from the Hebrew text of the
   Old Testament, the quotations of our Lord are almost uniformly taken
   from the Septuagint. Is it conceivable that this would be the case in a
   Hebrew Gospel? (3.) The Gospel contains translations of Hebrew words,
   as: "They shall call His name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God
   with us," 1: 23 ; "A place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of
   a skull," 27: 33. (4.) There are certain explanations of Palestinian
   customs and habitual occurrences that would have been altogether
   superfluous in a Hebrew Gospel, naturally intended only for the natives
   of Palestine, f. i. in 22:23; 27:8, 15; 28:15.

   The conclusion to which this evidence leads is corroborated by the
   following facts: (1.) In all probability no one has ever seen the
   Hebrew Gospel of Matthew, and no trace of it can now be found. (2.) All
   the quotations from Matthew in the early Church fathers are taken from
   the present Greek Gospel. (3.) The Gospel of Matthew always stood on an
   equal footing with the other Gospels and is cited just as much as they
   are. This evidence both external and internal has given rise to several
   theories, which we can briefly state in the following manner: (1.)
   Matthew wrote his Gospel in Hebrew and someone else translated it into
   Greek. This position was held by the Church in general until the time
   of the Reformation. Since then several Protestant scholars took another
   view, because Rome defended the ultimate authority of the Vulgate by
   pointing out that the Greek Matthew was also merely a translation. The
   attacks of Rationalism on the so-called second-hand Matthew, and the
   dubious character of a part of the ancient testimony, also served to
   bring this theory into discredit. Notwithstanding this, however, some
   of the ablest scholars have defended it up to the present. The
   prevailing idea among them is that the Greek Matthew is not so much in
   all parts a literal translation as a new redaction. According to
   Westcott it gives in writing the Greek counterpart of the Hebrew
   Gospel, that had taken shape in oral tradition from the beginning. Zahn
   regards it as the ripe fruit of the interpretation of the Hebrew
   original in the congregations to which Papias refers.

   (2.) There never was a Hebrew original, but Matthew wrote his Gospel in
   the Greek language. The present gospel is not a translation, but an
   original work. They who hold this view are of the opinion that the
   testimony of Papias and of those following him was a sheer mistake, due
   partly to ignorance and partly to a confounding of the Gospel of
   Matthew with the Ebionite Gospel according to the Hebrews.

   (3.) Matthew wrote neither a Hebrew nor a Greek Gospel, but, if
   anything, a work called the logia by Papias, which must have been a
   collection of the sayings or discourses of the Lord. According to some
   these logia are lost, but must probably be identified with one of the
   supposed sources (Q) of our present Gospels. Others as Godet and
   Holdsworth believe that the work contained the discourses that we find
   in the Gospel of Matthew and was therefore incorporated bodily in our
   present Gospel.

   (4.) The evangelist after writing his Gospel in Hebrew with a view to
   his countrymen, possibly when he had left Palestine to labor elsewhere,
   translated or rather furnished a new recension of his Gospel in the
   Greek language with a view to the Jews of the Diaspora. The former was
   soon lost and altogether replaced by the latter.

   In formulating our opinion in regard to this question. we desire to
   state first of all that we have no sufficient reason to discredit the
   testimony of the early Church. It is true that Eusebius says of Papias
   that he was "a credulous, weak minded, though pious man," but in
   connection with this we must bear in mind: (1) that Eusebius says this
   in connection with the chiliastic opinions of Papias that were odious
   to the historian; (2) that he himself elsewhere testifies that Papias
   was a man "in the highest degree eloquent and learned and above all
   skilled in the Scriptures," and (3) that the peculiar views of Papias
   did not necessarily impair his veracity, nor invalidate his testimony
   to a historical fact. Let us remember also that it is inconsistent to
   believe Papias, when he says that Matthew wrote the Gospel, and to
   discredit his further testimony that the apostle wrote in Hebrew, as
   some scholars do. It is indeed almost certain that Pantaenus was
   mistaken, when he thought that he had found the Hebrew Gospel in India;
   and that Jerome labored under a delusion, when he imagined that he had
   translated it at Cesarea. What they saw was probably a corruption of
   the Hebrew original, known as, "the Gospel according to the Hebrews."
   But this possible mistake does not invalidate the other independent
   testimony of Jerome and that of all the early fathers to the effect
   that Matthew wrote the Gospel in Hebrew.

   In the second place we desire to point out that Papias in speaking of
   the logia of Matthew undoubtedly referred to his Gospel. The word logia
   does not mean speeches or sayings, as is now often asserted. It is
   found four times in the New Testament, viz, in Acts 7: 38; Rom. 3 : 2;
   Heb. 5:12; I Peter 4:11, and in every one of these places it has its
   classical meaning of oracles. It is applied to the divine utterances of
   God in his Word. In later writers the word is generally employed to
   indicate inspired writings. There is no reason to think that Papias
   used the word in the sense of logoi. If in addition to this we take in
   consideration that in all probability the testimony of Irenaeus is
   based on, that of Papias and that he takes the word as referring to the
   Gospel of Matthew, the presumption is that Papias had the Gospel in
   mind. The meaning of his testimony is therefore, that the first Gospel
   was written in Hebrew. The so-called Logia-source is a creature of the
   imagination.

   In the third place the internal evidence of our present Gospel proves
   conclusively that this is not a mere translation of a Hebrew original.
   The evidence adduced seems quite sufficient. The Greek Matthew may be
   and most likely is in substance a translation of the original Hebrew;
   yet it mustibe regarded as in many respects a new recension of the
   Gospel. The loss of the Hebrew original and the general substitution
   for it of the Greek version is readily explained by the scattering of
   the Jews after the destruction of Jerusalem, and by the early
   corruption of the Hebrew Gospel in the circles of the Ebionites and the
   Nazarenes.

   In the fourth place it seems most plausible that Matthew himself,
   shortly after he had written the Hebrew Gospel, translated it,
   adjusting it in several respects to the needs of the Jews that were
   dispersed in different lands. True, early tradition does not speak of
   this, and Jerome even says that it was not known in his time who
   translated it into Greek. This favors the idea that it was done very
   early. Moreover our Greek Gospel was known from the beginning as the
   Gospel katha Matthaion, just as the second and third as the Gospel kata
   Markon and kata Loukan. As such it is also universally quoted by those
   fathers that are accustomed to mention their authors. The case of
   Matthew would thus be analogous to that of Josephus.

   II. Readers and Purpose. The Gospel of Matthew was undoubtedly destined
   for the Jews. This is expressly stated by Irenaeus, Origen, Eusebius,
   Gregory Nazianzen, e. a. This testimony is corroborated by internal
   evidence. The genealogy of Jesus goes back only to Abraham, the father
   of the Hebrew race; and in harmony with the tenets of the Jews the
   Messiahship of Christ is proved from the prophets. The whole Gospel
   impresses one as being occasioned by the exigencies of the Jews both in
   Palestine and without. In none of the other Gospels is the false
   position of Pharisees and Scribes so clearly exposed.

   It was Matthew's purpose to convince the Jews that Jesus was the
   Christ, the great Davidic King promised by the prophets. He knew that,
   if this could be shown clearly, they would be won for the Saviour. This
   purpose is very evident from the Gospel. The legal genealogy of Christ
   is traced back to Abraham; and it is clearly brought out that prophecy
   was fulfilled in the manner of Christ's birth 1: 23; the place of his
   nativity 2: 6; his flight into Egypt 2:15 ; the murder of the innocents
   2:18; his residence at Nazareth 2: 23; the ministry of his forerunner
   3: 3; 11:10, his removal to Capernaum 4:15, 16; his healing the sick
   8:17; his meek and retiring disposition 12:18-21; his teaching by
   parables 13: 34, 35; his entry into Jerusalem 21: 4, 5; his rejection
   by the builders 21:42; his being David's Son and Lord 22: 44; his
   desertion by his disciples 26: 31; the price of his betrayal 27: 9; the
   division of his raiment 27: 35; and his cry of agony 27: 46. It is
   Matthew only that records the sayings of the Lord: "I am not come to
   destroy, but to fulfill," 5:17; and: "I was not sent but unto the lost
   sheep of the house of Israel," 15 : 24. To him Jerusalem is "the Holy
   City," "the Holy Place," and "the City of the great King." On seven
   different occasions he calls the Lord "the Son of David." In harmony
   with the prophets Christ the King is most prominent in his Gospel,
   though of course the prophetic and priestly character of the Lord are
   also clearly revealed.

   III. Time and Place. Little can be said as to the time, when Matthew
   wrote his Gospel; and what few indications we have of the time are
   rather uncertain, because we do not know, whether they bear on the
   origin of the Hebrew original or of the present Greek Gospel. Tradition
   generally points to Matthew's Gospel as being the first. Irenaeus makes
   a very definite statement, viz.: "Matthew among the Hebrews published a
   Gospel in their own language, while Peter and Paul were preaching the
   Gospel at Rome and founding a church there." This must have been
   somewhere between 63-67 A. D.

   Something may be gathered in this respect from the contents of the
   Gospel. We cannot, as some do, infer from 22: 7 that it was composed
   after the destruction of Jerusalem, for then we would have to assume
   that our Lord could not have predicted this event. Moreover this
   argument impugns the veracity of the evangelist. A proof for the
   contrary, viz, that this Gospel was written before the destruction of
   Jerusalem, is found in 24:15, where we find in a discourse of the
   Saviour this parenthetic clause of the writer: "let him that readeth
   understand," in connection with the Lord's admonition to the
   inhabitants of Judea to flee to the mountains, when they shall see the
   abomination of desolation standing in the Holy Place. The same
   inference is drawn by some from the eschatological discourse of Christ
   in chs. 24-25, where the beginning of sorrows, the destruction of
   Jerusalem, and the Lord's return in glory are placed alongside of each
   other, without any distinction of time; and the writer does not by a
   single word betray any knowledge of the fact that the destruction of
   Jerusalem would be separated in time from the Lord's return. But this,
   being an argument from silence, is rather precarious. The dates
   assigned to this Gospel by rationalistic critics range from about 70 to
   125 A. D.

   As to the place, where the Gospel was written, Athanasius says that it
   was published at Jerusalem; Ebedjesu, in Palestine; and Jerome, in
   Judea for the sake of those in Judea who believed. There is nothing in
   the Gospel itself that contradicts this. It is very likely, however,
   that the Greek Gospel was written elsewhere.

   IV. Method. The question arises, whether Matthew used sources in the
   composition of his Gospel. The prevalent opinion at present is that the
   writer of this Gospel, whoever he may have been, drew in the main on
   two sources, viz, on the logia of Matthew for the discourses of the
   Lord, and on the Gospel of Mark for the narrative portion of his work.
   It is found necessary, however, to assume several other minor sources.
   Thus Weiss, Julicher, Baljon, Peake, Buckley, Bartlet (in Hastings D.
   B.) e. a. Against these see Davidson and Salmon. Zahn's opinion is that
   Mark employed the Hebrew Matthew in the composition of his Gospel, and
   that the writer of our Greek Matthew in turn used the Gospel of Mark.
   The great diversity of opinion among New Testament scholars in this
   respect shows clearly that it is quite impossible to determine with any
   degree of certainty what sources Matthew employed. All we can say is
   (1) that in all probability the Hebrew Matthew depended on oral
   tradition only; (2) that our Greek Matthew is based on the Hebrew; and
   (3) that it is not impossible that Matthew had read the Gospel of Mark
   before he composed the present Greek Gospel.

    CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The Gospel of Matthew has been accepted as canonical from the earliest
   times. There are many traces of its use, especially of the Sermon on
   the Mount in the Didache. Next we find it clearly quoted in the Epistle
   of Barnabas, who cites ten passages with the significant formula "it is
   written." This proves that the Gospel was used and recognized as
   canonical in the early part of the second century. Further it is
   abundantly testified to until the beginning of the third century, when
   all controversy ceases, there being up to that time altogether 21
   witnesses, so that this Gospel is one of the best attested books in the
   New Testament. Among these witnesses are the old Latin and Syriac
   Versions that contain this Gospel; early church fathers that refer to
   it as authoritative or quote it; and heretics who, even while attacking
   the truth, tacitly admit the canonical character of the Gospel.

   This book is properly placed at the very beginning of the New
   Testament. It forms part of the foundation on which the New Testament
   structure was to be reared. And among the Gospels, which together
   constitute this foundation, it is rightly put in the first place. It
   is, as it were, a connecting link between the Old Testament and the
   New. As the Old Testament had reference to the Jews only, so the Gospel
   of Matthew is written for the old covenant people. And it is clearly
   linked to the Old Testament by its continual reference to the prophets.
   The permanent spiritual value of this Gospel is that it sets forth in
   clear outline Christ as the One promised of old; and, in harmony with
   the prophetic literature, especially as the great divine King, before
   whom the Church of all ages must bow down in adoration.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] In giving the outline of the Gospels I have followed in general
   Gregory in his Why Four Gospels?
     __________________________________________________________________

The Gospel of Mark

  CONTENTS

   We may divide the contents of Mark's Gospel, that treats of Christ as
   the mighty Worker, into five parts:

   I. The Advent of the mighty Worker, 1:1--2:12. Jesus is heralded as the
   mighty One by John the Baptist, and proclaimed as the Son of God by the
   Father, 1:1-13. After calling some of his disciples, He taught the
   Galilean multitudes as one having authority, worked mighty miracles
   among them, as the casting out of demons, the healing of Peters
   mother-in-law, the cleansing of a leper, etc., and showed His authority
   to forgive sins, 1: 14--2:12.

   II. The Conflict of the mighty Worker, 2: 12--8: 26. In connection with
   the feast of Levi, the fact that the apostles did not fast, and that
   they plucked ears of corn on the sabbath, Jesus gives the Pharisees
   instruction regarding the purpose of his coming, and the moral
   character of the requirements of his Kingdom, 2:13--3: 8. The healing
   of the man with the withered hand leads to the enmity of Pharisees and
   Herodians, which caused the withdrawal of Jesus. The Lord now chose
   twelve apostles and continued his mighty works, so that even his
   friends and relatives sought to restrain him, and his enemies claimed
   that He did them through the power of the devil, 3: 9-35. Next we find
   him teaching the people regarding the origin, the quiet growth,
   independent of mans efforts, and the future strength of the Kingdom of
   God, 4:1-34. His divine power shines forth in his calming the sea, his
   curing the demoniacs in the land of the Gadarenes and the woman that
   had the issue of blood, and his raising the daughter of Jairus, 4:
   36--5 : 43. He finds no faith at Nazareth, and now sends out the twelve
   into the cities of Galilee, 6:1-13. Herod, hearing of Christ, stands in
   awe of him, believing him to be John the Baptist, whom he beheaded,
   6:14-29. Withdrawing with the twelve to a desert place, He feeds the
   five thousand, and after that shows his power over nature by walking on
   the sea, 6: 30-56. The Pharisees accost him, because his disciples eat
   bread with unclean hands, 7:1-23. He now cures the daughter of the
   Syro-Phoenician woman and the deaf and dumb man at Decapolis, where He
   also feeds the four thousand, 7: 24-8: 9. Once more the Pharisees ask
   him for a sign. Leaving them, He restores the sight of the blind man at
   Bethsaida, 8:10-26.

   III. The Claim of the mighty Worker, 8: 27--13: 37. The Lord shows the
   necessity of his suffering, leads his disciples to confess him as
   Messiah, and points out what is required of them, 8:27-38. His power
   and glory are seen in the transfiguration and in the miracle following
   this, 9:1-29. Then follows a second revelation of his future suffering,
   followed by teachings regarding humility and offenses, 9: 30-50. In
   Perea Christ, tempted by the Pharisees, gives his opinion on the
   question of divorce; then He blesses little children and points out the
   way of life to the young ruler, 10:1-31. For the third time He reveals
   his future suffering, and prepares his disciples for a life of service,
   10: 32-45. At Jericho He restores the sight of Bar-timeus. Next he
   enters Jerusalem amid loud hosannas, curses the fig-tree and cleanses
   the temple, 10: 46--11: 26. In the temple He reveals his superiority by
   answering the questions of Pharisees, Sadducees and Herodians, and
   points to himself as Davids Lord, 11: 27--12: 44. Then he speaks of his
   coming in glory, 13.

   IV. The Sacrifice of the mighty Worker, 14:1--15 : 47. Preparation is
   made for Jesus death by the Sanhedrin and Judas on the one hand, and by
   Mary of Bethany on the other, 14:1-11. The passover is eaten and the
   Lords supper instituted, 14:12-25: In Gethsemane follows bitter agony
   and captivity, 14: 26-52. Then the Lord is tried and condemned by the
   Sanhedrin and by Pilate, and finally He is crucified, 14: 53--15 : 47.

   V. The mighty Worker as Conqueror of Death, 16:1-20. Women go to the
   grave on the first day of the week and are directed by the angels to go
   to Galilee, 16:1-8. The Lord appears several times, gives blessed
   promises, and at last ascends to heaven, 14:9-20.

    CHARACTERISTICS

   There are certain characteristics by which the Gospel of Mark is
   distinguished from the other Gospels:

   1. The most striking peculiarity of the second Gospel is its
   descriptive character. It is Marks constant aim to picture the scenes
   of which he speaks in lively colours. There are many minute
   observations in his work that are not found in the other Synoptics,
   some of which point to its autoptic character. He mentions the look of
   anger that Christ cast on the hypocrites about him, 3: 5; relates the
   miracles, performed immediately after the transfiguration, with greater
   circumstantiality than the other Gospels, 9: 9-29; tells of Jesus
   taking little children in his arms and blessing them, 9: 36; 10:16;
   remarks that Jesus, looking at the young ruler, loved him, 10: 21, etc.

   2. This Gospel contains comparatively little of the teaching of Jesus;
   it rather brings out the greatness of our Lord by pointing to his
   mighty works, and in doing this does not follow the exact chronological
   order. Teaching is subordinate to action, though we cannot maintain
   that it is ignored altogether. Mark, though considerably smaller than
   Matthew, contains all the miracles narrated by the latter except five,
   and besides has three that are not found in Matthew. Of the eighteen
   miracles in Luke, Mark has twelve and four others above this number.

   3. In the Gospel of Mark several words of Christ that were directed
   against the Jews are left out, such as we find in Mt. 3: 7-10; 8: 5-13;
   15: 24, etc. On the other hand more Jewish customs and Aramaic words
   are explained than in the first Gospel, f. i. 2:18; 7:3; 14:12; 15:6,
   42; 3:17; 5:41; 7:11, 34; 14: 36. The argument from prophecy has not
   the large place here that it has in Matthew.

   4. The style of Mark is more lively than that of Matthew, though not as
   smooth. He delights in using words like euthus or eutheos and polus
   prefers the use of the present and the imperfect to that of the aorist,
   and often uses the periphrastic einai with a participle instead of the
   finite verb. There are several Latinisms found in his Gospel, as
   kenturion,kordantes, krabbatos,praitorion, spekoulator and phragelloun.

    AUTHORSHIP

   Just as in the case of Matthew we are entirely dependent on external
   testimony for the name of the author of the second Gospel. And the
   voice of antiquity is unanimous in ascribing it to Mark. The most
   ancient testimony to this effect is that of Papias, who says: "Mark,
   the interpreter of Peter, wrote down carefully all that he recollected,
   though he did not [record] in order that which was either said or done
   by Christ. For he neither heard the Lord nor followed him; but
   subsequently, as I have said, [attached himself to] Peter, who used to
   frame his teaching to meet the [immediate] wants [of his hearers] ; and
   not as making a connected narrative of the Lords discourses. So Mark
   committed no error, as he wrote down some particulars just as he called
   them to mind. For he took heed to one thing--to omit none of the facts
   that he heard, and to state nothing falsely in [his narrative] of
   them." Several other church fathers, such as Irenaeus, Clement of
   Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen, Jerome, Eusebius, e. a., follow in his
   wake; there is not a dissentient voice.

   We cannot glean a single hint from the Gospel itself as to the identity
   of the author. It may be that the obscure young man who followed Jesus
   in the night of his betrayal. 14: 51, 52, and who, stripped of his
   garment fled naked in the darkness of night, was the author himself.
   The house of Marks mother was at least in later time a rendezvous for
   the disciples of the Lord, Acts 12:12; so that it is not improbable
   that Jesus and his disciples ate the Paschal supper there, and that
   Mark, hearing them depart, left his bed and stole after them. This
   would immediately explain the acquaintance of the author with this
   interesting fact.

   Some scholars have expressed doubt as to the identity of Mark, the
   evangelist, and John Mark, the companion of Barnabas and Paul. The
   general consensus of opinion, however, favors this. Proceeding on the
   assumption that this view is correct, we find Mark mentioned first in
   connection with Peter's deliverance from prison in 44 A. D. After
   leaving the prison walls the apostle went to "the house of Mary, the
   mother of John, whose surname was Mark," Acts 12:12. From the way in
   which Luke introduces his mother we gather that Mark was a well known
   person, when the Acts were written. The fact that Peter calls him his
   son, I Peter 5:13 naturally leads to the supposition that in his early
   years he had frequent intercourse with the apostle and was through the
   instrumentality of Peter led to a saving knowledge of the truth. He was
   a cousin of Barnabas and hence a Jew, probably even of a priestly
   family, Acts 4: 36. When Barnabas and Paul set out on their first
   missionary journey, Mark accompanied them until they came to Pamphylia,
   when for some unknown, but as it seems reprehensible reason, he turned
   back. At the beginning of the second missionary journey he was minded
   to accompany the apostles again, but Paul positively refused to accept
   his services. He now accompanied his uncle to Cyprus. When we next hear
   of Mark, about ten years later, he is spoken of by Paul as one of those
   few "fellow-laborers that have been a consolation to him," Col. 4:10;
   Philem. 24. In his last letter the apostle speaks of Mark once more,
   and in such a laudatory manner as to prove that Mark has fully regained
   his confidence, II Tim. 4:11. The last we hear of Mark in Scripture is,
   when Peter sends the greetings of Mark, his son, to the Christians in
   Asia Minor, I Peter 5:13. These four passages lead us to the following
   construction of his later history: He was with Paul during the apostles
   first imprisonment at Rome and then intended to visit the congregation
   of Colossae. We have no reason to doubt that he carried out this
   purpose. After Pauls release Mark was at Rome with Peter, who in
   writing to the Christians of Asia Minor assumes that they know Mark.
   Apparently he made another visit to Asia Minor, since Paul requests
   Timothy, II Tim. 4:11 to take Mark with him, when he comes to Rome.
   After the death of Peter he is said to have visited Alexandria, where
   he was the first to found Christian churches, and finally died a
   martyrs death. This tradition, though old, is not without suspicion.

   It seems that Mark was "like Peter more a man of action than of deep
   and abiding principle, a man of fervor and enthusiasm rather than of
   persevering effort; but he was transfused by the power of the same
   Christ who transfused Peter into the man of rapid, continued and
   effective effort in the missionary work of the Church." Gregory, Why
   Four Gospels, p. 163.

   The relation of Mark to Peter deserves special attention. Scripture
   speaks of this in the two places already mentioned, and tradition
   abundantly testifies to it. Papias says that "Mark was Peters
   interpreter and wrote down carefully all that he recollected." Clement
   of Alexandria also says that he wrote down the discourses of Peter, as
   he remembered them. Irenaeus, Tertullian and Jerome all style Mark "the
   interpreter of Peter." Tertullian even says that "the Gospel published
   by Mark may be reckoned Peter's, whose interpreter he was." And Origen
   still stronger: "Mark wrote his Gospel according to the dictates of
   Peter." Similarly Athanasius. All these testimonies agree in asserting
   that Mark was dependent on Peter in writing his Gospel; they disagree,
   however, as to the degree of dependence, some claiming merely that Mark
   recorded what he remembered of Peters preaching, and others, that he
   wrote what Peter dictated. Which representation is the true one?

   The title of the Gospel is against the dictation theory, for if Peter
   had dictated the Gospel, it would in all probability have been called
   by his name, just as the Epistles dictated by Paul are universally
   ascribed to him. On the other hand the autoptic touches in the Gospel
   make it probable that in some parts of his work Mark employed the very
   words of Peter; they also suggest a possible basis for the later
   tradition that Peter dictated to Mark. However, it is not impossible
   that some of the Church fathers accentuated the dependence of Mark on
   Peter unduly, merely to enhance the authority of his work. The true
   relation of the evangelist to the apostle is expressed in the words:
   "Mark was the interpreter (hermeneutes) of Peter." This does not mean
   that he accompanied Peter on his missionary journeys as dragoman,
   translating Aramaeic discourses into Greek (Davidson), or Greek into
   Latin (Bleek); but that he was Peters scholar and in his Gospel
   interprets i. e. sets forth the doctrine of Peter for those who have
   not heard the apostle.

   The Gospel itself incidentally testifies to the relation in which it
   stands to Peter. There are many touches that indicate first-hand
   knowledge, as in 1:16-20; 1:29; 9:5; 15:54, 72; 16: 7. Some things
   found in the other Synoptics are unexpectedly omitted by Mark, as
   Peters walking on the water, Mt. 14: 29; his appearance in the incident
   of the tribute money, Mt. 17: 24-27; the statement of Christ that He
   prayed for Peter individually, Lk. 22: 32; the significant word spoken
   to him as the Rock, Mt. 16:18. In other cases his name is suppressed,
   where it is used by Matthew or Luke, as 7:17 cf. Mt. 15: 15; 14:13 cf.
   Lk. 22:8.

   The authorship of Mark is quite generally admitted; yet there are some,
   such as Beischlag and Davidson e. a. who deny it. They maintain that
   our present Gospel does not tally with the description of Papias, where
   he says that Mark wrote down the things he heard of Peter "not in
   order." Wendt supposes that Papias had in mind a series of narratives
   that are embodied in our present Gospel, a sort of Urmarkus. But when
   Papias said that the evangelist wrote "not in order," he did not say
   anything that is not true of our Mark, for in it we do not find things
   in the order of their occurrence. And in ancient literature there is
   not a single trace of an Urmarkus.

    COMPOSITION

   1. Readers and Purpose. External testimony enlightens us respecting the
   circle for which the Gospel of Mark was intended; it points to Rome and
   the Romans. Clement of Alexandria says that many of the converts of
   Rome desired of Mark that he should write down the discourses of Peter.
   Jerome also speaks of this "request of the brethren at Rome"; and
   Gregory Nazianzen says: "Mark wrote his Gospel for the Italians." If we
   now turn to the Gospel itself, we find that it was peculiarly adapted
   to the Romans. They were a strenuous, a very active people; Marks
   Gospel is pre-eminently the Gospel of action, and is written in a brisk
   lively style. The fact that the argument from prophecy holds an
   inferior place in it, and that so many Jewish customs and Aramaeic
   words are explained, points away from the Jews; while the Latin words
   contained in the gospel, the reference to the Roman manner of divorce,
   10:12, the reduction of a coin to the Roman quadrans, 12:42, the
   knowledge of Pilate presupposed in 15: 1 (cf. Mt. 27: 1 and Lk. 3:1),
   and the introduction of Simon of Cyrene as the father of Alexander and
   Rufus, 15:21 (cf. Rom. 16:13),--all point to Rome.

   It stands to reason that the purpose of Mark in writing stood in the
   closest relation to the circle of readers for whom he intended his
   Gospel. It is certainly true, as Zahn asserts, that his intention was
   to record the beginning (arche) of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, i. e.
   the beginning of its preaching and of its course; but he has this in
   common with the other Synoptics; it is nothing distinctive (cf. p. 58
   above). The theory of Hilgenfeld and Davidson, following Baur, that the
   Gospel of Mark was written to conciliate the two opposing parties of
   the apostolic age, the Petrine and the Pauline, and therefore carefully
   avoids the exclusivism of Matthew as well as the universalism of Luke
   can only be sustained by the most forced and artificial
   interpretations. Neither does the gospel support the view of Weiss,
   that it was written at a time, when the hope of Christs second coming
   was on the decline, and intended to show that the Messianic character
   of Jesus mission was sufficiently attested by His earthly life. Mark's
   aim was simply to record the gospel narrative without any special
   dogmatic aim, but to do this in such a manner as would be most suitable
   for the Romans, the busy Romans, the people of action. Hence he places
   special emphasis on the acts of Christ. For those who loved conquest
   and admired heroism he desired to picture Christ as the mighty
   Conqueror that overcame sin and all its consequences, yea even death
   itself.

   2. Time and Place. As to the time when Mark wrote his Gospel the
   witness of the early Church is not unanimous. Irenaeus says that after
   the death of Peter and Paul Mark wrote down what he had heard Peter
   preach. Clement of Alexandria places the composition of the Gospel
   before the death of Peter, stating that, when Peter heard of it, "he
   neither obstructed nor encouraged the work." Jerome informs us that
   Peter "approved and published it in our churches, commanding the
   reading of it by his own authority~" Others say that Peter dictated to
   Mark. The question to be decided is therefore, whether Mark wrote
   before or after the death of Peter. It is generally assumed that the
   testimony of Irenaeus is the most trustworthy. It is possible that some
   of the later Church fathers insisted on Marks having written the Gospel
   during the life of Peter, in order to clothe it with apostolic
   authority. Zahn would harmonize the testimony of the fathers by
   assuming that Mark began his work before and finished it after the
   death of the apostle; and that Peter on hearing of Mark's venture at
   first said nothing regarding it; then, seeing a part of the work,
   rejoiced in it; and still later, when it had almost reached its perfect
   form, sanctioned it, Einl. II p. 203.

   Turning to the Gospel itself, we find that it contains no positive
   evidence as to the time of its composition. Some inferred from 13: 24
   as compared with Mt. 24: 29 that it was written after the destruction
   of Jerusalem, the evangelist being conscious of the lapse of a certain
   period between that catastrophe and the day of Christs return. But the
   foundation is too slender for the conclusion. With greater probability
   others infer from 13:14, "let him that readeth understand," that the
   destruction of the city was still a matter of expectation. This seems
   to follow also from Marks utter silence regarding that calamity. The
   probable conclusion is therefore that the year 70 A. D. is the terminus
   ad quem for the composition of this Gospel. From Col. 4:10 we may infer
   that it was written after 62 A. D., for if Paul had known Mark as an
   evangelist, he would most likely have introduced him as such. A place
   of still greater importance is II Peter 1: 15. "Yea I will give
   diligence that at every time ye may be able after my decease to call
   these things to remembrance." Here Peter seems to promise that there
   will be a record of his preaching after his demise. We would therefore
   date the Gospel between 67 and 70 A. D. Davidson without good reasons
   places it in the beginning of the second century, about 125 A. D.
   Regarding the grounds for his position, (1) that in this Gospel belief
   in the divinity of Christ is more pronounced than in the first century;
   and (2) that the word euangelion is used in a sense foreign to the
   apostolic age, we merely remark that they are both unproved
   assumptions.

   The testimony of the fathers points, almost without a dissenting voice,
   to Rome as the place, where Mark composed his gospel. Chrysostom,
   however, testifies that "Mark wrote in Egypt at the request of the
   believers there. But in another statement he admits that he really
   knows nothing about it.

   3. Method. Augustine called Mark "the abridger of Matthew," assuming
   that the second Gospel was an abbreviated compilation from the first.
   This theory has since been defended by several scholars of the Tubingen
   school, but is now abandoned. The general features of the Gospel do not
   bear out that view. Zahn finds that Mark based his Gospel both on the
   oral communications of Peter and on the Hebrew Matthew, Einl. II p.
   322. Davidson denies the originality and priority of the Gospel by
   making it depend to a great extent on Matthew and Luke, Introd. I p.
   478. Salmon finds throughout the Gospel many evidences of the priority
   and independence of Mark, but believes that in other places he is, with
   Matthew and Luke, dependent on a common source, Introd. p. 155. The
   prevalent opinion at present is that Marks Gospel was prior to the
   other two, though, at least according to some, he may have employed the
   euangelion of Matthew. But in order to maintain this priority its
   defenders have resorted to such artificial and unlikely theories that
   they in part defeated their own purpose. The theory of an Urmarkus has
   been broached, but found little acceptance. The opinion of Dr. Arthur
   Wright that we must distinguish between a proto-, a deutero- and a
   tritoMark, a distinction applied to oral tradition by him, is now by
   others applied to written documents. Cf. Holdsworth, Gospel Origins p.
   108.

   Here again the great difference of opinion proves that it is quite
   impossible to trace in all details the origin of the material found in
   this Gospel. The great objection to several of the theories propounded
   is that they seek to account for the origin of Mark in a too mechanical
   way. We may be certain of two things: (1) that Mark derived the
   greatest part of his material from the preaching of Peter that had
   gradually assumed a definite shape in his mind; and (2) that he has
   recorded partly the ipsissima verba of Peter (except for the occasional
   change of we into they), and partly merely the substance of the
   apostles kerugma in a form and with interpretations of his own. For the
   rest of his material he probably depended on the Hebrew original of
   Matthew.

  INTEGRITY

   The integrity of the Gospel of Mark is generally maintained, with the
   exception, however, of the last twelve verses, regarding which there is
   a great difference of opinion. The critical camp of the past century is
   just about equally divided, although at present the tide is somewhat
   against these verses. The reasons for rejecting them are both external
   and internal. These verses are wanting in the two oldest and most
   valuable manuscripts, viz, the Sinaitic and the Vatican. Eusebius and
   Jerome and a few others state that they were wanting in almost all the
   Greek copies of the gospels of their time. It is possible, however,
   that the testimony of Jerome and the rest resolves itself into that of
   Eusebius. This is all but certain with respect to that of Jerome, as
   even Davidson admits. They are wanting also in the important MS. k,
   representing the African text of the old Latin Version, which has
   another and shorter conclusion, like that in MS. L. They are also
   absent from some of the best MSS. of the Armenian Version. Then the
   style of this section is abrupt and sententious, not graphic like that
   of the rest of the Gospel. It makes the impression of a collection of
   brief notices, extracted from larger accounts and loosely combined. Its
   phraseology is also peculiar. Thus prote sabbatou, verse 9 is used
   instead of he mia ton sabbatou as in 16 :2. The verb poreuesthai, which
   occurs three times in this section, is not found in the body of the
   Gospel. Neither is the word theasthai, 16:11, 14. Another unique
   feature is the use of ho kurios as a designation of Christ, verses 19,
   20.

   These verses have also found ardent defenders, however, among whom
   especially Dean Burgon must be named, though he is perhaps a little too
   positive. In his work on, "The last Twelve Verses of the Gospel
   according to Mark," he put up an able defense. The authenticity of this
   section is favored by the following considerations: It is found in most
   of the uncial MSS. and in all the cursives, though some of these mark
   it with an asterisk, or indicate that it was absent in older copies.
   Moreover its absence from Aleph and B looks somewhat suspicious. It is
   also incorporated in most of the ancient Versions, of which the Itala,
   the Curatorian and Peshito Syriac, and the Coptic are older than any of
   our Greek codices. All the existing Greek and Syriac lectionaries, as
   far as they have now been examined, contain these verses. Irenaeus
   quotes the 19th verse as a part of the Gospel of Mark. Justin Martyr
   too in all probability testifies to the authenticity of these verses.
   And several of the later fathers, such as Epiphanius, Ambrose and
   Augustine certainly quote from them. And as far as internal evidence is
   concerned, it seems very unlikely that Mark would end his Gospel with
   the words ephobounto gar without recording a single appearance of the
   Lord. Moreover these verses contain too many peculiarities to be a
   forgery.

   We cannot delay to discuss the causes for the variation of the MSS, nor
   to review the different conclusions to which scholars have come as to
   the extent of Marks Gospel. They who wish to study the subject can do
   so in the work of Burgon, in the Introductions of Guericke and Salmon
   and in Urquharts New Biblical Guide VII, where this section is
   defended; and in the work of Westcott and Hort, "The New Testament in
   Greek," and in the Introductions of Reuss, Weiss, Davidson and Zahn,
   who reject it.

   It seems to us that the ground offered for the rejection of these
   verses by external testimony is rather slender and uncertain, while the
   internal evidence is weighty indeed. In view of it we are inclined to
   accept one of two possible conclusions: either that Mark himself added
   these verses some time after he had written his Gospel, possibly
   culling his material from Matthew and Luke; or that someone else wrote
   them to complete the work. The latter is favored by the Armenian Gospel
   that was written in 986 and was discovered by F. C. Conybeare in 1891,
   and which has the superscription above this section: "Of the Presbyter
   Ariston." In either case we see no reason, however, to doubt the
   canonicity of this part of Marks Gospel, though some have attempted to
   make this suspicious especially by pointing to the unlikely (?)
   miracles of verses 17, 18. Cf. Luke 10:19.

    CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   Though the external testimony to the canonicity of Mark's Gospel is not
   so abundant as that for the Gospel of Matthew, yet it is sufficient to
   establish this beyond a shadow of doubt. It is quoted by at least two
   of the apostolic fathers, by Justin Martyr and by the three great
   witnesses of the end of the second century, Irenaeus, Clement of
   Alexandria and Tertullian, and is referred to as a part of the Word of
   God by several others. We find no expressions of doubt in the early
   Church.

   The special purpose of this Gospel in the canon is to show us Christ in
   his divine power, destroying the works of satan, and conquering sin and
   death. More than other Gospels it places prominently before us the work
   of Christ in behalf of those that are bound by the shackles of satan
   and are suffering the consequences of sin. We here see the Lion out of
   the tribe of Juda, conquering and ever to conquer. Mark is the only one
   of the evangelists that speaks of the future Kingdom of God as coming
   with power, 9:1. In that way this Gospel has special significance for
   the Church of all ages. It gives her the blessed assurance that her
   future is entrusted to One who has shown himself a mighty Conqueror,
   and who is abundantly able to save to the uttermost all who believe in
   Him.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Gospel of Luke

  CONTENTS

   Like the contents of the previous Gospels we may also divide those of
   Luke's into five parts:

   I. The Advent of the Divine Man, 1 :-4:13. After stating his aim the
   evangelist describes the announcement from heaven of the forerunner,
   John the Baptist, and of Christ himself, and their birth with the
   attendant circumstances, 1: 1-2: 20. Then he shows that Christ was made
   subject to the law in circumcision, in the presentation in the temple,
   and in his journey to Jerusalem, 2: 21-52. He traces the descent of the
   Son of Man to Adam, and points out that He was prepared for his work by
   baptism and temptation, 3: 1 4: 13.

   II. The Work of the Divine Man for the Jewish World, 4: 14- 9: 50. In
   this part we first see Christ preaching in the synagogues of Nazareth,
   Capernaum and all Galilee; performing many miracles in Capernaum and by
   the sea of Galilee, such as the curing of Peter's mother-in-law, the
   wonderful draught of fishes, the cleansing of the leper, and the
   healing of the palsied man; calling Levi to follow him; and instructing
   his enemies regarding his authority, his purpose, and the moral
   character of his demands, as a result of which many were amazed and
   Pharisees and Scribes were filled with hatred, 4: 14 6: 11. After a
   night of prayer the Lord now chooses his twelve disciples and proclaims
   the constitution of his Kingdom, 6:12-49. He cures the centurion s
   servant, raises the widow's son, and gives instruction by word and
   example regarding the nature of his work and the character of the
   subjects of his Kingdom, 7:149. The origin of the Kingdom is now
   illustrated in the parable of the sower, and the divine power of Christ
   over both the natural and the spiritual world is shown in the stilling
   of the storm, in the deliverance of the Gadarene demoniac, in his
   curing the woman with the issue of blood and raising the daughter of
   Jairus, 8:1-56. The twelve are sent out and on their return Christ
   retires with them to a desert place, where He miraculously feeds the
   five thousand, after which He once and again announced his future
   suffering and was transfigured on the Mount, 9:1-50.

   III. The Work of the Divine Man for the Gentiles, 9: 51-18: 30. Jesus
   in traveling towards Jerusalem sends messengers before him, but these
   are rejected by the Samaritans; then He sends out the seventy, who
   return with a good report, teaches that neighborly love is not to be
   restricted to the Jews (good Samaritan), and gives his disciples
   instruction regarding prayer, 9: 51-11:13. The Pharisees now claim that
   Christ casts out the devils through Beelzebub, in answer to which He
   pictures their condition, and when they tempt him in various ways,
   pronounces his woe upon them and warns his disciples against them, 11:
   14-12 :12. In connection with the parable of the rich fool the Lord
   warns against covetousness and anxious care, and bids his disciples to
   be prepared for the day of his coming, 12:13-53. Sitting at meat in the
   house of a Pharisee, He teaches those present true mercy, true
   humility, true hospitality, and the fact that they, having refused the
   supper of the Lord, will be rejected, 14:1-24. Next the necessity of
   self-denial is impressed on those that would follow Jesus, and in three
   parables the Pharisees are made acquainted with the real purpose of his
   coming, 14: 25-15: 32. The disciples are instructed in the careful use
   of their earthly possessions, and to the Pharisees the law of
   retribution is explained, 16:1-31. In various ways the Lord impresses
   on his followers the necessity of a forgiving spirit, of humility, of
   faith and gratitude, of constant prayer with a view to the unexpected
   character of his coming, of trusting in God and of selfdenial, all
   ending in everlasting salvation, 17:1 18: 30.

   IV. The Sacrifice of the Divine Man for all Mankind, 18:31-23 :49.
   Jesus announces once more his future suffering and death, at Jericho
   restores the sight of a blind man and calls Zaccheus, and points out to
   his followers that his Kingdom would not immediately come, 18: 32-19:
   27. Triumphantly He enters Jerusalem, where He cleanses the temple,
   answers the questions of the Chief Priests, the Scribes, the Pharisees
   and the Sadducees, and instructs his followers regarding his future
   coming, 19: 28-21 :38. After eating the passover with his disciples He
   was betrayed, condemned and crucified, 22:1 23:56.

   V. The Divine Man Saviour of all Nations, 24. On the morning of the
   first day Christ arose; women seek him in the grave; He appears to two
   of his disciples on the way to Emmaus, to the eleven, and finally
   departs from them with the promise of the Spirit.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   The following are the most important characteristics of the third
   Gospel:

   1. In point of completeness it surpasses the other Synoptics,
   beginning, as it does, with a detailed narrative of the birth of John
   the Baptist and of Christ himself, and ending with a record of the
   ascension from the Mount of Olives. In distinction from Matthew and
   Mark this Gospel even contains an allusion to the promise of the
   Father, 24: 29, and thus points beyond the old dispensation to the new
   that would be ushered in by the coming of the Holy Spirit. The detailed
   narrative of Christ's going to Jerusalem in 9: 51-18:14 is also
   peculiar to this gospel.

   2. Christ is set before us in this Gospel as the perfect Man with wide
   sympathies. The genealogy of Jesus is trace back through David and
   Abraham to Adam, our common progenitor, thus presenting him as one of
   our race. We are told of the truly human development both in body and
   spirit of Jesus in 2: 40-52, and of his dependence on prayer in the
   most important crises of His life, 3: 21; 9: 29. Those features of the
   Lord s miracles of healing are clearly brought out that show his great
   sympathy. "Peter's mother-in-law suffers from a great fever; and the
   leper is full of leprosy. The hand restored on the sabbath is the right
   hand, the centurion s servant is one dear to him, the son of the widow
   of Nain, is an only son, the daughter of Jairus an only daughter, the
   epileptic boy at the hill of transfiguration is an only child." Bruce,
   The Expositor's Greek Testament I p. 47.

   3. Another feature of this gospel is its universality. It comes nearer
   than other Gospels to the Pauline doctrine of salvation for all the
   world, and of salvation by faith, without the works of the law. In the
   synagogue at Nazareth Christ points out that God might again deal with
   the Jews as He had done in the days of Elijah and Elishah, 4:25-27; He
   declares that the faith of the centurion was greater than any He had
   found in Israel, 7: 2-10; sends messengers before his face into
   Samaria, 9: 52-56; demands love of Israel even for the Samaritans, 10:
   30-37; heals the Samaritan leper as well as the others, 17: 11-19; and
   speaks the significant word: "Blessed are they that hear the word of
   God and keep it, 11:28.

   4. More than the other evangelists Luke relates his narrative to
   contemporaneous history and indicates the time of the occurrences. It
   was in the days of king Herod that the birth of John the Baptist and
   Christ was announced, 1:1, 26; during the reign of Caesar Augustus,
   that Christ was born, 2: 1; while Cyrenius was governor of Syria, that
   the taxation took place, 2: 2; in the fifteenth year of Tiberias, etc.,
   that Christ was baptized and began his public ministry, 3:1, 2. Notice
   also the following chronological indications: 1:36, 56, 59; 2:42; 3:23;
   9:28, 37, 51; 22:1, 7. We should not infer from the foregoing, however,
   that Luke furnishes us with a chronological record of the Lord s public
   ministry. Very indefinite expressions of time are found throughout the
   Gospel, as: "and it came to pass, when he was in a certain city," 5:12;
   "and it came to pass on a certain day," 5:17; "and it came to pass also
   on another sabbath," 6: 6, etc.

   5. Luke writes a purer Greek than any of the other evangelists, but
   this is evident only, where he does not closely follow his sources. The
   Greek of the preface is of remarkable purity, but aside from this the
   first and second chapters are full of Hebraisms. Of the rest of the
   Gospel some parts approach very closely to classical Greek, while
   others are tinged with Hebrew expressions. Plummer says: "The author of
   the Third Gospel and of the Acts is the most versatile of all the New
   Testament writers. He can be as Hebraistic as the LXX, and as free from
   Hebraisms as Plutarch." Comm. on Luke in International Crit. Comm. p.
   XLIX. His style is also very picturesque; he tries to make us see
   things, just as the eyewitnesses saw them. Moreover his Gospel contains
   312 words that are peculiar to him. Several of these are hapax
   legomena. There are also five Latin words, viz. denarion,legeon,
   soudarion,assarion and modios. Cf. lists in Plummer's Comm. and
   Davidson's Introd.

  AUTHORSHIP

   Though the author speaks of himself explicitly in the preface of his
   Gospel, we are dependent on tradition for his name. And here again the
   testimony of the fathers is unanimous. Irenaeus asserts that "Luke, the
   companion of Paul, put down in a book the Gospel preached by him." With
   this agrees the testimony of Origen; Eusebius, Athanasius, Gregory,
   Nazianze, Jerome, e. a.

   The Gospel itself offers us no direct collateral testimony. Yet there
   are certain features that strengthen our belief in the authorship of
   Luke. In the first place the writer evidently looks at things with the
   eye of a physician. In 1882 Dr. Hobart published a work on, The Medical
   Language of St. Luke, showing that in many instances the evangelist
   uses the technical language that was also used by Greek medical
   writers, as paralelumenos, 5:18, 24 (the other Gospels have
   paralutikos);sunechomene pureto megallo 4 :38; este he rhu'sis tou
   haimatos 8 :44 (cf. Mt. 5 :29) ; anekathisen, 7 :14, Luke carefully
   distinguishes demoniacal possession from disease, 4:18; 13: 32; states
   exactly the age of the dying person, 8:42; and the duration of the
   affliction in 13:11. He only relates the miracle of the healing of
   Malchus ear. All these things point to Luke, "the beloved physician.

   In the second place there is what has been called the Paulinism of
   Luke. This has sometimes been emphasized unduly, no doubt, but it
   certainly is a characteristic feature of the third Gospel, and is just
   what we would expect in a writing of Paul's companion. In the third
   place we find great similarity between this Gospel and the Acts of the
   Apostles. If Luke wrote the latter, he also composed the former. The
   general opinion is expressed by Knowling in his introduction to the
   book of Acts, in the Expositor's Greek Testament II p. 3: "Whoever
   wrote the Acts wrote also the Gospel which bears the name of Luke." It
   is true that there are more Hebraisms in the Gospel than in Acts, but
   this is due to the fact that the writer in composing the former was
   more dependent on written sources than he was in writing the latter.

   The only certain knowledge we have of Luke is derived from the Acts of
   the Apostles and from a few passages in the Epistles of Paul. From Col.
   4:11,14 it appears that he was not a Jew and that his wordly calling
   was that of a physician. Eusebius and Jerome state that he was
   originally from Antioch in Syria, which may be true; but it is also
   possible that their statement is due to a mistaken derivation of the
   name Luke from Lucius (cf. Acts 13: 1) instead of from Lucanus. The
   testimony of Origen makes us suspect this. Theophylact and Euthymius
   had the mistaken opinion that he was one of the Seventy sent out by our
   Lord. This is refuted by the preface of the Gospel, where Luke clearly
   distinguishes himself from those that saw and heard the Lord.
   Apparently the evangelist joined the company of Paul and his
   co-laborers on the second missionary journey at Troas. This may be
   inferred from the beginning of the we-sections in Acts 16:10. The first
   one of these sections ends at 16:17, so that Luke probably remained at
   Philippi. He stayed there, so it seems, until Paul returned from Greece
   on his third missionary journey, for in Acts 20: 5 we suddenly come
   upon the plural pronoun of the first person again. Then he evidently
   accompanied the apostle to Jerusalem, 20: 6, 13, 14, 15; 21:1-17. In
   all probability he was with Paul at Qesarea, 27: 1, from where he
   accompanied the apostle to Rome, 27:1 28:16. He remained at Rome during
   the first imprisonment, Col. 4:14; Philem. 24, and was according to
   these passages a beloved friend and fellow-laborer of the apostle. And
   when the great missionary of the gentiles was imprisoned for the second
   time, Luke was the only one with him, II Tim. 4:11, and thus gave
   evidence of his great attachment to Paul. The last part of Luke's life
   is involved in obscurity. Nothing certain can be gathered from the
   conflicting testimony of the fathers. Some claim that he gained a
   martyr's crown; others, that he died a natural death.

   The question must be asked, whether Paul was in any way connected with
   the composition of the third Gospel. The testimony of the early Church
   is very uncertain on this point. Tertullian says: "Luke's digest is
   often ascribed to Paul. And indeed it is easy to take that for the
   master's which is published by the disciples." According to Eusebius,
   "Luke hath delivered in his Gospel a certain amount of such things as
   he had been assured of by his intimate acquaintance and familiarity
   with Paul, and his connection with the other apostles." With this the
   testimony of Jerome agrees. Athanasius states that the Gospel of Luke
   was dictated by the apostle Paul. In view of the preface of the gospel
   we may be sure that the Church fathers exaggerate the influence of Paul
   in the composition of this Gospel, possibly to give it apostolic
   authority. Paul s relation to the third Gospel differs from that of
   Peter to the second; it is not so close. Luke did not simply write what
   he remembered of the preaching of Paul, much less did he write
   according to the dictation of the apostle, for he himself says that he
   traced everything from the beginning and speaks of both oral and
   written sources that were at his command. Among these oral sources we
   must, of course, also reckon the preaching of Paul. That the great
   apostle did influence Luke s representation of "the beginning of the
   Gospel," is very evident. There are 175 words and expressions in the
   gospel that are peculiar to Luke and Paul. Cf. Plummer p. LIV. Besides,
   as we have already seen, some of the leading ideas of Paul are found in
   the third gospel, such as the universality of the Gospel, the necessity
   of faith, and the use of the word diakaioo in a forensic sense, 7:29;
   10:29; 16:15; 18:14. A striking resemblance exists also between Luke s
   account of the institution of the Lord s supper, 22:19-20. and Paul s
   memoir of this in I Cor. 11: 23-25, but this may be due to the use of a
   common source.

   The Lukan authorship of the Gospel was generally accepted up to the
   time, when Rationalism began its attacks on the books of the Bible. The
   Tubingen school, notably F. C. Baur, maintained that the Gospel of
   Marcion, who began to teach at Rome in 140 A. D., was the original of
   our Gospel. Others followed where Baur led. In later years, however,
   critical opinion wheeled about completely and the opinion is generally
   held that Marcion's Gospel is a mutilation of Luke's, though in some
   parts it may represent another and even an older text. This, of course,
   made it possible again to maintain the authorship of Luke. But even now
   there are several German scholars who doubt that Luke wrote the Gospel,
   and Harnack's protest against their contention seems ineffective. Their
   objections to the Lukan authorship are based on the Acts of the
   Apostles rather than on the Gospel, but, as has been intimated, the two
   stand or fall together. We shall consider these objections, when we
   treat of Acts.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Readers and Purpose. The Gospel of Luke was first of all intended
   for Theophilus, who is addressed as "most excellent Theophilus" in 1:
   3, and is also mentioned in Acts 1:1. We have no means of determining
   who this Theophilus was. It has been supposed by some that the name was
   a general one, applied to every Christian, as a beloved one or a friend
   of God. But the general opinion now is, and rightly so, that it is the
   name of an individual, probably a Greek. The fact that he is addressed
   by Luke in the same manner as Felix, 23: 26, 24: 3, and Festus, 26: 25
   are addressed, led to the conclusion that he was a person of high
   station. Baljon thinks he was undoubtedly a Gentile Christian, while
   Zahn regards him as a Gentile who had not yet accepted Christ, since
   Luke would have addressed a brother differently. It is generally
   agreed, however, that the Gospel was not intended for Theophilus only,
   but was simply addressed to him as the representative of a large circle
   of readers. Who were these first readers of the gospel? Origen says
   that the third gospel was composed "for the sake of the Gentile
   converts ;" Gregory Nazianze, more definitely: "Luke wrote for the
   Greeks." Now it is quite evident from the gospel itself that the
   evangelist is not writing for the Jews. He never gives the words of
   Jesus in the Aramaeic language; instead of amen lego he has alethos
   lego, 9:27; 12 :44; 21:3; for grammateis he uses nomikoi, didaskalos,
   2:46; 7:30; 10:25; 11:45; and of many places in Palestine he gives a
   nearer definition. It is very probable that that Gospel of Luke was
   intended for the Greeks, because Paul labored primarily among them,
   Theophilus was in all probability a Greek, the preface of the gospel is
   in many respects like those found in Greek historians, and the whole
   Gospel is remarkably adjusted to the needs of the Greeks. Cf. for this
   last point especially Gregory, Why Four Gospels p. 207 if.

   The purpose of Luke is clearly stated in the preface, viz. 98 that
   Theophilus and the Gentile readers in general might know the certainty
   of those things, wherein they had been instructed, 1: 4. It is his
   desire to present clearly the truth of all Gospel facts. In order to do
   this, he aims at fulness of treatment; traces all things from the
   beginning; writes an orderly account of all that has happened,
   recording the sayings of the Lord in their original setting more than
   the other evangelists do, thus promoting definiteness and strengthening
   his representation of the reality of things; mentions the names not
   only of the principal actors in the Gospel history, but also those of
   others that were in any way connected with it, 2:1, 2; 3:1, 2; 7:40;
   8:3; brings the Gospel facts in relation with secular history, 2:1, 2;
   3:1, 2; and describes carefully the impression which the teachings of
   Christ made, 4:15, 22, 36; 5:8, 25; 6:11; 7:29; 8:37; 18:43; 19:37.
   From the contents of the Gospel we may further gather that it was the
   author s nearer purpose to present Christ in a very acceptable way to
   the Greeks, viz, as the perfect man (cf. p. 91 above), as the
   sympathetic friend of the afflicted and the poor, 1: 52; 2:7; 4:18;
   6:20; 12:15 ff. 16:19, etc., and as the Saviour of the world, seeking
   those that are lost, 7: 36-50; 15:1-32; 18:9-14; 19: 1-10;23:43.

   2. Time and Place. Tradition tells us very little regarding the time,
   when Luke wrote his Gospel. According to Eusebius Clement of Alexandria
   received a tradition from presbyters of more ancient times "that the
   Gospels containing the genealogies were written first." Theophylact
   says: "Luke wrote fifteen years after Christ's ascension. The testimony
   of Euthymius is to the same effect, while Eutichius states that Luke
   wrote his Gospel in the time of Nero. According to these testimonies
   the evangelist composed his Gospel possibly as early as 54, and
   certainly not later than 68 A. D.

   Internal evidence is even more uncertain. Some infer from 21: 24 that
   Luke realized that a certain time was to elapse between the destruction
   of Jerusalem and the final judgment, and therefore wrote after the
   destruction of the Holy City, a very inconclusive argument indeed,
   since this is a prophetic word of Christ. We might argue in favor of a
   date after the destruction of Jerusalem from the absence of the warning
   note that is found in both Matthew and Mark, but being an argument from
   silence even that does not prove the point. Several scholars,
   especially of the Tubingen school, date the Gospel near the end of the
   first or in the beginning of the second century. The main argument for
   this date is the supposed fact that Luke is in some parts of his Gospel
   dependent on the Antiquities of Josephus, a rather chimerical idea.
   Both Zahn and Weiss are of the opinion that Luke wrote after the
   destruction of Jerusalem, but not later than the year 80 A. D. Zahn
   settled on this terminus ad quem, because he considers it likely that
   Luke was a member of the Antiochian congregation as early as the year
   40 A. D., and would therefore be very old in the year 80 A. D.; Weiss,
   since the evangelist evidently expected the second coming of Christ in
   his time, which was characteristic of the first generation after
   Christ. The great majority of conservative scholars place the
   composition of this Gospel somewhere between 58 and 63 A. D. The main
   arguments for this date are: (1) it is in harmony with ancient
   tradition; (2) it best explains the total silence of Luke regarding the
   destruction of Jerusalem; and (3) it is most in harmony with the dating
   of Acts in 63 A. D., which offers a good explanation of Luke s silence
   with respect to the death of Paul.

   As to the place, where the Gospel of Luke was written tradition points
   to Achaia and Boeotia. We have no means of controlling this testimony,
   however, so that it really leaves us in ignorance. Some of the modern
   guesses are, Rome, Caesarea, Asia Minor, Ephesus, and Corinth.

   3. Method. In view of the preface of Luke's Gospel we have reason to
   believe that in the composition of it the evangelist depended on both
   oral tradition and written sources. In present day theories the
   emphasis is mainly placed on written sources, and the most prevalent
   hypothesis is that he employed the Gospel of Mark, either in the
   present form or in an earlier recension; the apostolic source Q or some
   diegesis containing this (from which two sources he derived mainly the
   matter that he has in common with Matthew and Mark); and a third main
   source of unknown character and authorship, from which he drew the
   narrative of the nativity, chs. 1, 2, and the account of the last
   journey to Jerusalem, contained in 9: 51 18:14. Zahn also believes that
   Luke employed Mark as one of his sources, but does not attempt to give
   a nearer definition of the other sources used. The opinion that he drew
   part of his material from Josephus deserves but a passing notice. It
   seems to us that it is impossible to determine exactly what sources
   Luke used; all we can say is: (1) Having been an associate of Paul for
   several years, part of which he spent in Palestine, where he had
   abundant opportunity to meet other apostles and eyewitnesses of the
   Lord's works, he must have gathered a large store of knowledge from
   oral tradition, which he utilized in the composition of his gospel.
   This accounts for a great deal of the matter which he has in common
   with Matthew and Mark. (2) During the time of his research in Palestine
   he also became acquainted with a goodly number of diegeseis narratives
   of the Gospel facts, of which we can no more determine the exact
   nature, and drew on them for a part of his material. One of these
   probably contained the matter found in chs. 1 and 2, and in 9: 51
   18:14. (3) It does not seem likely that Luke read either the Gospel of
   Matthew or that of Mark, and classed them or either one of them with
   the previous attempts, on which he desired to improve. Oral tradition
   in connection with the guidance of the Holy Spirit is quite sufficient
   to explain the resemblance between these Gospels and that of Luke.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The canonicity of this Gospel is well attested. Says Alexander in his
   work on the Canon p. 177: "The same arguments by which the canonical
   authority of the Gospels of Matthew and Mark was established, apply
   with their full force to the Gospel of Luke. It was universally
   received as canonical by the whole primitive Church has a place in
   every catalogue of the books of the New Testament, which was ever
   published is constantly referred to and cited by the Fathers as a part
   of sacred Scripture and was one of the books constantly read in the
   churches, as a part of the rule of faith and practice for all
   believers." There are in all 16 witnesses before the end of the second
   century that testify to its use and general acceptance in the Church.

   The gospel of Luke presents to us Christ especially as one of the human
   race, the Seed of the woman, in his saving work not only for Israel,
   but also for the Gentiles. Hence it pictures him as the friend of the
   poor and as seeking sinners, emphasizes the universality of the Gospel
   blessings, and distinctly bespeaks a friendly relation to the
   Samaritans. Its permanent spiritual value is that it reminds the Church
   of all ages that in every nation he that feareth God, and worketh
   righteousness, is accepted with him; and that we have a great High
   Priest that was touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and was in
   all parts tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Gospel of John

  CONTENTS

   The contents of the Gospel of John is also divided into five parts:

   I. The Advent and Incarnation of the Word, 1: 1-13. John takes his
   point of departure in the pre-existence and divine origin of Christ,
   and points out that He was heralded by John the Baptist, was the light
   of the world and gave believers the power to become the children of
   God.

   II. The Incarnate Word the only Life of the World, 1: 14--6: 71. The
   evangelist records the testimony to the grace and truth of the
   incarnate Word given by John the Baptist and by Christ himself in word
   and deed, 1: 14--2 :11; and the self-revelation of Christ in the
   cleansing of the temple, 2:12-32; in the conversation with Nicodemus,
   3:1-21; followed by the public testimony of John 3: 22-36; in the
   conversation with the Samaritan woman, 4:1-42; and in the healing of
   the nobleman's son, 4: 43-54. More particularly he shows, how Christ
   reveals himself as the author and sustainer of life in the healing of
   the impotent man and its vindication, 5:1-47; and in the miracle of the
   loaves with the following discourse, leading to desertion on the one
   and to confession on the other hand, 6:1-71.

   III. The Incarnate Word, the Life and Light, in Conflict with Spiritual
   Darkness, 7:1--11: 54. On the feast of tabernacles Christ reminds the
   Jews of the fact that He is the life of the world, and presents himself
   to them as the water of life, wherefore officers were sent to take him,
   7:1-52. The following day He brings out the spiritual darkness of the
   Jews in connection with the adulterous woman, and declares that He is
   the light of the world, the only light that can truly enlighten them;
   and that He only could liberate them from their spiritual bondage;
   which leads to an attempt to stone him, 8:1-59. On a subsequent
   occasion He proves himself to be the light of the world by healing the
   blind man and speaks of himself as the good Shepherd that lays down his
   life for his sheep; thereby provoking unbelief and rage, 9:1--10: 21.
   At the feast of the dedication He declares that He and the Father are
   one, which again leads to an attempt to stone him, 10: 22-42. In
   raising Lazarus Jesus presents himself as the resurrection and the
   life, thus leading some of the people to believe in him, but his
   enemies to the settled purpose to kill him, 11:1-54.

   IV. The Incarnate Word saving the Life of the World through his
   Sacrificial Death, 11: 55--19: 42. The enemies plan to kill Jesus, but
   Mary of Bethany anoints him and the people meet him with glad hosannas;
   the Greeks seek him at Jerusalem, but the multitude turns from him in
   unbelief, 11: 55--12: 50. He sits at the Paschal supper with his
   disciples, gives them a lesson in humble service, exposes the traitor
   and announces that the time has now come to leave his disciples,
   13:1-38. He discourses on the significance of his departure and on the
   new life in communion with the Father, 14:1--16: 33; and offers the
   intercessory prayer committing his followers to the Father, 17:1-26. In
   Gethsemane He is taken captive, and after a preliminary hearing before
   the high priest is brought before Pilate who, though finding no guilt
   in Jesus, yet delivers him into the hands of the Jews to be crucified,
   18:1-16. After his crucifixion He is buried by Joseph and Nicodemus,
   19:17-42.

   V. The Incarnate Word, risen from the Dead, the Saviour and Lord of all
   Believers, 20:1--21: 25. Having risen from the dead, Jesus appears to
   Mary Magdalena and on two successive Lords days to his disciples,
   20:1-31. Later He is seen by some of his disciples at the sea of
   Tiberias, where He restores Peter and points significantly to the
   career of John, the writer of the Gospel, 31:1-25.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   Of the characteristics that mark the fourth Gospel the following
   especially are to be noted:

   1. The gospel of John emphasizes more than any of the others the
   Divinity of Christ. It has no historical starting-point, like the
   Synoptics, but recedes back into the depths of eternity, and starts out
   with the statement sublime in its simplicity: "In the beginning was the
   Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." Positively, the
   Logos-doctrine is peculiar to this Gospel; negatively, every indication
   of Christs human development and of his gradually awakening
   self-consciousness is strikingly absent from it. We find no genealogy
   here, no description of Christ's birth with it's attendant
   circumstances, and no narrative of his baptism and temptation. John the
   Baptist testifies to his Divinity, as soon as He enters on the scene,
   and He himself publicly claims this prerogative almost from the
   beginning of his public ministry, cf. 3:13; 5:17 if; 6: 32, 40 if.,
   etc. The miracles of the Lord, narrated in this Gospel, are of such a
   character that they give great prominence to his divine power. The
   noblemans son was cured from a distance, 4:46 ff.; the man at Bethesda
   had been infirm thirty-eight years, 5: 5; the blind man at Jerusalem
   had been born blind, 9:1; and Lazarus had already lain in the grave
   four days, 11:17.

   2. The teaching of Christ greatly predominates in Johns Gospel, but
   this is quite different from that contained in the Synoptics. We find
   no parables here but elaborate discourses, which also contain a couple
   of allegories. The all absorbing topic is not the Kingdom of God but
   the Person of the Messiah. The simple rudimentary teaching regarding
   the Kingdom is here replaced by a more penetrating (though not
   developed) instruction in the deeper realities of faith. In connection
   with his miracles or other historical facts Christ presents himself as
   the source of life, 4: 46--S : 47; the spiritual nourishment of the
   soul, 6: 22-65; the water of life, 4: 7-16; 7: 37, 38; the true
   liberator, 8: 31-58; the light of the world, 9: 5, 35-41; and the
   living principle of the resurrection, 11: 25, 26. The farewell
   discourses of the Saviour, besides containing many profound truths
   respecting his personal relation to believers, are also significant on
   account of their clear references to the coming Paraclete.

   3. The scene of action in this Gospel is quite different from that in
   the Synoptics. In the latter the work of Christ in Galilee is narrated
   at length, while He is seen at Jerusalem only during the last week of
   His life. In the Gospel of John, on the other hand, the long ministry
   of Christ in Galilee is presupposed rather than narrated, while his
   work and teaching in Judea and particularly at Jerusalem is made very
   prominent. The great feasts afforded the occasion for this work and are
   therefore distinctly mentioned. John speaks of three, possibly four,
   Passovers, 2:13; 5:1; 6:4; 13: 1; of the feast of Tabernacles, 7: 2;
   and of the feast of the Dedication, 10: 22.

   4. The Gospel of John is far more definite than the Synoptics in
   pointing out the time and place of the occurrences that are narrated;
   it is in a certain sense more chronological than the other Gospels. We
   are generally informed as to the place of Christ's operation. Definite
   mention is made of Bethany, 1:28; Cana, 2: 1; Capernaum, 2:12;
   Jerusalem, 2:13; Sychar, 4: 5; Bethesda, 5 : 2, etc. The designations
   of time are equally distinct, sometimes the hour of the day being
   given. The chronological framework of the gospel is found in its
   reference to the great feasts. John the Baptist sees Christ coming to
   him the day after he had met the delegation from Jerusalem, 1: 29; and
   again on the following day, 1: 35. A day later Christ called Philip and
   Nathanael, 1: 43-51; on the third day there was a marriage in Cana, 2:
   1; it was at the sixth hour that Christ sat down at the well, 4: 6; at
   the seventh, that the nobleman's son was cured, 4: 52; in the midst of
   the feast that Jesus went into the temple, 7:14; and again on the last
   great day, 7: 37; and about the sixth hour that Christ was delivered
   unto the Jews by Pilate, 19:14.

   5. The style of the fourth Gospel is not like that of the other three.
   It is peculiar in that "it contains, on the one hand, except in the
   prologue and chara chaireiin 3:29, hardly any downright Hebraisms,"
   Simcox, The Writers of the New Testament p. 73, while, on the other
   hand, it approaches the style of Old Testament writers more than the
   style of any other New Testament writing does. John evidently commanded
   a fairly good Greek vocabulary, but does not attempt any elaborate
   sentences. Rather than do this, he will repeat part of a previous
   statement and then add a new element to it. His sentences are generally
   connected in the most simple way by kai, de or oun, and his
   descriptions are often elaborate and repetitious. He exhibits a special
   fondness for contrasts and for the use of the parallelismus membrorum.
   A very characteristic expression of his is zoe aio'nos, which occurs 17
   times in the Gospel. For other phrases and expressions see Simcox. He
   also employs several Aramaean words, as rhabbi, kephas, messias,
   Gabbatha, Golgotha, amen anen.

  AUTHORSHIP

   The voice of antiquity is all but unanimous in ascribing the fourth
   Gospel to John. The Monarchian sect, called by Epiphanius, "the Alogi,"
   forms the only exception. Little is known of this sect, except that it
   rejected the doctrine of the Logos. Salmon says: "In fact I now believe
   that "the Alogi" consisted of Caius and, as far as I can learn, of
   nobody else." Introd. p. 229. The internal evidence for the authorship
   of the Gospel is now generally arranged under the following heads:

   1. The author was a Jew. He evidently had an intimate acquaintance with
   the Old Testament, had, as it were, imbibed the spirit of the
   prophetical writings. He knew them not only in the translation of the
   LXX, but in their original language, as is evident from several Old
   Testament quotations. Moreover the style of the author clearly reveals
   his Jewish nationality. He wrote Greeks it is true, but his
   construction, his circumstantiality and his use of parallelism, are all
   Hebraic. "There is a Hebrew soul living in the language of the
   evangelist." Luthardt, St. John the Author of the Fourth Gospel, p.
   166. Ewald comes to the conclusion, "that the Greek language of the
   author bears in itself still the clearest and strongest mark of a
   genuine Hebrew, who born among the Jews in the Holy Land, and grown up
   in this society without speaking Greek, carries in himself the whole
   spirit and breath of his mother-tongue even in the midst of the Greek
   raiment that he afterwards learnt to cast about him, and has no
   hesitation to let himself be led by that spirit." Quoted by Luthardt,
   p. 167.

   2. The author was a Palestinian Jew. He clearly shows that he is well
   at home in the Jewish world. He is intimately acquainted with Jewish
   customs and religious observances and with the requirements of the law,
   and moves about with ease in the Jewish world of thought. He knows
   that, according to the strict Jewish conception, it was unlawful to
   heal on the sabbath, 5: 1 ff.; 9:14 ff.; and also that circumcision was
   allowed, 7: 22 ff. He is aware of the Jewish expectation of Elijah, 1:
   21; and of the ill-feeling between the Jews and the Samaritans, 4: 9.
   He understood that the Jews regarded a misfortune as the result of some
   particular sin, 9: 2; and that they considered one unclean who had
   entered the house of a Gentile, 18: 28. He is thoroughly acquainted
   with Jerusalem, 5 : 2; with the valley of Sichem and mount Gerezim, 4:
   5 ff.; with the temple, 8: 20; and with Capernaum and other places
   around the sea of Galilee, 7.

   3. The writer was an eyewitness of the events he relates. He claims
   this explicitly, if not already in 1: 14, "we beheld his glory" (Cf. I
   John 1:1-3), certainly in 19:35. "And he that saw it bare record, and
   his record is true; and he knoweth that he saith true that ye might
   believe." This claim is corroborated by the lively and yet simple
   manner in which he pictures the events; by the many definite
   chronological data and naming of localities, to which we have already
   referred; and by the great prominence given to certain individuals with
   whom Jesus came in contact.

   4. The author was the apostle John. He often makes mention in his
   Gospel of a disciple whom he never names, but to whom he constantly
   refers as "the (an) other disciple," or as "the disciple whom Jesus
   loved." Cf. 13: 23; 18:15; 19:26; 20:2, 3, 4, 8; 21:7. At the close of
   his Gospel he says of him: "This is the disciple which testifieth these
   things; and we know that his testimony is true," 21: 24. Who was this
   disciple? The evangelist names only seven of the disciples of the Lord,
   the five that are not named being John and his brother James, Matthew,
   Simon the Canaanite and James the son of Alpheus. Now it is evident
   from 1: 35-41 that said disciple was one of the first ones called by
   the Lord, and these according to Mark 1: 16-19 were Peter, Andrew, John
   and James. The first two are explicitly named in John 1: 41-43, so that
   the one whose name is suppressed must have been either John or James.
   But we cannot think of James as the author of this Gospel, since he
   died a martyrs death as early as A. D. 44. Therefore John must have
   been the writer.

   According to Mt. 27: 56 and Mk. 1:20; 15: 40, John was the son of
   Zebedee and Salome who probably belonged to the middle class of
   society. His mother was among the faithful followers of the Saviour,
   Mt. 27: 56; Mk. 16:1. He was one of the very first followers of Jesus
   and soon appears as one of the innermost circle of the disciples, one
   of the three that always accompany the Saviour. With the Lord he enters
   the dwelling of Jairus, ascends the mount of transfiguration and
   penetrates into the dark recesses of Gethsemane. As he stands by the
   cross, the mother of Jesus is entrusted to his care. On the morning of
   the resurrection he is one of the first to visit the grave of the
   Saviour. In the first part of the Acts of the Apostles he appears as
   one of the faithful witnesses of the resurrection of the Lord. After
   that we lose sight of John in Scripture, but tradition tells us that he
   spent the last part of his life in Asia Minor, especially at Ephesus,
   where he died in venerable age.

   There is an apparent contradiction between the synoptical data
   regarding the character of John and the conception of it derived from
   his own writings, but this is easily explained. The very first
   indication of his character we glean from the statement in Mk. 3:17,
   that the Lord named him and his brother James "Boanerges, which is, the
   sons of thunder." This conveys the idea of an ardent temper, of great
   strength and vehemence of character. And on two occasions we find that
   they reveal just such traits, viz. when they peremptorily forbade one
   who was casting out devils in the name of Jesus to continue this, Mk.
   9: 38; Lk. 9:49; and when they desired permission to command fire to
   come down from heaven to devour the Samaritans, Lk. 9: 54. In both
   cases the Lord reproves their show of temper. Another trait of their
   character is revealed in their request to sit in the places of honor in
   the future Kingdom of Jesus, Mt. 20: 20-24; Mk. 10: 35-41. Their
   ambition was such as to offend the other disciples and to call forth a
   severe rebuke from the Lord. John was, no doubt, zealous for the Lord,
   but his zeal was mistaken; he had a passionate desire to be near his
   Master, but he showed this in a manner that was not free from
   selfishness and pride. The Lord directed his zeal and ambition into
   other channels by pointing out their unspiritual character and by
   teaching him that one can be great in the Kingdom of God only by being
   the servant of ones brethren. This undoubtedly made a profound
   impression on the sensitive John and begot within him the habit of
   introspection, of self-examination. He became more quiet, more reserved
   with an inclination to ponder on the mysteries that he encountered in
   his daily association with the Lord, and penetrated farther than the
   other disciples into the hidden depths of the mysterious life of
   Christ. As a result John, as he reveals himself in his writings, is
   quite different from the John of the Synoptics. From his Gospel and
   Epistles we learn to know him as a man of deep religious feeling,
   beloved of Christ; a man that lived in close communion with his Lord, a
   communion more spiritual, however, than he desired in his youthful
   years. His exclusivism has made place for a love that would embrace
   all; his zeal is still operative, but it has been sanctified and led
   into proper channels; his strength has become a tower of defense for
   spiritual truth.

   Not until the last part of the eighteenth century was the authorship of
   John attacked on critical grounds, and even then the attacks were of
   small significance. Bretschneider in 1820 was the first to assail it in
   a systematic way. But he was soon followed by others, such as Baur,
   Strauss, Schwegler, Zeller, Scholten, Davidson, Wrede e. a. It has been
   their persistent endeavor to show that the Gospel of John is a product
   of the second century. Some would ascribe it to that shadowy person,
   the presbyter John, whose existence Eusebius infers from a rather
   ambiguous passage of Papias, but who, in all probability, is to be
   identified with John the apostle. Others positively reject this theory.
   Wrede, after arguing that the authorship of John cannot be established,
   says: "Far less can the recent hypothesis be regarded as proven which
   purports to find the author of the Gospel in John the presbyter." The
   Origin of the New Testament p. 89.

   The most important considerations that led many rationalistic critics
   to the conclusion that the fourth Gospel was written in the second
   century, are the following: (1) The theology of the Gospel, especially
   its representation of Christ, is developed to such a degree that it
   points beyond the first and reflects the consciousness of the Church of
   the second century. (2) The Gospel was evidently written under the
   influence of the philosophic and religious tendencies that were
   prevalent in the second century, such as Montanism, Docetism and
   Gnosticism. (3) The great difference between the fourth Gospel and the
   Synoptics appears to be the result of second century cavilling
   respecting the nature of Christ, and of the Paschal controversy.

   But the idea that the Gospel of John is a second century product goes
   counter to both the internal evidence to which we already referred, and
   to the external testimony, which is exceptionally strong and which can
   be traced back to the very beginning of the second century. Some of the
   Epistles of Ignatius show the influence of John's Christology, and the
   writings of both Papias and Polycarp contain allusions to the first
   Epistle of John, which was evidently written at the same time as the
   Gospel. The latter was in existence, therefore, in the beginning of the
   second century. The theology of the Gospel of John is no more developed
   than that of Paul's Epistles to the Ephesians and the Colossians, that
   were written between A. D. 61 and 63. Critics generally ceased to place
   any reliance on the so-called Montanistic features of the Gospel, and
   although they still maintain that some passages contain traces of a
   Docetic Gnosticism, these are purely imaginary and readily vanish, when
   the light of exegesis is turned on. The connection of the Gospel with
   the Paschal controversy is now admitted to be very dubious. And the
   difference between it and the Synoptics can be satisfactorily explained
   without regarding it as a work of the second century. Cf. above p. 19
   ff.

   Critics of the Tubingen school, who accepted the Johannine authorship
   of the Apocalypse, were wont to deny that John had written the Gospel,
   because it differed in so many respects from the former work. At
   present this argument is not insisted on, because scholars are not so
   sure as they once were, that John wrote the book of Revelation. Reuss,
   who still argues in that fashion, says: "It must be admitted that even
   in the most recent times the decision of the question as to the
   apostolic genuineness of the Apocalypse has by both sides been made to
   depend upon a previously formed judgment as to the fourth Gospel."
   History of the N. T., I p. 161.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Readers and Purpose. The Gospel of John was in all probability
   written primarily for the Christians of Asia Minor, among whom
   especially the heresy of Cerinthus had arisen. Early tradition has it
   that John wrote it at the request of the bishops of Asia to combat that
   heresy. Internal evidence certainly favors the hypothesis that it was
   composed for Greek readers. The author carefully interprets Hebrew and
   Aramaeic words, as in 1: 38, 41, 42; 9:7; 11:16; 19:13, 17; 20:16. He
   makes it a point to explain Jewish customs and geographical
   designations, 1:28; 2:1; 4:4,5; 11:54, . . . 7:37; 19:31,40,42.
   Moreover, notwithstanding his characteristically Hebrew style, he
   usually quotes from the Septuagint.

   It was not John's purpose to furnish a supplement to the Synoptics,
   though his Gospel certainly contains a good deal of supplemental
   matter; neither did he mean to produce a direct polemic against the
   Cerinthian heresy, even if this did to a certain degree determine his
   special way of stating the truth. He did not aim at conciliating the
   discordant parties of the second century by leading them up to a higher
   unity, as the Tubingen school asserted; nor at refuting "Jewish
   objections and invectives," and at providing "his fellow-Christians
   with weapons ready to hand ;" a hypothesis of which Wrede asserts:
   "This view is on the whole a recent one, but it is making victorious
   progress among scholars." The Origin of the New Testament, p. 84.

   The apostle himself gives expression to his purpose, when he says:
   "These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the
   Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, ye might have life in his
   name," 20: 31. His aim is twofold, therefore, theoretical and
   practical. He desires to prove that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
   God, and to lead believers to a life of blessed communion with him. The
   means he employs to that end are: (1) The miracles of the Lord, on
   which special emphasis is placed, cf. 20:30; 31:25; and which are
   contemplated as semeia, as signs of the divine glory of Christ. (2) The
   long discourses of the Saviour, which serve to interpret his signs and
   to describe the unique relation in which He stands to the Father. And
   (3) the narratives touching Jesus dealing with individuals, such as
   Nathaniel, Nicodemus, the Samaritan woman, Philip, Mary Magdalena and
   Thomas, showing, how He led them to faith, a faith culminating in the
   confession of Thomas: "My Lord and my God."

   2. Time and Place. Since John was undoubtedly the writer of the fourth
   Gospel, we have a terminus ad quem in A. D. 98, for Irenaeus says that
   John lived to the time of Trajan, who began his reign in that year. The
   testimony of Jerome is to the same effect: "The apostle John lived in
   Asia to the time of Trajan, and dying at a great age in the
   sixty-eighth year of our Lords passion, was buried near the city of
   Ephesus." The same writer places the death of John in A. D. 100. In all
   probability, however, John wrote his Gospel several years before his
   death, since its style is, as Alford remarks, "that of a matured, but
   not of an aged writer." Prolegomena to the Gospels Ch. V., Sec. VI, 10.
   It is not an easy matter to find a terminus a quo. We may be sure that
   the apostle did not compose the Gospel until after the death of Paul in
   A. D. 68. The congregations of Asia Minor were the special charge of
   the great apostle of the Gentiles, and he never makes any mention in
   his Epistles of Johns being in their midst, nor does he send him a
   single salutation; and when he parted from the Ephesian elders, he
   evidently did not anticipate the coming of an apostle among them.
   Moreover we infer from 21:19 that John knew of the manner in which
   Peter died, and presupposes this knowledge in his readers. Therefore it
   is unlikely that the Gospel was written before A. D. 70. Bengel in his
   Gnomon infers from the use of the present tense in 5: 2 that Jerusalem
   was still intact. But this argument is not conclusive, since the city
   was not completely demolished by the Romans, and because we can with
   equal propriety conclude from 11:18 that both Jerusalem and Bethany had
   been swept off the face of the earth. John's utter silence regarding
   the destruction of the city favors the idea that he wrote the Gospel
   several years after that calamity. Zahn would date the Gospel after A.
   D. 80, his terminus ad quem for the composition of Luke's Gospel, since
   tradition teaches that John wrote later than the Synoptics. Among
   rationalistic critics the most divergent dates are suggested. Baur held
   that the Gospel was composed between A. D. 160 and 170. At present the
   tendency is to revert to some date nearer the limits indicated above.
   Thus Pfleiderer dates it A. D. 140; Hilgenfeld believes that it
   originated between A. D. 130 and 140. Harnack and Julicher are not
   inclined to place it later than A. D. 110, and the former even admits
   that it may have been written as early as A. D. 80.

   Tradition points to Ephesus as the place of composition. Origen
   testifies "that John, having lived long in Asia, was buried at
   Ephesus." This is confirmed by Polycrates, a bishop of Ephesus. Jerome
   says: "John wrote a Gospel at the desire of the bishops of Asia." And
   Cosmas of Alexandria informs us definitely that John composed his
   Gospel, while dwelling at Ephesus. There is no reason to doubt this
   testimony.

   3. Method. John's Gospel is evidently of an autoptic character. He may
   have read the Synoptics before he composed his work, but he did not use
   them as sources from which he drew a part of his material. In several
   places the author indicates that he related what he had seen and heard,
   cf. 1:14; 13:23; 18:15; 19:26, 35;20:2. Compare what he says in his
   first Epistle 1:1-3. While the Synoptic Gospels were in all probability
   based to a great extent on oral tradition and written sources, neither
   of these played an appreciable part in the composition of the fourth
   Gospel. John, who had carefully stored in memory the profound
   discourses of the Lord regarding his own Person, discourses that made a
   deep and lasting impression on the beloved disciple, drew on that
   fountain of knowledge and, guided by the Holy Spirit in all the truth,
   supplied us with an exact record of the signs and words of the Saviour.

   It has often been remarked that there is a great difference between the
   style of Christ's discourses in the Synoptics and that of those
   contained in the fourth Gospel; and that in this gospel there is so
   much similarity between the narrative of the evangelist and the
   discourses of the Saviour that it seems as if John clothed these in his
   own language. But the Synoptics and John have so little such matter in
   common that we cannot safely build a conclusion on it, and in the
   discourses of Christ which they do have in common no great difference
   of style in observable. And as far as the second point is concerned, it
   may be, as Alford thinks probable, that the Lord influenced John so
   profoundly that the latter's style became very similar to that of the
   Master. But even if John did reproduce the discourses of the Saviour in
   his own style and language, we may rest assured that he gives us the
   exact teaching of the Lord.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The Gospel of John was accepted as canonical in all parts of the Church
   from the earliest time, the only exceptions being the Alogi and
   Marcion. It is true, the apostolic fathers do not quote it, but the
   writings of three of them show traces either of it or of the first
   Epistle. Among the Church fathers Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria,
   Tertullian, Origen, Justin Martyr, Jerome e. a. either freely quote it,
   or refer to it as an integral part of the Word of God. Moreover it is
   included in Tatian's Diatessaron, the Muratori canon, and the Syriac
   and old Latin Versions. In all at least nineteen witnesses testify to
   the use and recognition of the Gospel before the end of the second
   century. The great significance of this Gospel in Holy Writ is that it
   places prominently before us the Son of Man as the Son of God, as the
   eternal Word that became flesh. According to this Gospel Christ is the
   Son of God, who descended from the Father, stood in a unique relation
   to the Father, had come to do the Father's will on earth, and would
   return to the glory that He had eternally possessed with the Father,
   that He might send the Holy Spirit from the Father to abide with his
   Church throughout all ages. In that Spirit He himself returns to his
   followers to dwell in them forever. He is the highest revelation of
   God, and our relation to him, either of faith or of unbelief,
   determines our eternal destiny. Before this Christ the Church bows down
   in adoration with Thomas and calls out: "My Lord and my God."
     __________________________________________________________________

The Acts of the Apostles
     __________________________________________________________________

   The contents of this book is naturally divided into two parts; in each
   of which the main topic is the establishment of the Church from a
   certain center:

   I. The establishment of the Church from Jerusalem, 1:1--12: 25. In this
   part we first have the last discourse of Christ to his disciples, the
   ascension, the choice of an apostle in the place of Judas, the
   fulfilment of the promise in the outpouring of the Holy Spirit and the
   conversion of three thousand, 1: 1--2: 47. Then follows the healing of
   the lame man by Peter and John; their faithful witnessing for Christ in
   the temple, for which they were taken captive by the priests, the
   captain of the temple and the Sadducees; their release, since the
   enemies feared the people; and their thanksgiving for deliverance, 3:
   1--4: 31. Next the condition of the Church is described: they had all
   things in common, and severe punishment was meted out to Ananias and
   Sapphira for their deception, 4: 32--5:11. On account of their words
   and works the apostles were again imprisoned, but delivered by the
   angel of the Lord; they were brought before the council of the Jews and
   dismissed after a warning, 5:12--42. The murmuring of the Grecians
   leads to the appointment of seven deacons, one of which, viz. Stephen,
   wrought miracles among the people, and after witnessing for Christ
   before the council, became the first Christian martyr, 6: 1--7: 60.
   This is followed by a description of the persecution of the Church and
   the resulting scattering of believers, of the work of Philip in
   Samaria, of Sauls conversion, and of Peters healing of Eneas and
   raising of Tabitha, 8:1--9:43. Then we have Peters vision of the
   descending vessel, his consequent preaching to the household of
   Cornelius, and the defense of his course before the brethren in Judea,
   10:1--11:18. The narrative of the establishment of the Church at
   Antioch, of James martyrdom, and of the imprisonment and miraculous
   deliverance of Peter concludes this section, 11: 19--12: 25.

   II. The Establishment of the Church from Antioch. 13:1--28: 31. From
   Antioch Barnabas and Saul set out on the first missionary journey,
   including visits to Cyprus, Pisidian Antioch, Iconium, Lystra and
   Derbe, from where they returned to Antioch, 13:1--14: 28. Then an
   account is given of the council of Jerusalem and its decisions
   affecting the Gentiles, 15:1-34. After his contention with Barnabas,
   Paul starts out on the second missionary journey with Silas, passing
   through the Cilician gates to Derbe, Lystra, Iconium and Troas, whence
   he was directed by a vision to pass into Europe, where he visited
   Philippi, Thessalonica, Berea, Athens and Corinth, preaching the gospel
   and establishing churches. From Corinth he again returned to Jerusalem
   and Antioch, 15: 35--18: 22. Shortly after Paul began his third
   missionary journey, going through Asia Minor, staying at Ephesus for
   over two years, and passing into Corinth, from where he again returned
   to Jerusalem by way of Troas, Ephesus and Cesarea, 18: 23--21:16. At
   Jerusalem the Jews sought to kill him, his defense both on the steps of
   the castle and before the Sanhedrin merely inciting greater rage and
   leading to a positive determination to kill him, 21:17--23:14. A
   conspiracy leads to Paul's deportation to Cesarea, where he defends his
   course before Felix, Festus and Agrippa, and on account of the unfair
   treatment received at the hands of these governors, appeals to Caesar,
   23:15--26: 32. From Cesarea he is sent to Rome, suffers shipwreck on
   the way, performs miracles of healing on the island Melita, and on
   reaching his destination preaches the gospel to the Jews and remains a
   prisoner at Rome for two years, 27:1--28: 31.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. The great outstanding feature of this book is that it acquaints us
   with the establishment of Christian churches, and indicates their
   primary organization. According to it churches are founded at
   Jerusalem, 2: 41-47; Judea, Galilee and Samaria, 9: 31; Antioch, 11:
   26; Asia Minor, 14: 23; 16: 5; Philippi, 16: 40; Thessaalonica, 17:10;
   Berea, 17:14; Corinth, 18:18, and Ephesus, 20:17-38. From the sixth
   chapter we learn of the institution of the deacons office, and from 14:
   23 and 20:17-38 it is clear that elders, also called bishops, were
   already appointed.

   2. The narrative which it contains centers about two persons, viz.
   Peter and Paul, the first establishing the Jewish, the second the
   Gentile churches. Consequently it contains several discourses of these
   apostles, as Peters sermon on the day of Pentecost, 2:14-36; and in the
   temple, 3:12-26; his defenses before the Jewish council, 4: 8-12; 5 :
   29-32; his sermon in the house of Cornelius, 10: 34-43; and his defense
   before the brethren in Judea, 11: 4-18. And of Paul the book contains
   the sermons preached at Antioch, 13: 16-41; at Lystra, 14:15-18; and at
   Athens, 17: 22-3 1; his address to the Ephesian elders, 20: 18-35; and
   his defenses before the Jews on the stairs of the castle, 22:1-21;
   before the Sanhedrin 23:1-6; and before Felix and Agrippa, 24:10-21;
   26:2-29.

   3. The many miracles recorded in this writing constitute one of its
   characteristic features. Besides the miracles that are not described
   and of which there were many "signs and wonders" by the apostles, 2:
   43; 5:12, 15, 16; by Stephen, 6:8; by Philip, 8: 7; by Paul and
   Barnabas, 14: 3; and also by Paul alone, 19:11,12; 28:1-9 ;--the
   following miracles are specifically described: the gift of tongues,
   2:1-11; the lame man cured, 3:1-11; the shaking of the prayer hall,
   4:31; the death of Ananias and Sapphira, 5:1-11; the apostles delivered
   from prison, 5:19; the translation of Philip, 8: 39, 40; Eneas made
   whole, 9: 34; Dorcas restored to life, 9: 36-42; Pauls sight restored,
   9:17; the deliverance of Peter from prison, 12: 6-10; the death of
   Herod, 12: 20-23; Elymas, the sorcerer, struck blind, 13: 6-11; the
   lame man at Lystra cured, 14: 8-11; the damsel at Philippi delivered
   ,16: 16-18; the jail at Philippi shaken, 16: 25, 26; Eutychus restored
   to life, 20:9-12; Paul unhurt by the bite of a poisonous viper, 28:1-6;
   the father of Publius and many others healed, 28:8, 9.

   4. The style of this book is very similar to that of the third Gospel,
   though it contains less Hebraisms. Simcox says that "the Acts is of all
   the books included in the New Testament the nearest to contemporary, if
   not to classical literary usage,--the only one, except perhaps the
   Epistle to the Hebrews, where conformity to a standard of classical
   correctness is consciously aimed at." The Writers of the New Testament,
   p. 16. The tone is most Hebraic in the first part of the book,
   especially in the sermons in chs. 2 and 13 and in the defense of
   Stephen ch. 7, in all of which the Old Testament element is very large
   ;--and it is most Hellenic in the last part of the book, as in the
   epistle of the church at Jerusalem, the letter of Lysias, the speech of
   Tertullus, and the defense of Paul before Agrippa. This is undoubtedly
   due to the fact that the first part of the book deals primarily with
   Jewish, and last part especially with Gentile Christianity.

  TITLE

   The Greek title of the book is praxeis apostolon, Acts of Apostles.
   There is no entire uniformity in the MSS. in this respect. The
   Sinaiticus has simplypraxeisalthough it has the regular title at the
   close of the book. Codex D is peculiar in havingpraxis apostolon, Way
   of acting of the Apostles. We do not regard the title as proceeding
   from the author, but from one of the transcribers; nor do we consider
   it a very happy choice. On the one hand the title, if translated, as is
   done in both the Authorized and the Revised Version, by "The Acts of
   the Apostles," is too comprehensive, since there are but two apostles
   whose acts are recorded in this book, viz. Peter and Paul. On the other
   hand it is too restricted, because the book contains not only several
   acts, but also many words of these apostles; and also, since it records
   besides these acts and words of other persons, such as Stephen, Philip
   and Barnabas.

  AUTHORSHIP

   The voice of the ancient Church is unanimous in ascribing this book to
   Luke, the author of the third Gospel. Irenaeus in quoting passages from
   it repeatedly uses the following formula: "Luke the disciple and
   follower of Paul says thus." Clement of Alexandria, quoting Paul's
   speech at Athens, introduces it by, "So Luke in the Acts of the
   Apostles relates." Eusebius says: "Luke has left us two inspired
   volumes, the Gospel and the Acts." The external testimony for the Lukan
   authorship is as strong as we could wish for.

   Now the question arises, whether the internal evidence agrees with
   this. The book does not directly claim to have been written by Luke.
   Our Scriptural evidence for the authorship is of an inferential
   character. It seems to us that the Lukan authorship is supported by the
   following considerations:

   1. The we-sections. These are the following sections, 16-10-17; 20:
   5-15; and 27:1--28:16, in which the pronoun of the first person plural
   is found, implying that the author was a companion of Paul in part of
   the apostles travels. Since Paul had several associates, different
   names have been suggested for the author of this book, as Timothy,
   Silas, Titus and Luke, who according to Col. 4:14; Philemon 24; and II
   Tim. 4:11, was also one of the apostles companions and best friends.
   The first two persons named are excluded, however, by the way in which
   they are spoken of in 16:19 and 20:4, 5. And so little can be said in
   favor of Titus that it is now quite generally agreed that Luke was the
   author of the we-sections. But if this is true, he is also the author
   of the book, for the style of the book is similar throughout; there are
   cross-references from the we-sections to the other parts of the book,
   as f. i. in 21: 8, where Philip is introduced as one of the seven,
   while we know only from ch. 6 who the seven were, and from 8: 40, how
   Philip came to be in Cesarea; and it is inconceivable that a later
   writer should have incorporated the we-sections in his work in such a
   skillful manner that the lines of demarcation cannot be discovered, and
   should at the same time leave the tell-tale pronoun of the first person
   undisturbed.

   2. The medical language. Dr. Hobart has clearly pointed out this
   feature in both the Gospel of Luke and the Acts of the Apostles. Some
   make light of this argument, but Zahn says: "W. K. Hobart hat fur
   Jeden, dem flberhaupt etwas zu beweisen ist, bewiesen, dass der
   Verfasser des lucanischen Werks em mit der Kunstsprache der
   griechischen Medicin vertrauter Mann, em griechischer Arzt gewesen
   ist." Einl. II p. 429. We find instances of this medical language in
   achlus13:11;paralelumenos;, 8:7; 9:33;puretois kai dusenteria
   sunerxomenon, 25 :8.

   3. Assuming that Luke wrote the third Gospel, a comparison of Acts with
   that work also decidedly favors the Lukan authorship, for: (1) The
   style of these two books is similar, the only difference being that the
   second book is less Hebraistic than the first,--a difference that finds
   a ready explanation in the sources used and in the authors method of
   composition. (2) Both books are addressed to the same person, viz.
   Theophilus, who was, so it seems, a special friend of the author. (3)
   In the opening verse of Acts the author refers to a first book that he
   had written. Taking the points just mentioned in consideration, this
   can be no other than our third Gospel, though Baljon, following
   Scholten, denies this. Geschiedenis v/d Boeken des N. V. p. 421.

   4. The book contains clear evidence of having been written by a
   companion of Paul. This follows not only from the we-sections, but also
   from the fact that, as even unfriendly critics admit, the author shows
   himself well acquainted with the Pauline diction. We have reasons to
   think that he did not derive this acquaintance from a study of Pauls
   Epistles; and if this is true, the most rational explanation is that he
   was an associate of Paul and heard the great apostle speak on several
   occasions. Moreover the authors characterization of Paul is so detailed
   and individualized as to vouch for personal acquaintance.

   The authorship of Luke has not found general acceptance among New
   Testament scholars. The main objections to it appear to be the
   following: (1) The book is said to show traces of dependence on the
   Antiquities of Josephus, a work that was written about A. D. 93 or 94.
   The reference to Theudas and Judas in 5: 36, 37 is supposed to rest on
   a mistaken reading of Josephus, Ant. XX, V, 1, 2. (2) The standpoint of
   the author is claimed to be that of a second century writer, whose
   Christianity is marked by universality, and who aims at reconciling the
   opposing tendencies of his time. (3) The work is held by some to be
   historically so inaccurate, and to reveal such a wholesale acceptance
   of the miraculous, that it cannot have been written by a contemporary.
   There is supposedly a great conflict especially between Acts 15 and
   Galatians 2.

   We cannot enter on a detailed examination of these objections; a few
   remarks anent them must suffice. It is by no means proven that the
   author read Josephus, nor that he wrote his work after the Jewish
   historian composed his Antiquities. Gamaliel, who makes the statement
   regarding Theudas and Judas, may very well have derived his knowledge
   from a different source; and his supposed mistake (which may not be a
   mistake after all) does not affect the authorship, nor the
   trustworthiness of the book. That the standpoint of the author is more
   advanced than that of the Pauline Epistles (Baljon) is purely
   imaginary; it is in perfect harmony with the other New Testament
   writings. And the idea of a struggle between the Petrine and Pauline
   factions is now generally discarded. Historical inaccuracy does not
   necessarily imply that a book was written a considerable time after the
   events. Moreover in the book of Acts there is no such inaccuracy. On
   the contrary, Ramsay in his, St. Paul the Traveler and the Roman
   Citizen has conclusively proved that this book is absolutely reliable
   and is a historical work of the highest order. It may be that some
   difficulties have not yet found an altogether satisfactory solution,
   but this does not militate against the authorship of Luke.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Readers and Purpose. It is not necessary to speak at length about
   the readers for whom this book was first of all intended, because like
   the Gospel of Luke it is addressed to Theophilus, and like it too it
   was undoubtedly destined for the same wider circle of readers, i. e.
   the Greeks.

   But what was the purpose of the author in writing this book? This is a
   very much debated question. The book of Acts is really a continuation
   of the third gospel and was therefore, in all probability, also written
   to give Theophilus the certainty of the things narrated. We notice that
   in this second book, just as in the first, the author names many even
   of the less important actors in the events, and brings out on several
   occasions the relation of these events to secular history. Cf. 12:1;
   18:2; 23:26; 25:1. Of what did Luke want to give Theophilus certainty?
   From the fact that he himself says that he wrote the first book to give
   his friend the certainty of the things that Jesus began to do and to
   teach, we infer that in the second book he intended to give him
   positive instruction regarding the things that Jesus continued to do
   and to teach through his apostles. It seems that he found his program
   in the words of the Saviour, 1: 8: "But ye shall receive power, after
   that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be my witnesses both
   in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost
   parts of the earth." In harmony with this program he describes the
   march of Christianity from Jerusalem, the center of the Jewish
   Theocracy, to Rome, the center of the world. With Paul in Rome,
   therefore, the authors task is finished.

   Opposed to this view are those that regard the book as a tendency
   writing, in which history has been falsified with a definite purpose.
   As such we have:

   (1) The theory of the Tubingen school, that the book was written to
   conciliate the Petrine and Pauline factions in the early Church, and
   therefore represents Peter as more liberal, and Paul as more Judaistic
   than is in harmony with their own writings. The supposed parallelism
   between Peter and Paul, according to some, ministers to the same
   purpose. This theory in the bald form in which it was broached by Baur,
   is now generally abandoned, and has been modified in various ways.

   (2) The view defended by some later scholars, such as Overbeck and
   Straatman, that the book of Acts is really an apology for Christianity
   over against the Gentiles, especially the Romans. Hence the author
   gives the Romans due honor, and clearly brings out the advantages which
   Paul derived from his Roman citizenship. He desires to convey the
   impression that the doctrine taught by Paul, who was protected by the
   mighty arm of Rome, who was acquitted of false charges by Roman
   governors, and who with a good conscience appealed to Caesar himself,
   could not be regarded as dangerous to the state. Wrede considers this a
   subordinate purpose of the author.

   The abiding merit of these theories is that they contemplate the book
   of Acts as an artistic whole. For the rest, however, they do not
   commend themselves to our serious consideration. The basis on which
   they rest is too uncertain; they are not borne out by the facts; they
   are inimical to the well established historicity of the book; and they
   come to us with the unreasonable demand, born of unbelief and aversion
   to the miraculous, to consider the author as a falsifier of history.

   2. Time and Place. As to the time, when the book was composed little
   can be said with certainty. It must have been written after A. D. 63,
   since the author knows that Paul staid in Rome two years. But how long
   after that date was it written? Among conservative scholars, such as
   Alford, Salmon, Barde e. a. the opinion is generally held that Luke
   wrote his second book before the death of Paul and the destruction of
   Jerusalem, because no mention whatever is made of either one of these
   important facts. Zahn and Weiss naturally date it about A. D. 80, since
   they regard this date as the terminus ad quem for the composition of
   the third gospel. Many of the later rationalistic critics too are of
   the opinion that the book was written after the destruction of
   Jerusalem, some even placing it as late as A. D. 110 (Baljon) and 120
   (Davidson). Their reasons for doing this are: (1) the supposed
   dependence of Luke on Josephus; (2) the assumption, based on Lk. 21:20;
   Acts 8:26 ff. that Jerusalem was already destroyed; and (3) the
   supposed fact that the state of affairs in the book points to a time,
   when the state had begun to persecute Christians on political grounds.
   None of these reasons are conclusive, and we see no reasons to place
   the book later than A. D. 63.

   The place of composition was in all probability Rome.

   3. Method. The problem of the sources used by Luke in the composition
   of this book has given rise to several theories, that we cannot discuss
   here. And it is not necessary that we should do this, because, as Zahn
   maintains, none of these repeated attempts has attained any measure of
   probability; and Headlam says: "The statement of them is really a
   sufficient condemnation." Hastings D. B. Art. Acts of the Apostles. For
   a good discussion of the various theories of Van Manen, Sorof, Spitta
   and Clemen cf. Knowlings Introduction to Acts in the Expositors Greek
   Testament. With Blass we believe that, if Luke is the author, the
   question of sources for the greater part of the book need not be
   raised. The writer may have learnt the early history of the Jerusalem
   church from Barnabas at Antioch and from several others who found
   refuge in that city after the persecution; from Philip, whose guest he
   was for several days, 21: 8-15, and with whom he must have had frequent
   intercourse during Pauls later stay at Cesarea; and from Mnason, an old
   disciple, 21:16. And regarding the missionary journeys of Paul he, in
   all probability, received full information from the apostle himself,
   and could partly draw on his own memory or memorandum. It is quite
   possible that the author had written records of the speeches of Peter
   and Paul, but he certainly did not reproduce them literally but colored
   them in part with his own style.

  INSPIRATION

   The book of Acts is a part of the inspired Word of God. We have in it
   the fruit of apostolic inspiration, in so far as we find here speeches
   of some of the apostles and of Stephen, who was filled with the Holy
   Ghost, when he defended his course before the Jewish council, 6:5, 10.
   And in the composition of his book Luke was guided by the Holy Spirit,
   so that the whole work must be regarded as a product of graphical
   inspiration. This follows from the fact that this book is a necessary
   complement of the Gospels, which are, as we have seen, inspired
   records. It is a continuation of the Gospel of Luke, that is quoted as
   Scripture in I Tim. 5:18 (cf. Luke 10: 7). If the Gospel is inspired,
   then,. assuredly, the work that continues its narrative is also written
   by inspiration. Moreover we find that the Church fathers from the
   earliest time appeal to this book as of divine authority,--as an
   inspired work.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The place of Acts in the canon of Holy Scripture has never been
   disputed by the early Church, except by such heretical sects as the
   Marcionites, the Ebionites and the Manichaeans, and then only on
   dogmatical grounds. Traces of acquaintance with it are found in the
   apostolic fathers, as also in Justin and Tatian. Irenaeus, Clement of
   Alexandria and Tertullian frequently quote from this book. It is named
   in the Muratorian canon, and is also contained in the Syriac and old
   Latin Versions. These testimonies are quite sufficient to show that it
   was generally accepted.

   As an integral part of Scripture it is inseparably connected with the
   Gospels, and reveals to us, how the Gospel was embodied in the life and
   institution of the Church. We here see that the sowing of the precious
   seed that was entrusted to the apostles resulted in the planting and
   extension of the Church from three great racial centers of the world,
   from Jerusalem, the center of the Jewish Theocracy, from Antioch, the
   center of Greek culture, and from Rome, the capital of the world. The
   Gospels contain a revelation of what Jesus began to do and to teach;
   the book of Acts shows us what he continued to do and to teach through
   the ministry of men. There is an evident advance in the teaching of the
   apostles; they have learnt to understand much that was once a mystery
   to them. In the Gospels we find that they are forbidden to tell anyone
   that Jesus is the Messiah; here we read repeatedly that they preach
   Christ and the resurrection. They now exhibit Christ in his true
   character as the Prince of Life and as the King of Glory. And the
   effect of their teaching was such as to bear striking evidence to the
   regenerating power of Him, who by the resurrection from the dead was
   powerfully declared to be the Son of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistles in General

  THE EPISTOLARY FORM IN BIBLICAL LITERATURE.

   The revelation of God comes to us in many forms, in diverse manners. It
   is not only embodied in facts, but also in words; it is borne not only
   by the prophets, but also by the sweet singers and by the wise men of
   Israel; it finds expression not only in the Gospels, but also in the
   Epistles. About one-third of the New Testament is cast in the
   epistolary form.

   This form of teaching was not something absolutely new in the time of
   the apostles, although we find but few traces of it in the Old
   Testament. Mention is made there of some letters written by kings and
   prophets, f. i. in I Kings 21: 8, 9; II Kings 5:5-7; 19:14; 20:12; Jer.
   29:1; but these are quite different from our New Testament Epistles.
   The letter as a particular type of self-expression took its rise, so it
   seems, among the Greeks and the Egyptians. In later time it was also
   found among the Romans and in Hellenistic Judaism, as we notice from
   the epistle of Aristion, that treats of the origin of the Septuagint.
   According to Deissmann the Egyptian papyri especially offer a great
   amount of material for comparison.

   In all probability, however, it was Paul who first introduced the
   epistle as a distinct type of literary form for the conveyance of
   divine truth. Aside from the Gospels his Epistles form the most
   prominent part of the New Testament. In this connection it is well to
   bear in mind the important distinction made by Deissmann between a
   letter and an epistle, of which the former is non-literary, or, as J.
   V. Bartlet says, "pre-literary," and the latter is a literary artistic
   form of communication. It is Deissmann's conviction that the writings
   of Paul have been very much misunderstood. "They have been regarded as
   treatises, as pamphlets in letter form, or at any rate as literary
   productions, as the theological works of the primitive Christian
   dogmatist." He insists that they are letters, serving the purpose of
   communication between Paul and the congregations, letters that were not
   intended by Paul for publication, but only for the private use of the
   addressees, arising from some historical exigency, unsystematic and
   pulsating with the life of the writer. Deissmann, St. Paul p. 7 ff.
   This writer certainly rendered us good service by calling attention to
   the fact, often lost sight of, that the Epistles of Paul are the living
   spontaneous expression of a great mind, continually meditating and
   reflecting on the truth of God; that they are letters, often clearly
   revealing the changing moods of the apostle. They are marked as letters
   by their occasional character, by their being calculated for a single
   community and situation, and by their addresses, praescripts and
   salutations.

   With respect to the fitness of this form for the communication of the
   divine thoughts the remarks of Bernard are very valuable. He finds that
   it is in perfect harmony "with that open and equal participation of
   revealed truth, which is the prerogative of the later above the former
   dispensation; indicating too that the teacher and the taught are placed
   on one common level in the fellowship of the truth. The prophets
   delivered oracles to the People, but the apostles wrote letters to the
   brethren, letters characterized by all that fulness of unreserved
   explanation, and that play of various feeling, which are proper to that
   form of intercourse. It is in its nature a more familiar communication,
   as between those who are or should be equals." "The form adopted in the
   New Testament combines the advantages of the treatise and the
   conversation. The letter may treat important subjects with accuracy and
   fulness, but it will do so in immediate connection with actual life. It
   is written to meet any occasion. It is addressed to peculiar states of
   mind. It breathes of the heart of the writer. It takes its aim from the
   exigencies, and its tone from the feelings of the moment." Bernard, The
   Progress of Doctrine in the N. T. pp. 156, 157.

    THE INSPIRATION OF THE EPISTLES

   The Scriptural Epistles are as well as the Gospels and Acts divinely
   inspired. Even as in their preaching, so also in writing their letters
   the apostles were guided by the Holy Spirit. Here again we must
   distinguish between the apostolic and the graphical inspiration,
   although in this case the two are very closely connected. For a general
   description of the apostolic inspiration we refer to p. 30 if. above.
   It is necessary to remark, however, that in the case of the Epistles,
   as distinguished from that of the Gospels, it did not almost
   exclusively assume the character of a hupomnesis, but was also to a
   great extent a didaskalia. Both of those elements are indicated in the
   promise of the Holy Spirit given by Christ before his departure: "But
   the Comforter, even the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
   name, He shall teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all
   that I said unto you." John 14: 26. Cf. also 16:12,13. In the Gospels
   we have the totality of the apostolic kerugma hence their production
   naturally depended in great measure on a faithful memory. The Epistles,
   on the other hand, contain the fruit of the apostles reflection on this
   kerugma, their injerpretation of it. Therefore it was not sufficient
   that the writers in composing them should faithfully remember former
   things; they needed more light on them, a better understanding of their
   real meaning and profound significance. For that reason the Holy Spirit
   became their didaskalos.

   The apostles were evidently conscious of being inspired by the Holy
   Ghost in the composition of their Epistles. This follows from the
   authority with which they address the congregations. They feel sure
   that their word is binding on the conscience; they condemn in
   unqualified terms those who teach any other doctrine as coming from
   God; they commend and praise all that diligently follow their
   directions; but they also reprimand and censure those that dare to
   follow another course. If this is not due to the fact that they were
   conscious of divine inspiration, it bespeaks an overweening arrogance;
   which, however cannot be harmonized with their life of service and
   their many expressions of deep humility.

   Moreover there are several explicit statements in the Epistles
   testifying to the fact that the apostles were aware of being the
   instruments of Gods Spirit. Thus Paul claims that the Spirit revealed
   to him the hidden things of God, which he also spoke, not in words
   which man's wisdom taught, but in words which the Spirit taught, I Cor.
   2:10,13. He is willing to subject his words to the judgment of the
   prophets, I Cor. 14: 37; and to give a proof of Christ speaking in him,
   II Cor. 13: 3. He thanks God that the Thessalonians received the word
   of his message, not as the word of man, "but as it is in truth, the
   word of God," I Thess. 2:13; and admonishes them to hold the traditions
   which they were taught by his word or by his Epistle. Peter places the
   word of the prophets and that of the apostles on a level as the Word of
   God, in I Pet. 1: 10-12; and elsewhere he arranges his Epistle
   alongside of those of Paul, which he calls Scripture by implication,
   and thus clearly shows that he also regards his own writing as a
   product of the Spirit of God, II Pet. 3:15, 16. John writes: "We are of
   God; he that knoweth God knoweth us; he that is not of God knoweth us
   not. By this we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of error." I
   John 4: 6. This language is intelligible only on the supposition that
   John spoke the words of God.

   Now we must bear in mind that the apostles speak thus regarding their
   written words, so that they were evidently conscious of the guidance of
   the Holy Spirit in writing their Epistles. To that extent they too
   shared in a separate transcriptive inspiration. Their Epistles are a
   part of the Word of God, and have been accepted as such by the Church.
   It is true that for a time five of them, viz., the Epistles of James
   and Jude, II Peter and II and III John, were classed as antilegomena,
   but this only means that their canonicity was subject to doubt and
   dispute for a while, not that they were ever numbered among the
   spurious books. They have been recognized by the majority of
   ecclesiastical writers from the very beginning, and were generally
   accepted by the Church after the council of Laodicea in A. D. 363.

  THE CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE EPISTLES IN GENERAL

   The Old and the New Testament revelations run on parallel lines. In the
   Old Testament we have the fundamental revelation of the Law in the
   Pentateuch; in the New Testament, the fundamental revelation of the
   Gospel in the fourfold witness of the evangelists. This is followed in
   the Old Testament by the historical books, revealing the institutions
   to which the Law gave rise; and in the New Testament, by a historical
   book, showing how the Gospel of Jesus Christ found embodiment in the
   Church. After this we find in the New Testament the Epistles that
   reveal the operation of the truth in the churches, and contain, in
   connection with the life of the churches, the interpretation of the
   Gospel; thus corresponding in part to the Old Testament books of
   experience, such as Job, Psalms, Proverbs, etc., and in part to the
   prophets as interpreters of the Law. The Gospels show us, how Christ
   was preached to the world; the Epistles, how he was taught to the
   Church. The former contain the facts of the manifestation of Christ;
   the latter the effects of it in the spiritual experience of the
   churches.

   In the Epistles we get a glimpse of the inner life of the
   congregations; we see, how they receive the truth and to what degree
   they are guided by it in their actions. We behold Christian life in
   operation, working on the great principles that have been received. We
   find that some heartily embrace the truth and endeavor to apply it
   consistently to life in its manifold forms; that others grasp it but
   imperfectly and, as a result, misapply it in practical life; and that
   still others resist the truth and pervert it to their own condemnation.
   And in connection with these conditions the truth is now set forth and
   interpreted and applied to the multifarious relations of life.

   This teaching is given in the epistolary form, of which we have already
   spoken. Cf. p.129 above. And the method employed by the writers in
   presenting the truth is, as Bernard says, "one of companionship rather
   than of dictation." They do not announce a series of revelations that
   come to them from without, but they speak out of the fulness of their
   own Christian knowledge and experience. Neither do they approach their
   readers with the authoritative prophetic formula, "Thus saith the
   Lord," which in the Old Testament was the end of all contradiction; but
   they appeal to the judgment and conscience of those whom they address.
   They state their propositions and then substantiate them by giving the
   grounds on which they rest. They argue with their readers from the Old
   Testament, from generally admitted truths and from experience, often
   employing the argumentum ad hominem to give point to their teachings;
   and they intercept the objections of their readers and refute them.
   This method of teaching, as compared with that of the prophets, is more
   truly human, the divine factor being less prominent; and as compared
   with that of Christ in the Gospels, is far more argumentative,
   calculated to train the minds of men to that thoughtfulness that leads
   to a thorough assimilation of the truth.

   In their contents as well as in their form the Epistles are a distinct
   advance on the Gospels. After the latter have presented to us the
   manifestation of Christ in the world, the former treat of the life in
   Christ, in which the acceptance of his manifestation issues. After the
   Spirit of God has been poured out, Christ, who had formerly dwelt among
   men, makes his abode in the very hearts of believers. Hence it is
   especially of that new life of believers in union with Christ, that the
   Epistles speak. They constantly emphasize the fact that the individual
   believers and that the churches are "in Christ," and that therefore
   their conversation too must be "in Christ." They clearly interpret the
   significance of Christs work for believers out of every nation and
   tribe. and point out that his experiences are paralleled in the life of
   every believer. All those that are united with Christ by faith suffer
   with Christ, are crucified with Christ, die with Christ, and live with
   Christ in newness of life. And their future life is hid with Christ in
   God. The origin of that new life, its conditions, its nature, its
   progressive and communal character, and its final perfection and
   glory,--are all clearly described in the Epistles. As the foundation on
   which all these blessings rest we are pointed to the redemptive, the
   justifying, the sanctifying, and the intercessory work of Jesus Christ.
   He is the beginning and the end. The Epistles contain clear evidence
   that believers are gathered from every nation and tribe to Christ who
   is the Head of the Church, and in whom they are builded together for a
   habitation of God in the Spirit, that God may be all in all.

    CLASSIFICATION

   The New Testament contains in all twenty-one Epistles, which may be
   divided into two classes, viz., 1. The Pauline Epistles; and, 2. The
   General Epistles.

   1. The Pauline Epistles. Thirteen of the New Testament Epistles bear
   the name of the great apostle to the gentiles. Hence they are generally
   known as the Pauline Epistles. By some the Epistle to the Hebrews is
   added to this number, though it nowhere claims to have been written by
   Paul. The Church has always been divided on the question of it's
   authorship, the Eastern church affirming and the Western denying that
   Paul wrote it. Clement of Alexandria states that the apostle composed
   it in the Hebrew language, and that Luke translated it into Greek. From
   a statement of his we may probably infer that his teacher, Pantaenus,
   also affirmed the Pauline authorship of this Epistle, which would carry
   the testimony back another generation. Origen admits that a very old
   tradition points to Paul as the author, but he comes to the conclusion
   that only God knows who wrote the book. Irenaeus does not attribute the
   Epistle to Paul; nor does Tertullian, who regards Barnabas as the
   author. Eusebius says: "Of Paul the fourteen Epistles commonly received
   are at once manifest and clear. It is not, however, right to ignore the
   fact that some have rejected the Epistle to the Hebrews, asserting that
   it is gainsaid by the church of Rome as not being Paul's." He was
   inclined to believe that the apostle wrote it in Hebrew and that Luke,
   or more likely, Clement of Rome translated it. The catalogue of the
   council of Laodicea also speaks of fourteen Epistles of Paul. We shall
   leave the question of the authorship of this Epistle in suspense for
   the present, and classify the fourteen Epistles of which we have now
   spoken, as follows:

   I. Pauline Epistles:

   1. Those written during the period of Pauls missionary activity:

   a. The two Epistles to the Thessalonians;

   b. The Epistle to the Galatians;

   c. The two Epistles to the Corinthians;

   d. The Epistle to the Romans.

   2. Those written during Pauls imprisonment:

   a. The Epistle to the Ephesians;

   b. The Epistle to the Colossians;

   c. The Epistle to Philemon;

   d. The Epistle to the Philippians.

   3. Those written after Pauls release from the Roman prison:

   a. The two Epistles to Timothy;

   b. The Epistle to Titus.

   II. Of uncertain Authorship:

   The Epistle to the Hebrews.

   It may well be supposed that Paul who always remained in touch with the
   churches he founded wrote many more letters than we now possess of him.
   This is evident also from the Epistles themselves. I Cor. 5:9 refers to
   a letter now lost, and it is possible that II Cor. 7: 8 does also,
   although this may refer to first Corinthians. Col. 4:16 speaks of a
   letter out of (ix) Laodicea, of which we have no further knowledge.
   Although these letters were undoubtedly inspired as well as the ones we
   still possess, we may rest assured that no Epistle intended by God for
   the canon of Holy Scriptures was ever lost.

   We may further remark that Paul evidently wrote very little with his
   own hand; he generally employed an amanuensis in the composition of his
   Epistles and merely added with his own hand the salutation to his
   friends and the authenticating signature, cf. II Thess. 3:17; Philem.
   19; and Gal. 6: 11, which is, however, of uncertain interpretation.
   Only in one letter do we find a definite designation of the amanuensis,
   viz., in Rom. 16:22.

   2. The General Epistles. This is a group of seven Epistles which in the
   old manuscripts usually follows immediately after the Acts of the
   Apostles and therefore precedes the Pauline Epistles, perhaps because
   they are the works of the older apostles and in general represent the
   Jewish type of Christianity. Their representation of the truth
   naturally differs from that of the Pauline Epistles, but is in perfect
   harmony with it. Among these general Epistles there are:

   1. Those written to a community of Christians:

   a. The Epistle of James;

   b. The two Epistles of Peter;

   c. The first Epistle of John;

   d. The Epistle of Jude.

   2. Those written to a certain individual:

   a. The second Epistle of John; (?)

   b. The third Epistle of John.

   Of these seven Epistles the first one of Peter and the first one of
   John were generally accepted as canonical from the beginning, while the
   other five were at first subject to doubt and only gradually found
   acceptance throughout the Church. Yet they were never regarded as
   spurious.

   Why these Epistles should be called general or catholic, is more or
   less of an enigma. Various interpretations of the name have been given,
   but none of them is entirely satisfactory. Some hold that they were so
   called, because they contain the one catholic doctrine which was
   delivered to the churches by the apostles; but this is not a
   characteristic mark of these Epistles, since those of Paul contain the
   same doctrine. Others maintain that the adjective catholic was used by
   some of the church fathers in the sense of canonical, and was by them
   applied first to the first Epistle of Peter and the first of John to
   indicate their general acceptance, and afterwards to the entire group.
   But this explanation is unlikely, because (1) there is scant proof that
   the term catholic was ever equivalent to canonical; and (2) it is hard
   to see, if this really was the case, why the term should not have been
   applied to the Pauline Epistles as well, that were all accepted from
   the beginning. Still others think that they received this appellation,
   because they were not addressed to one person or church like the
   Epistles of Paul, but to large sections of the Church. We consider this
   to be the best explanation of the name, since it is most in harmony
   with the usual meaning of the term, and accounts best for the way in
   which it is used in patristic literature. Even so, however the name
   cannot be regarded as entirely correct, because on the one hand the
   second (?) and third Epistles of John are written to individuals, and
   on the other, the Epistle to the Ephesians is also an encyclical
   letter. These two Epistles of John were probably included in this
   group, because of their smallness and close relation to the first
   Epistle of John.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistles of Paul

  PAUL

   There is no apostle of whose life we have such full information as we
   have regarding that of Paul. He was born of Hebrew parents in the
   intellectual atmosphere of Tarsus in Cilicia, where besides receiving
   the regular Jewish education, he may have visited one of the many Greek
   schools found there. Being exceptionally bright, he was sent to
   Jerusalem to complete the study of the law and to be introduced into
   rabbinic lore. In that center of Jewish learning he received
   instruction at the feet of the greatest Jewish teacher of his age,
   Gamaliel I, and a bright future was opening up before him, since he was
   zealous for the law.

   We first meet him in Scripture as a youth in connection with the
   violent death of Stephen, and soon find in him the most active
   persecuter of the Church of Christ. After he has finished his
   destructive work at Jerusalem, he repairs to Damascus with authority
   from the high priest to persecute the Church in that city. On the way
   thither his course is checked by the Lord of the Church, he becomes a
   penitent, and turns into a zealous advocate of the principles that were
   formerly obnoxious to him. Leaving Damascus, he spent three years in
   Arabia, where he received further instruction from God himself, and he
   learnt to adjust himself to the new conditions of life; after which he
   again returned to Damascus. Being threatened with death at the hands of
   the Jews, he fled from Damascus to Jerusalem, and from Jerusalem to his
   native city in Cilicia. After laboring there for some years, he
   accompanied Barnabas to Antioch in Syria, where he aided in
   establishing the youthful church in that city. He ministered to the
   needs of that congregation for a whole year, during which time he and
   Barnabas also went to Jerusalem to bring the contributions for the
   poor. Soon after they were directed by the Holy Spirit to preach the
   Gospel among the Gentiles. On this first journey they labored on the
   island of Cyprus and in Pisidian Antioch, Iconium, Lystra and Derbe,
   preaching the Gospel and working miracles. Notwithstanding fierce
   opposition from the Jews, they succeeded in founding several churches.
   Having finished their work, they returned to Antioch in Syria, and
   during their stay there were delegated to the council of Jerusalem to
   consult the mother church regarding the debated question, whether
   circumcision was binding on the Gentiles. Next Paul sets out on his
   second missionary journey with Silas, revisiting the churches founded
   on the first tour and by the direction of the Holy Spirit crossing over
   to Europe, where he labored with varying success at Philippi,
   Thessalonica, Berea, Athens and Corinth, founding churches in most of
   these places. From Corinth he returned to Antioch, after first visiting
   Jerusalem. His third missionary journey followed shortly. Passing
   through Asia Minor, he finds a fruitful field of labor in Ephesus,
   where he remains three years, bringing all Asia to the knowledge of the
   truth and contending with idolatry and superstition. From there he
   again passes through Macedonia to Corinth, spending the winter in that
   city, and then returning by way of Troas, Ephesus and Cesarea to
   Jerusalem. Here he takes the necessary precautions to avoid all
   possible provocation of the Jews, but notwithstanding this they seek to
   kill him. Having been rescued by the chief captain, he defends his
   course before the Jews. This only increases their rage, however;
   wherefore he is taken into the castle and is brought before the
   Sanhedrin on the following day, where his defense leads to dissension
   between the Pharisees and the Sadducees. In the following night he
   receives encouragement from the Lord and is told that he must also bear
   witness in Rome. On account of a plot laid by the Jews he is
   transferred to Cesarea, where he again defends his course before Felix,
   Festus and Agrippa. The wavering attitude of the governors, who are
   convinced of his innocence and yet desire to favor the Jews, induces
   him to appeal to Ceasar. As a result he is taken to Rome, arriving
   there after suffering shipwreck, and remaining a prisoner in his own
   dwelling for two years. From the pastoral epistles and tradition we may
   infer that his first trial ended in acquittal. His movements after this
   are uncertain, though there are hints of visits to Philippi, Colossae,
   Ephesus, Crete, Nicopolis and even Spain. After being imprisoned again
   he was condemned and died as a martyr in A.D.68.

   Little can be said regarding the personal appearance of the great
   apostle. In the Acts of Paul and Thecla he is represented as "short,
   bald, bow-legged, with meeting eyebrows, hooked nose, full of grace."
   John of Antioch preserves a similar tradition, which adds, however,
   that he was "round-shouldered and had a mixture of pale and red in his
   complexion and an ample beard." His opponents at Corinth said of him:
   "His letters are weighty and powerful, but his bodily presence is weak
   and his speech contemptible," II Cor. 10:10 ff. He himself refers once
   and again to his physical weaknesses. In all probability he was not a
   man of magnificent physique.

   His personal life was full of contrasts, as Deissmann correctly
   observes. He was encumbered with an ailing body, and yet was a man of
   great endurance and of almost unlimited capacity for work in the
   Kingdom of God. The secret of his strength lay in his God, who spoke to
   him: "My grace is sufficient for thee, and my strength is made perfect
   in weakness." He was a man of great humility, but was at the same time
   capable of uttering words of the greatest self-confidence, "before God
   a worm, before men an eagle" (Deissmann). It is Paul that says: "I am
   the least of the aposfles," I Cor. 15 : 9; "I am less than the least of
   all the saints," Eph. 3: 8; and: "of whom (sinners) I am chief," I Tim.
   1: 16. But it is the same Paul that speaks: "I labored more abundantly
   than they all," I Cor. 15:10; and: "For I suppose I was not a whit
   behind the very chiefest apostles," II Cor. 11: 5. But he realizes that
   all that is commendable in him and that is praiseworthy in his work, is
   fruit of the grace of God. Hence he follows up the statement in I Cor.
   15:10 by saying: "yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me."
   Paul was a tenderhearted man, and was yet on certain occasions very
   severe. He was capable of the most affectionate feeling, always
   solicitous for the welfare of the churches; but just on that account
   inexorable over against all those that were enemies to the truth.
   Compare in this respect the epistle to the Philippians with that to the
   Galatians. He placed himself entirely at God's disposal, following
   where He led, and was willing to be the unworthy instrument in the hand
   of his Lord in spreading the glad tidings of salvation. Hence he was
   great in the Kingdom of God.

   The chronology of the life of Paul is a subject of great difficulty.
   Aside from the date of the first Pentecost there is but a single date
   in the Acts of the Apostles of which we are sure, viz., that of the
   death of Herod in A. D. 44, and this has little value in determining
   the chronological order of the events in Paul's life. A question of
   great importance is, in what year Felix was succeeded by Festus. We
   cannot enter into the dispute about this date, but assume that Schurer
   is correct, when he fixes it at A. D. 60. Geschichte des fiidischen
   Volkes I p. 577. In the same year Paul was sent to Rome, arriving there
   in the spring of the following year, A. D. 61. He remained a prisoner
   at Rome for two years, i. e., until A. D. 63, when he was probably
   released; and lived until the fall of A. D. 67 (Eusebius), or until the
   spring of A. D. 68 (Jerome), when he was martyred at Rome.

   Figuring back from the same date, we find that Paul was imprisoned at
   Caesarea in A. D. 58, Acts 24: 27. Since he had spent the previous
   winter in Corinth and the fall in Macedonia, Acts 20: 2, 3, and had
   labored in Ephesus for a period of three years, Acts 20: 31, he must
   have begun his third missionary journey in the spring of A. D. 54. His
   second missionary tour was concluded shortly before, probably in the
   fall of A. D. 53, Acts 16: 23. This journey undoubtedly lasted about
   two years and a half, since the apostle would naturally set out in the
   spring of the year and his stay of a year and a half at Corinth
   together with all the work done in other places makes it impossible
   that he started on his journey in A. D. 52, cf. Acts 15: 36--17: 34.
   Hence the second journey began in A. D. 51. This second journey was
   preceded by the council of Jerusalem that most likely convened in A. D.
   50, Acts 15. The first missionary journey must be placed somewhere
   between the date just named and the year of Herods death, A. D. 44.

   Now it is probable that we must identify the visit of Paul to Jerusalem
   mentioned in Gal. 2: 1 with that of Acts 15. What is the apostles point
   of departure there, when he says: "Then fourteen years after, etc."?
   Exegetically it may be the visit spoken of in Gal. 1: 18; more likely,
   however, it is the time of his conversion, cf. Ellicott on Gal., so
   that the year 37 was probably the year in which that momentous change
   was wrought in his life. Then he spent the years 37-40 in Arabia, at
   the end of which period he again visited Jerusalem, Acts 9: 26; Gal. 1:
   18. In the same year he went to Tarsus, where he labored until about
   the year of Herods death, Acts 11: 25--12:1.

   Thus we obtain the following result:

   Pauls Conversion A. D. 37

   First Visit to Jerusalem A. D. 40

   Beginning of his Work at Antioch A. D. 44

   First Missionary Journey A. D. 45--48

   Delegated to the Council of Jerusalem A. D. 50

   Second Missionary Journey A. D. 5 1--53

   Third Missionary Journey A. D. 54--58

   Captivity at Jerusalem and Caesarea A. D. 58--60

   Arrives at Rome A. D. 61

   First Captivity at Rome A. D. 61--63

   Period between first and second Captivity A. D. 63--67

   Second Captivity and Death A. D. 67 or 68
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistle to the Romans

  CONTENTS

   This Epistle consists of two clearly marked but very unequal parts,
   viz, the doctrinal (1:1--11: 36) and the practical part (12:1--16: 27).

   I. The Doctrinal Part, 1: 1--11: 36. In this part we have first the
   introduction, containing the address, the customary thanksgiving and
   prayer, and an expression of the apostles desire to preach the gospel
   also at Rome, 1: 1-15. In the following two verses the apostle states
   his theme: "The gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one
   that believeth. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from
   faith to faith," 1:16, 17. After announcing this he describes the
   sinful state of the Gentiles, points out that the Jews are likewise
   guilty, and declares that their prerogatives do not exempt them from
   punishment but rather increase their guilt, 1: 18--3: 20. He then
   defines the righteousness which God has provided without the works of
   the law, and proves that this is revealed in the Old Testament, is the
   basis of a Christian experience that is rich in spiritual fruits, and
   proceeds on the same principle of moral government on which God dealt
   with Adam, 3:21--5 : 21. Next he replies to the objections that on his
   doctrine men may continue in sin and yet be saved; that his teaching
   releases men from moral obligation; and that it makes the law of God an
   evil thing, 6:1--7:25. In the following chapter he shows that on the
   basis of man's justification by faith his complete sanctification and
   final glorification is assured, 8:1-39. Having stated the way of
   salvation through faith, he now points out that this does not conflict
   with the promises given to Israel by showing that these pertained only
   to the elect among them; that the rejection of Israel is due to their
   refusal of the way of salvation; that it is not a complete rejection;
   and that in the end the Jews will be converted and will turn to God,
   9:1--11: 36.

   II. The Practical Part, 12:1--16: 27. The apostle admonishes the
   Christians at Rome that they be devoted to God and love one another,
   12:1-21. He desires that they willingly subject themselves to the civil
   authorities and meet all their obligations, 13:1-14. He enjoins upon
   them due regard for the weakness of others in matters of indifference,
   and the proper use of their Christian liberty, 14:1-23. Then he holds
   up to them Christ as their great example, and speaks of his purpose to
   visit Rome, 15: 1-33. Finally he sends a long list of greetings to Rome
   and closes his epistle with a doxology, 16:1-27.

    CHARACTERISTICS

   1. The characteristic feature of this Epistle is found in the fact that
   it is the most systematic writing of the apostle, an elaborate
   treatment of a single theme with appropriate practical exhortations. It
   contains a careful and rather full statement of what Paul himself
   calls, "my Gospel," 2:16; 16: 25. His Gospel is that man is justified
   by faith and not by the works of the law. In harmony with this theme
   the contents of the Epistle are Soteriological rather than
   Christological. The apostle points out that both Gentiles and Jews need
   this justification; that it is the way of salvation provided by God
   himself; that it yields the most blessed spiritual fruits; that it does
   not issue in the moral degradation of man, but in a life sanctified by
   the Spirit and culminating in everlasting glory; and that, though the
   Gentiles will have precedence over the Jews, who rejected the Gospel,
   these too will at last accept it and be saved. Godet calls this
   Epistle, "The Cathedral of Christian Faith." Because of its methodical
   character some have mistakenly regarded it as a treatise rather than as
   a letter. If it were a treatise, it might have been sent to one church
   as well as another, and it may be regarded as accidental that it was
   sent to Rome. But this is not the case. We cannot understand this, the
   greatest of Paul's literary productions, unless we study it
   historically in its relation to the church of Rome.

   2. The style of the Epistle is described by Sanday and Headlam in the
   following words: "This Epistle, like all the others of the group (I and
   II Cor. and Gal.), is characterized by a remarkable energy and
   vivacity. It is calm in the sense that it is not aggressive and that
   the rush of words is always well under control. Still there is a rush
   of words rising repeatedly to passages of splendid eloquence; but the
   eloquence is spontaneous, the outcome of strongly moved feeling; there
   is nothing about it of labored oratory. The language is rapid, terse,
   incisive; the argument is conducted by a quick cut and thrust of
   dialectic; it reminds us of a fencer with his eye always on his
   antagonist." Intern. Grit. Comm., Romans p. LV.

    AUTHORSHIP

   Both external and internal evidence clearly point to Paul as the
   author. We find the first direct evidence for his authorship in the
   Apostolicon of Marcion. The letter is further ascribed to Paul by the
   Muratori canon, and is quoted as his by Irenaeus, Clement of
   Alexandria, Tertullian and a host of others. The Epistle itself claims
   to have been written by Paul, and this claim is borne out by the
   contents, so that even Davidson says: "The internal character of the
   epistle and its historical allusions coincide with the external
   evidence in proving it an authentic production of the apostle." Introd.
   I p. 119.

   The authenticity of this great letter, along with that of the Epistles
   to the Corinthians and to the Galatians has been well-nigh universally
   admitted. The first one to attack it was Evanson in 1792, followed by
   Bruno Bauer in 1852. Their rather reckless criticism has made little
   impression on German critical opinion. In more recent times the Pauline
   authorship has been denied by the Dutch scholars Loman (1882), Pierson
   and Naber (1886) and Van Manen (1892), and by the Swiss scholar Steck
   (1888); but their arguments, of which an epitomy may be found in
   Sanday-Headlam, Romans p. LXXXVI; Baljon, Gesch. v/d Boeken des N. V.
   p. 97 ff.; and Godet, Introd. to the N. T. I St. Paul's Epistles p.
   393,--failed to carry conviction among New Testament critics.

    THE CHURCH AT ROME

   Regarding the church to which this letter is addressed there are
   especially two questions that call for discussion, viz. 1. It's Origin;
   and 2. It's Composition.

   1. Its Origin. There are three theories respecting the origin of the
   church at Rome.

   a. According to a tradition dating from the fourth, and probably from
   the third century, that found general acceptance in the Roman Catholic
   church, the congregation at Rome was founded by Peter in A. D. 42
   (Jerome and Eusebius) or in A. D. 44 (Acts 12:17). This view is now
   generally given up and is even rejected by some Catholic scholars. It
   finds no support in Scripture, but is rather contradicted by its plain
   statements. From Acts 16: 9, 10 we get the impression that Paul was the
   first missionary to pass into Europe (A. D. 52), and this is just what
   we would expect, since he, in distinction from the other apostles, was
   sent to the Gentiles. Moreover we still find Peter in the East, when in
   A. D. 50 the council of Jerusalem is held, which does not agree with
   the tradition that he was at Rome 25 years. And neither in this
   Epistle, nor in those written from Rome do we find the slightest trace
   of Peter's presence there; yet Paul would certainly have mentioned him,
   had he been the bishop of the Roman church. It is also impossible to
   reconcile Paul's plan to visit Rome with the principle he himself lays
   down in 15 : 20, if the local church had been founded by Peter. And
   finally tradition tells us that Linus was the first bishop of Rome, and
   Clement, the second.

   b. Protestants often ascribed the origin of this church to the Roman
   Jews that were in Jerusalem at the feast of Pentecost, Acts 2:10, and
   witnessed the extraordinary phenomena that accompanied the descent of
   the Holy Spirit. On that theory the church really originated among the
   Jews. In proof of this the report which Suetonius gives of the decree
   of expulsion issued by the emperor Claudius against the Jews of Rome,
   is adduced: "Judaeos impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantes Roma
   expulit." It is said that this Chresto must be Christ, whose religion
   spread in the Jewish synagogue and caused violent dissensions that were
   dangerous to the public peace; but this may well be, and indeed is,
   questioned by many scholars. Moreover it is rather doubtful, whether
   the Jews converted at the time of Pentecost were in a position to
   evangelize others and to establish a Christian church. And finally this
   explanation does not square with the fact that the church at Rome, as
   we know it from the Epistle, does not bear a Judaeo- but a
   Gentile-Christian complexion.

   c. It seems more likely, therefore, that the church at Rome originated
   somewhat later, and in a different fashion. We know that before A. D.
   44 the gospel had been brought to Antioch in Syria and spread rapidly
   among the Gentiles of that region, Acts 11: 20. Soon a flourishing
   church was established in that beautiful city on the Orontes, a church
   endowed with great spiritual gifts, having in its midst an abundance of
   men that were well qualified for the work of evangelization, Acts 13:1.
   Now there was at that time a lively intercommunication between Syria
   and Rome, and it is certainly not improbable that some Gentile
   Christians, filled with the spirit of evangelization, set out from here
   for the capital of the world. Or if not from here, some such persons
   may have gone forth from the other centers of Christianity,
   established, by Paul on his missionary journeys. This would explain,
   how the great apostle acquired so many acquaintances at Rome as he
   names in chapter 16, mostly Gentiles, some of whom he calls his
   fellow-laborers (cf. 3, 9, 12), while he characterizes others with some
   word of endearment (cf. 5-8, 10, 11, 13). Some such friends they must
   have been who went out to meet Paul on the Appian way, Acts 28:25,
   while the Jews at Rome were evidently quite ignorant as to the
   teachings of Christianity, Acts 28: 17-29. On this theory the Gentile
   character of the church at Rome causes no surprise.

   2. Its Composition. Quite a controversy has been waged about the
   question, whether the church at Rome was predominantly Jewish- or
   Gentile-Christian. The traditional idea was that it consisted primarily
   of Christians from the Gentiles; but the view that it was composed
   mainly of Jewish Christians gained currency through Baur and was widely
   accepted for some time. In support of this theory scholars appealed:
   (1) To the passages in the epistle, in which Paul seems to include
   himself and his readers in the first person plural, as 3: 9 and 5:1.
   But notice the same feature in I. Cor. 10:1, though the Corinthians
   were certainly Gentiles. (2) To those passages that speak of the
   relation of the readers, or of Paul and his readers alike to the law,
   as 7:1-6. This argument is stronger than the preceding one; yet we find
   that the apostle employs similar language with reference to the
   Galatians, Gal. 3: 13--4: 9, while most of these were certainly outside
   the pale of Jewry. (3) To the character of Pauls argumentation and the
   dialectical form in which he presents his Gospel to the Romans. But
   even this does not necessarily imply that he was writing primarily to
   Jewish Christians, since he argues in similar fashion in the Epistle to
   the Galatians, and because this finds a ready explanation partly in the
   Jewish training of the apostle and partly in the fact that Paul was
   fully conscious of the objections which legalistic adversaries were
   wont to bring against his doctrine. Besides, he knew that there were
   Jewish converts in the church at Rome too, who might make similar
   strictures. (4) To the chapters 9-11, regarded by Baur as the kernel of
   the epistle, which relate particularly to the Jews. Yet in these very
   chapters Paul addresses, in the most unambiguous manner, the Gentiles,
   and refers to Israel as distinct from his readers, cf. 9: 3, 24;
   10:1-3; 11:13, 17-20, 24, 25, 30, 31.

   When in 1876 Weizsacker again took up the defense of the older view, he
   produced a decisive reaction in its favor. And, no doubt, it deserves
   the preference, for: (1) In 1: 5, 6 Paul writes: "By whom we have
   received grace and apostleship, for obedience to the faith among the
   Gentiles (tois ethnesin) for his Name; among whom ye are also the
   called of Jesus Christ." (2) In verse 13 he says that he had often
   purposed to come to Rome "that I might have some fruit among you also,
   even as among other Gentiles." (3) When the apostle says in 11:13: "For
   I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles,
   I magnify mine office," it is best to assume with Meyer and Godet that
   he is addressing the whole congregation in its chief constituent
   element. (4) According to 15:15 ff. the writer has spoken the more
   boldly to the Romans, because of the grace that was given him "that he
   should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the
   Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be
   acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost." On the strength of
   these passages we conclude that, though there was a Jewish constituency
   in the church at Rome, it consisted primarily of Gentile Christians, so
   that in ministering to it also Paul was the apostle of the Gentiles. It
   seems almost certain, however, that a legalistic tendency had sprung up
   in the congregation, but this tendency may have been characteristically
   Roman rather than specifically Judaistic. For further details of this
   controversy cf. Holtzmann, Einleitung p. 232 ff.; Sanday-Headlam, Comm.
   p. XXXI ff.; The Expositors Greek Test. II p. 561 ff.; and Zahn,
   Einleitung I p. 299 ff. etc.

    COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. It is impossible to speak with absolute
   certainly respecting the occasion of Paul's writing this Epistle,
   although scholars are quite well agreed that the apostle found it in
   the fact that he had finished his work in the East and now intended to
   visit the imperial city, on which he had long since cast his eye.
   Probably an imminent journey of Phebe to the capital offered him, on
   the eve of his departure for Jerusalem, the desired opportunity to send
   his communication to Rome.

   But if the question is asked, why the apostle wrote this letter to the
   Romans, why he gave it the particular character that it has, we find
   that there is a great variety of opinions. Some regard the Epistle as
   historical and occasional; others, as dogmatic and absolute. There are
   those who hold that the particular form of the letter was determined by
   the condition of the readers; and those that would make it dependent on
   the state of Paul's mind. Some believe that the apostle in writing it
   had in mind his Gentile readers, while others hold that he had special
   reference to the Jewish constituents of the church at Rome. The
   different theories respecting the purpose of the letter may be reduced
   to three.

   a. According to some the purpose of the letter is dogmatic, the Epistle
   containing a systematic exposition of the doctrine of salvation. But if
   Paul meant to give in it nothing but an objective statement of the
   truth, the question may be asked, why he should send it to Rome, and
   not to some other church.

   b. Others affirm that the aim of the Epistle is controversial, Paul
   giving an exposition of the truth with special reference to the
   opposition of Judaeism to his gospel. Now we need not doubt that there
   is a polemic element in this Epistle, but the question may well be
   raised, whether the apostle did not combat legalism in general rather
   than Judaeism.

   c. Still others believe that the purpose of the letter is conciliatory,
   aiming at the unity of Jew and Gentile in the church at Rome. This
   theory also contains an element of truth, for Paul certainly was very
   solicitous about that unity, when he wrote this Epistle; but it is a
   mistake to regard the promotion of it as his sole purpose in writing.

   It seems to us that, with Holtzmann, Sanday-Headlam and Denney (in Exp.
   Gk. Test.), we should combine these various elements in stating the
   purpose of the Epistle. Paul had long cherished a desire to visit the
   city on the Tiber. Through his friends and associates he had received
   some intelligence regarding the church that had been founded there. And
   now that he is about to depart for Jerusalem, he has evil forebodings;
   he may never see Rome; and yet he deems it desirable that the Roman
   church, which had not been founded by an apostle, should not only be
   notified of his intended visit, but receive a full and clear statement
   of his Gospel. Hence he prepares for the Romans a careful exposition of
   the Gospel truth. And knowing, as he did, the legalistic tendency of
   the human heart, accented, as it often was in his time, by Judaeism,--a
   tendency that probably found a fruitful soil among the moralistic
   Romans, he clearly exhibits its antagonism to the doctrine of
   salvation, at the same time carefully guarding and assiduously
   cultivating the unity of the believers at Rome, of the weak and the
   strong, of Jews and Gentiles.

   2. Time and Place. As to the time, when Paul wrote this Epistle, we can
   infer from 1: 13 that he had not yet been in Rome, and from 15: 25 that
   he was still a free man. Therefore he must have written it before
   Pentecost of A. D. 58, for then he was taken captive at Jerusalem. On
   the other hand it is clear from 15:19-21 that the apostle has finished
   his task in the East and is now about to transfer his ministry to the
   West. Hence it follows that he composed this letter at the end of his
   third missionary journey, i. e. in the fall of A. D. 57, or in the
   spring of A. D. 58. This also agrees with the fact that the apostle in
   the Epistles to the Corinthians (116: 1-4; II 8, 9) is still occupied
   with the collection for the saints at Jerusalem, while this work is
   finished, when he writes to the Romans, 15:25.

   If this date is correct, then the Epistle must have been written at
   Corinth. And there are some data that corroborate this conclusion. The
   bearer of the letter is a member of the church at Cenchrea, one of the
   ports of Corinth, 16: 1; and Gajus, the host of Paul, is most likely
   the person mentioned in I Cor. 1: 14. Moreover the salutations of
   Timothy and Sopater or Sosipater in 16: 21 is in perfect agreement with
   what is said in Acts 20:4 regarding the presence of these men at
   Corinth, when Paul started for Jerusalem.

    INTEGRITY

   Touching the integrity of the Epistle to the Romans two questions have
   arisen: 1. Is the doxology, 16: 25-27, in the right place, or does it
   belong between 14: 23 and 15:1, or is it spurious? And 2. Are the
   chapters 15 and 16 genuine or spurious?

   1. The place of the doxology at the end of chapter 16 was doubted as
   early as the days of Origen. External testimony favors it, since it is
   found there in most of the MSS, while some have it at the end of
   chapter 14, and a few, in both places. Zahn is of the opinion, however,
   that internal evidence decidedly favors placing it at the end of
   chapter 14, because: (1) Paul's letters are often interspersed with
   doxologies, but never end with them. (2) It seems unlikely that Paul
   should add a doxology, closely connected with the body of the letter,
   after a list of personal greetings not so connected with it. (3) The
   doxology is closely related to the subject-matter of 14: 23 and 15:1.
   (4) It is far harder to explain its transfer from the 16th chapter to
   the 14th than the reverse. Einl. I p. 268 ff.

   Some, as f. i. Davidson and Balj on, doubt the genuineness of the
   doxology, but: (1) It is found in all the MSS. (2) The thought
   expressed in it is too rich and varied to be an interpolation. (3) No
   possible motive can be found for forging such a doxology.

   2. The 15th chapter is regarded by some as spurious, (1) because it is
   not found in the canon of Marcion; and (2) since the appellative
   applied to Christ in verse 8 is considered very strange as coming from
   Paul; the expression in verse 19 is not characterized by the usual
   Pauline modesty; and the verses 24, 28, 29 are held to be in conflict
   with 1:10-15, because they imply that Paul merely desired to pay a
   short visit to Rome, when he was on his way to Spain. But the first
   argument has little weight, since Marcion omits many other parts of the
   New Testament, and several that are generally admitted to be genuine;
   and the difficulties mentioned under (2) easily yield to exegesis.

   A far greater number of scholars reject chapter 16, (1) because
   Marcions canon does not contain it; (2) since it is contrary to the
   apostles custom to end his letters with so many greetings; and (3)
   because Paul was not in a position to know so many persons at Rome. To
   the first argument we need not reply again (cf. above) ; and as far as
   the greetings are concerned, it may be that Paul intentionally greeted
   so many persons at Rome to bring out clearly that, though he had not
   founded the church there, he was not a stranger to it, and to cultivate
   a certain familiarity. It deserves our attention that the only other
   Epistle in which we find a list of greetings is that to the Colossian
   church, which was like the church of Rome, in that it was not founded
   by the apostle. And taking in consideration the extensive travels of
   Paul in the East, and the constant movement of people in all parts of
   the empire to and from Rome, it causes no surprise that so many of the
   apostles acquaintances were in the capital.

   Some who doubt the destination rather than the genuineness of this
   chapter surmise that it or a part of it originally constituted an
   epistle, or a fragment of one, that was addressed to the Ephesians.
   They point out that Phebe would be more likely to journey to Ephesus
   than to Rome; that, in view of what is said in Acts 18:19; I Cor.
   16:19; II Tim. 4:19, there is a greater probability that Aquila and
   Priscilla were at Ephesus than in the imperial city; and that Epenetus
   is called "the first-fruits of Achaia unto Christ, 16: 5. But none of
   these proofs are conclusive. Moreover Dr. Gifford points out in the
   Speakers Commentary that of the twenty-two persons named in verses
   6-15, not one can be shown to have been at Ephesus; while (1) Urbanus,
   Rufus, Ampliatus, Julia and Junia are specifically Roman names; and (2)
   besides the first four of these names, "ten others, Stachys, Apelles,
   Tryphaena, Tryphosa, Hermes, Hernias, Patrobas (or (Patrobius),
   Philologus, Julia, Nereus are found in the sepulchral inscriptions on
   the Appian way as the names of persons connected with Qesars household
   (Phil. 4:22), and contemporary with St. Paul."

    CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The Epistle to the Romans is one of the best attested writings of the
   New Testament. Its canonicity was never doubted by the Church, and it
   has been remarkably free from the attacks of Rationalism up to the
   present time. Before the beginning of the third century there are
   nineteen witnesses to the canonicity of the letter, including some of
   the apostolic fathers, the Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs, Justin
   Martyr, the Muratori Canon, Marcion, Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria
   and Tertullian. Both friends and foes of Christianity accepted it as
   authoritative.

   It is the most systematic of all the writings of Paul, containing a
   profound and comprehensive statement of the way of salvation, a
   statement made with special reference to the legalistically inclined
   Romans. That salvation can be had through faith only, and not by the
   works of the law, not by one's works of morality, on which the man of
   the Roman type was inclined to place his reliance, is at once the great
   central doctrine of this epistle and its permanent lesson for all ages.
     __________________________________________________________________

The First Epistle to the Corinthians

  CONTENTS

   The contents of this Epistle may be divided into five parts:

   I. Condemnation of the Factions in the Church, 1:1--4: 21. After a
   brief introduction in 1: 1-9 Paul states that he had heard of the
   divisions among the Corinthians, 1: 11-12. In arguing against these he
   points out that his conduct was free from party spirit, since this is
   opposed by the gospel and forbidden by the character of Christ,
   1:13-31. Moreover he reminds the Corinthians that his preaching had
   been free from all partisanship which glories in the wisdom of man,
   because the gospel is the message of divine wisdom, is revealed by the
   Spirit and is understood only through the Spirit; white party spirit
   misapprehends the nature of the ministry, 2: 1--3 : 23. He concludes
   this argument by pointing to his own example, 4:1-21.

   II. The Necessity of Church Discipline urged, 5:1--6: 20. The
   Corinthians are exhorted to cast out the incestuous person, 5:1-13; to
   desist from lawsuits before the unrighteous, 6:1-11; and to flee from
   fornication, 6:12-20.

   III. Answer to Inquiries sent from the Church, 7:1--14: 39. Here we
   find a discussion of the lawfulness of marriage and its duties;
   directions about mixed marriages and an apostolic advice to the
   unmarried, 7:1-40. Then follows a discussion of Christian liberty in
   the participation of food offered to the idols, in which love must
   rule, and one must beware of any participation in idolatrous practices.
   The apostle illustrates this principle at length by pointing to his own
   example, 8:1--11: 1. Next the place of woman in the assemblies of the
   church, and the proper observance of the Lord's supper is considered,
   11:2-34. And finally the spiritual gifts manifest in the congregation
   come in for consideration. Their source and diversity, their functions,
   the superiority of love over the extraordinary gifts, and of prophecy
   over the speaking of tongues, and the right service of God,--all
   receive due treatment, 12:1--14: 40.

   IV. A Discussion of the Resurrection, 15:1-58. The apostle shows that
   the resurrection of Christ is an essential article of the apostolic
   testimony, and is the pledge of our resurrection; and answers various
   objections, describing the nature of the resurrection body and the
   final victory over death.

   V. Conclusion, 16:1-24. In this chapter the apostle commends to the
   Corinthians the collection for the saints at Jerusalem, bespeaks a good
   reception for Timothy, and ends his epistle with friendly admonitions
   and salutations.

    CHARACTERISTICS

   1. This Epistle is the most comprehensive of all the writings of Paul.
   It is just about as long as the letter to the Romans, and contains the
   same number of chapters; but, while the Epistle to the Romans
   systematically treats a single theme, this letter discusses a great
   variety of subjects, such as party spirit, church discipline, marriage
   and celibacy, Christian liberty, the place of woman in the church, the
   significance and use of the charismata, and the resurrection of the
   dead. And the apostle treats of these matters in a very orderly way,
   first taking up the accusations contained in the report of those from
   the household of Chloe, and then answering the questions that were put
   to him in the letter sent by the Corinthians.

   2. Closely connected with the first is a second characteristic, viz,
   that this Epistle is the most practical of all the Pauline letters. It
   reveals to us, as no other New Testament writing does, the snares and
   pitfalls, the difficulties and temptations to which a church just
   emerging from heathendom and situated in a wicked city, is exposed.
   Many of the problems that arose in the Corinthian church constantly
   recur in city congregations. As important as the Epistle to the Romans
   is for instruction in Christian doctrine, the first Epistle to the
   Corinthians is for the study of social relations.

   3. Little need be said regarding the language of Paul in this Epistle;
   it is the Greek of a Hellenistic Jew. We cannot call it Hebraistic;
   neither is it literary Greek. It is rather the Greek of Paul's own
   period, containing, aside from a few Hebrew loanwords, such as pascha,
   very few words that are found exclusively in the Septuagint. Findlay
   says: "Paul has become in this epistle more than elsewhere tois
   'Ellesin hos 'Ellen." Exp. Gk. Test. II p. 748. The argumentative form
   too in which the apostles thought is cast here, as elsewhere, is far
   more Greek than Hebrew, more Western than Oriental.

    AUTHORSHIP

   This epistle also claims to have been written by Paul, 1:1, 2, and
   bears upon the face of it the earmarks of the great apostle. The
   language, the style, the doctrine, and the spirit which it
   breathes,--are all his; and the historical allusions in chapters 9 and
   16 fit in exactly with what we know of his life and acquaintances from
   other sources. Besides this there is an imposing body of external
   evidence from Clement of Rome down to the authenticity of the letter.
   Hence it, like that written to the Romans, has been remarkably free
   from hostile attacks. Robertson and Plummer truly say in the
   Introduction to their Commentary on this Epistle p. XVI: "Both the
   external and the internal evidence for the Pauline authorship are so
   strong that those who attempt to show that the apostle was not the
   writer succeed chiefly in proving their own incompetence as critics."

   The free-lance Bruno Bauer was the first, and for a long time the only
   one, to attack the genuineness of I Corinthians. But in the last two
   decennia of the preceding century the Dutch critics Loman, Pierson,
   Naber and Van Manen, and the Swiss professor Steck chimed in with a
   most irresponsible kind of criticism, founded on supposed
   inconsistencies and evidences of composite authorship found in the
   Epistle, and on imaginary conflicts between it and the Acts of the
   Apostles. No critic of name takes their argument serious; according to
   the general estimate they are scarcely worth the paper on which they
   are written.

    THE CHURCH AT CORINTH

   1. Its Origin. After Paul left Athens on his second missionary journey,
   he came to the capital of Achaia,--to Corinth, a city situated on the
   isthmus of the Peloponnese between the Ionian and the Aegean sea. It
   was not the old Corinth, since this had been destroyed by Mummius in
   146 B. C., but Corinth redivivus, Corinth rebuilt by Ceasar just a
   hundred years later, that had rapidly risen in fame, and now had a
   population of between six and seven hundred thousand, consisting of
   Romans, Greeks, Jews and people of such other nationalities as were
   attracted by the commercial advantages of Corinth. The East and the
   West met there, and it soon became the mart of the world, where
   unparalleled riches were found alongside of the deepest poverty. And
   with the increase of riches and luxury came a life of ease and
   licentiousness. Worldly wisdom and great moral degradation went hand in
   hand. On the Acropolis shotie the temple of Venus, where a thousand
   maidens devoted themselves to the sensual service of the goddess.
   Corinthian immorality became a byword; and the expression to live like
   a Corinthian (korinthiazein) was indicative of the greatest
   licentiousness. Farrar says: "Corinth was the Vanity Fair of the Roman
   Empire, at once the London and the Paris of the first century after
   Christ." St. Paul I p. 556.

   To that worldly-wise profligate Corinth Paul wended his way with a sad
   heart in A. D. 52. Depressed in spirit because of past experiences, he
   began his labors in the synagogue, preaching to the Jews; but when they
   opposed him, he turned to the Gentiles and taught them in the house of
   a certain Justus. Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, became one of
   his first converts, and many others believed and were baptized, Acts
   18:1-8. Encouraged by a vision, he now began a ministry of a year and a
   half in that city. The Jews, filled with hatred, brought him before
   Gallio, the proconsul of Achaia, but did not succeed in making out a
   case against him. Even after this incident he labored a long time in
   Corinth and the adjacent country and undoubtedly established the
   Corinthian church on this occasion, Acts 18:18; ICor. 1:1.

   2. Its Composition and Character. We may be sure that the church
   consisted primarily of Christians from the Gentiles. This impression is
   conveyed by the account of Pauls work in Corinth, preserved for us in
   Acts 18, and is strengthened by a careful study of the epistle. The
   apostle says of the congregation, describing it according to its main
   constituent element: "Ye know that ye were Gentiles, carried away unto
   these dumb idols, even as ye were led," 12:1. Yet the church also
   comprised many Jews, as we may infer from Acts 18:8; I Cor. 1:12; 7:18;
   12:13. The majority of the converts were of the poorer classes, 1: 26;
   but there were also Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, Acts 18: 8; I
   Cor. 1: 14, Erastus, the chamberlain of the city and Gajus, Paul's
   host, Rom. 16: 23, and several others that were in more favorable
   circumstances, as we may infer from I Cor. 11:21, 22.

   As far as the complexion of the church is concerned we find that it
   bore the impress of its surroundings. There was a shallow
   intellectualism, coupled with a factiousness that was "the inveterate
   curse of Greece." Lax morals and unseemly conduct disgraced its life.
   Christian liberty was abused and idolatrous practices were tolerated.
   Even the gifts of the Holy Spirit gave rise to vainglory; and a false
   spiritualism led, on the one hand, to a disregard of bodily sin, and,
   on the other, to a denial of the bodily resurrection. But these faults
   should not blind us to the fact that there was a great deal in the
   church of Corinth that was praiseworthy. The social relations among the
   Corinthians had already undergone to a certain degree the elevating and
   sanctifying influence of the Holy Spirit; the church was rich in
   spiritual gifts, and was willing to impart of its substance to the poor
   saints at Jerusalem.

   The divisions at Corinth deserve more than a passing notice, since they
   are made so prominent in the Epistle. The question is, whether we can
   determine the character of the existing parties. In attempting this we
   desire to point out first of all that they were no parties in the
   strict sense of the word, each with an organization of its own, but
   merely dissensions in the church, representing a difference of opinion.
   They had not led to an absolute split in the ranks of believers, for
   Paul distinctly recognizes a certain feeling of unity in the church of
   Corinth, since he mentions meetings of the whole church repeatedly,
   11:18; 14: 23. Yet there were four divisions of which each one had his
   own slogan.

   a. Some said: "I am of Paul !" This party is mentioned first, not
   necessarily because it comes first in chronological order. Since the
   church had been founded by Paul, it would seem that a separate party,
   using the apostles name as their shibboleth, could only arise in
   opposition to another. It consisted most likely of those serious-minded
   believers who had regard to the contents of the gospel preaching rather
   than to its form; and who heartily accepted the simple doctrine of the
   cross, as Paul preached it, who had come to them without wisdom of
   words that the cross of Christ might not be made of non-effect.

   b. Others said: "I am of Apollos !" We do not believe that the
   preaching of Apollos differed essentially from that of Paul, nor that
   he was to blame for the dissension that arose as a result of his work.
   Paul himself bears witness to his perfect unity of spirit with Apollos,
   where he says that Apollos watered what he had planted, and that he
   that planteth and he that watereth are one, 3: 6-8; and that he had
   greatly desired to send Apollos with Timothy and the other brethren to
   Corinth, 15:12. And is it not likely that Apollos refused to go, just
   because he feared that it might foster the party spirit? The Apollos
   Christians were in all probability those cultured Greeks who, while
   they were in accord with the doctrine of free grace, greatly preferred
   a speculative and oratorical presentation of it to the simple preaching
   of Paul.

   c. Still others said: "I am of Cephas !" While the two former parties
   undoubtedly constituted the bulk of the congregation, there were also
   some who had scruples regarding the doctrine of free grace. They were
   conservative Jewish believers that adhered to the decisions of the
   council of Jerusalem and persisted in certain legal observances.
   Naturally they in spirit rallied around Peter, the apostle of
   circumcision. It may be that the tradition preserved by Dionysius of
   Corinth is true that Peter has at one time visited Corinth. If it is,
   this helps to explain their watchword.

   d. Finally there were also those who said: "I am of Christ !" This
   party has always been the most difficult to characterize, and, as a
   result, a great number of theories have been broached. After F. C. Baur
   many interpreted this "of Christ" in the light of II Cor. 10: 7, where
   the opponents of whom Paul speaks are ultra-Judaeists. On that theory
   the Christ-party would be even more strictly Jewish than the party of
   Peter. Others, such as Hilgenfeld and Hausrath maintain that it
   consisted of those that had been in personal relation with the Lord,
   and probably belonged to the five hundred of I Cor. 15: 5. Godet
   suggests that they were such as were embued with the spirit of
   Cerinthus, and believed in Christ in distinction from the human Jesus.
   He identifies them with those who would call Jesus accursed, I Cor. 12
   :3. We prefer to think with Meyer, Ellicott, Alford, Findley (Exp. Gk.
   Test.) and Biesterveld that it consisted of the ultra-pious ones who,
   despising all human leadership, arrogated the common watchword as their
   own private property, and by so doing made it a party slogan. They
   regarded themselves as the ideal party, were filled with spiritual
   pride, and thus became a great stumblingblock for the apostle. The key
   to this interpretation is found in 3: 22, 23, where the apostle offers
   a corrective for the party spirit, when he says: "Whether Paul, or
   Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present,
   or things to come; all are yours; and ye are Christ's and Christ is
   God's." Findlay correctly remarks that "the catholic humeis Christou
   swallows up the self-assertive and sectarian Ego de Christou.

   3. Pauls Communications with it. There are two questions that call for
   consideration under this heading: a. How often did Paul visit Corinth?
   and b. Did he write more letters to the Corinthian church than we now
   possess?

   a. We know that Paul visited Corinth in A. D. 52, Acts 18:1, and again
   in 57, Acts 20: 2. Are there traces of any other visits? The allusions
   in II Cor. 2: 1; 12:14; 13: 1 seem to imply that he had been in Corinth
   twice before he wrote II Corinthians, and hence prior to the visit of
   A. D. 57. In all probability we must assume a visit not recorded in the
   Acts of the Apostles. The question is, however, whether we must place
   it before the writing of I Corinthians, or between this and the
   composition of II Corinthians. This cannot be decided absolutely with
   the data at hand, but we consider it preferable to place it before the
   first Epistle: (1) because the time intervening between the two letters
   is so short that a trip to Corinth in that time is exceedingly
   improbable; (2) Since, Timothy and Titus having been in Corinth a part
   of that time, we cannot understand, what could make it imperative for
   Paul to make such a hasty visit; and (3) II Corinthians constantly
   refers to things written in the first Epistle in a way that would not
   have been necessary if Paul had already been in Corinth himself. In
   favor of placing it after the writing of the first Epistle, it is urged
   that I Corinthians does not refer to a visit that shortly preceded it.

   b. It seems to us that Paul unquestionably wrote more epistles to the
   Corinthians than those which we now possess. In I Cor. 5 : 9 the author
   clearly refers to an earlier letter, forbidding intercourse with
   immoral persons. That letter had been misunderstood, and therefore the
   impression it made is now corrected by the apostle. Very likely it also
   spoke of the collection for the saints at Jerusalem, 16:1, and conveyed
   the apostles intention to visit Corinth both before and after his visit
   to Macedonia, to which II Cor. 1: 15, 16 refers, and which he changed
   before writing I Corinthians (cf. 16: 5), thereby unwittingly exposing
   himself to the calumny of his enemies, II Cor. 1:15-18. From II Cor. 7:
   6-8 some infer that another letter, far more censorious than I
   Corinthians intervened between the two canonical letters, and caused
   the apostles uneasiness; but the evidence is not strong enough to
   warrant the conclusion.

    COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. This letter was occasioned by reports which
   Paul received from Corinth and by a series of questions that were put
   to him by the Corinthians. Those who were of the house of Chloe told
   him of the divisions in their home church, 1: 11, and common report had
   it that fornication and even incest was permitted in the congregation,
   5:1. Moreover the church sent a letter, probably by the hand of
   Stephanas, Fortunatus and Achaicus, 16:17, asking the apostles opinion
   in several matters, as marriage, 7:1; the eating of meat offered to the
   idols, 8: 1; the proper conduct in the church, 11: 2; the right use of
   the spiritual gifts, 12: 1; and in all probability also respecting the
   doctrine of the resurrection, 15.

   In harmony with this occasion the purpose of the Epistle is especially
   twofold: In the first place the apostle desires to quench the party
   spirit that was rife among the Corinthians that he might lead them all
   to the unity of faith that is in Jesus Christ; and to correct the other
   evils that were found in the church, such as the case of incest and the
   irregularities that disgraced their Agapae, which culminated in the
   Lords Supper. And in the second place it was his aim to give the young
   church, struggling with temptations and baffled by many difficult
   questions, further instruction along the lines indicated by them in
   their letter. With great diligence and care and solicitude for the
   welfare of the congregation the apostle applies himself to this task.
   In answer to the question, whether he also intended to defend his
   apostleship over against his enemies we would say that, though this was
   not altogether absent from his mind (cf. chs. 4 and 9), he does not aim
   at this directly like he does in writing II Corinthians, when the
   hostility of the false teachers has become far more pronounced.

   2. Time and Place. The place, where this Epistle was written, is
   clearly indicated in 16: 8, and therefore does not call for further
   discussion. This also aids us in determining the time of writing. The
   only stay of Paul at Ephesus of any duration is described in Acts 19.
   If our chronological calculations are correct, he came there in A. D.
   54 and, after a stay of three years, left there again in 57. According
   to I Cor. 16: 8 he wrote the epistle toward the end of his Ephesian
   ministry, before Pentecost of A. D. 57, and therefore probably in the
   early part of that year. We cannot conclude from I Cor. 5: 7 that it
   was when the feast of unleavened bread was celebrated, although it is
   very well possible that the nearness of that feast gave rise to the
   line of thought developed in that chapter.

    CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The canonicity of the Epistle is abundantly attested by early Christian
   literature. It is the first one of the New Testament writings that is
   cited by name by one of the apostolic fathers. Clement of Rome says in
   his first Epistle to the Corinthians: "Take the Epistle of the blessed
   Paul the apostle into your hands etc." The writings of the other
   apostolic fathers, viz. Barnabas, Hermas, Ignatius and Polycarp show
   clear traces of the use of this Epistle. From Irenaeus on it is quoted
   as Holy Scripture. The Gnostics regarded it with special favor. It was
   found in Marcion's canon, in the Muratorian Fragment etc. The testimony
   to it is very full and clear.

   In the Epistle to the Romans we have a statement of the way of
   salvation with special reference to the legalistic Romans; in this
   Epistle we find an exposition of it particularly with a view to the
   philosophically inclined Greeks. It clearly reveals that the way of
   wordly wisdom is not the way of life, a valuable lesson for the Church
   of all ages. But there is still another phase that gives the Epistle
   permanent value; it contains the doctrine of the cross in its social
   application. In it we see the church of God in the world with all its
   glitter and show, its temptations and dangers, its errors and crimes,
   and are taught to apply the principles of the Christian religion to the
   diversified relations of life, as we meet them in the bustle of a great
   and wicked city.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Second Epistle to the Corinthians

  CONTENTS

   The contents of this Epistle are naturally divided into three parts:

   I. Review of Pauls Relation's with the Corinthians, 1: 1--7:16. After
   the usual epistolary introduction, 1: 1-11, the apostle vindicates
   himself with respect to the change in his intended visit, and with
   reference to what he had written respecting the offender, 1: 12--2:13.
   Having done this, he takes up the discussion of the apostleship. In the
   first place he considers the office of an apostle, comparing the
   ministry of the Law with that of the Gospel, 3: 6-18, and vindicating
   his own position as an apostle of the New Covenant, 2: 14--3: 5; 4:1-6.
   Then he treats of the sufferings of an apostle which are inseparably
   connected with his work, but are alleviated by the hope of future
   glory, 4: 7--5:10. Next the life of an apostle passes the review, which
   finds its constraining motive in the love of Christ, has its spiritual
   basis in the life of the Redeemer, and is marked by sufferings,
   dishonor and poverty, on the one hand; but also by longsuffering and
   kindness, by knowledge and righteousness, on the other, 5:11--6:10.
   This is followed up by an appeal of the apostle to the Corinthians that
   they should give him place in their hearts, and should not be unequally
   yoked together with unbelievers, 6: 11--7: 4. Finally the apostle tells
   the Corinthians that he had been comforted greatly by the coming of
   Titus, by whom his fears that the former letter might have estranged
   them, were allayed and made place for rejoicing, 7: 5-16.

   II. The Collection for the Judaean Christians, 8:1--9:15. The apostle
   points the Corinthians to the example of the Macedonians who gave
   abundantly for the poor at Jerusalem, 8:1-7; and to the example of
   Christ who became poor that the Corinthians might be enriched, 8: 8-15.
   He commends to them Titus and the two brethren that are sent with him
   to gather the collection, 8:16-24; and exhorts them to give abundantly
   for this worthy cause, 9:1-15.

   III. Pauls Vindication of his Apostleship, 10:1--13:14. In this part
   Paul deals directly with his opponents. First of all he points out that
   the ministry entrusted to him also extended to the Corinthians, 9:1-18.
   Then he replies to his opponents that he had been perfectly loyal to
   the cause of Christ, 11:1-6; that he had not dealt deceitfully with the
   Corinthians, when he refused support from them, 11: 7-15; that he had
   far greater things in which to glory than they could boast of, 11:
   16--12:10; and that it had never been and was not now his aim to make a
   gain of the Corinthians, 12: 11-18. Finally he gives them warnings in
   view of his coming visit, and closes his epistle with final salutations
   and benediction, 12:19--13:13.

    CHARACTERISTICS

   1. II Corinthians is one of the most personal and the least doctrinal
   of all the letters of Paul, except the one written to Philemon. The
   doctrinal element is not altogether wanting; the great truths of
   salvation find expression in it, as well as in the other letters of the
   apostle; but, though they enter into its composition, they have a
   subordinate place and are, as it were, eclipsed by its large personal
   element, in which we see the very heart of the apostle, with all its
   varying moods of courage and anxiety, of love and aversion, of hope and
   disappointment. Alford says: "Consolation and rebuke, gentleness and
   severity, earnestness and irony succeed one another at very short
   intervals and without notice."

   2. The second characteristic of this Epistle is closely connected with
   the preceding one; it is the most unsystematic of all the letters of
   Paul. How greatly it differs in this respect from the Epistle to the
   Romans and from First Corinthians, becomes perfectly evident, when one
   attempts to give an outline of the contents. This irregularity is due
   to the fact that in this letter we do not find a calm discussion of
   doctrinal subjects or of certain phases of Christian life, but above
   all an impassioned self-defense against unjust charges and calumnies
   and insinuations. However humble the apostle may be, and though he may
   regard himself as the least of all the saints, yet in this letter he
   finds himself constrained to boast of his sufferings and of his work.

   3. The language of this Epistle has been judged variously, some
   criticizing it severely and others praising its excellencies. We cannot
   deny that it is more rugged and harsh, more obscure and difficult of
   interpretation than we are accustomed to in Paul's other writings.
   "Parentheses and digressions often intersect the narrative and disturb
   its sequence." (Davidson) Meyer says beautifully: "The excitement and
   varied play of emotion with which Paul wrote this letter, probably also
   in haste, certainly make the expression not seldom obscure and the
   sentences less flexible, but only heighten our admiration of the great
   delicacy, skill and power with which this outpouring of Paul's spirit
   and heart, possessing as a defense of himself a high and peculiar
   interest, flows and gushes on, till finally, in the last part, wave on
   wave overwhelms the hostile resistance." Comm. p. 412.

    AUTHORSHIP

   The external testimony to the authorship of Paul is inferior to that of
   I Corinthians; yet it is so strong that it leaves no room for honest
   doubt. Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian and many others,
   from all parts of the early Church, quote it by name.

   But even if this were not so strong, internal evidence would be quite
   sufficient to settle the question of authenticity. In the first place
   the Epistle claims to be a product of the great apostle. In the second
   place it is written in a style that is in many respects
   characteristically Pauline, notwithstanding its unique features; it
   contains the doctrine of salvation, as we are wont to hear it
   proclaimed by the apostle of the Gentiles; and it reveals his
   character, as no other Epistle does. And in the third place the thought
   of this Epistle is closely interwoven with that of I Corinthians. In I
   Cor. 16: 5 Paul speaks of his plan of travel, and in II Cor. 1:15-24 he
   comments on it; in I Cor. 5 he urges that discipline be applied to the
   incestuous person, and in II Cor. 2: 5-11 he says, with reference to
   this case, that they have inflicted sufficient punishment, and
   restrains their evident severity; respecting the collection for the
   Judaean Christians which he enjoins on the Corinthians in I Cor. 16:14,
   he gives further directions in II Cor. 8 and 9; to the Judaeizers who
   cast doubt on his apostleship he refers in I Cor. 4 and 9, and speaks
   of them more at length in II Cor. 10-13.

   The authenticity of the Epistle too was attacked by Bruno Bauer and by
   the Dutch critics that we mentioned in connection with the first
   Epistle. But their work failed to convince anyone but themselves. Godet
   truly says: "--the scholars who cannot discern, across these pages, the
   living personality of St. Paul, must have lost in the work of the
   study, the sense for realities." Introd. to the N. T. I p. 337.

    COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. In order to understand the occasion that
   induced Paul to write this Epistle to the Corinthians, we must bring it
   in connection with the first letter, which was in all probability borne
   to Corinth by Titus, Paul's spiritual son. After it had gone forth, the
   apostle pondered on what he had written in that letter, and it caused
   him some uneasiness of mind, II Cor. 7: 8. He reflected that he had
   written in a rather severe strain regarding the divisions at Corinth
   and the incestuous person, and feared for a time that his words might
   be misconstrued, that his letter might create a false impression, and
   that his severity might provoke resentment and thus injure the cause of
   the gospel that lay so near to his heart.

   We are aware that some scholars, as f. i. Hausrath, Schmiedel, Kennedy,
   Baljon, Findlay, Robertson (in Hastings D. B.) and Davidson hold that
   II Cor. 2:4, 9; 7:8 refer to a second lost epistle of Paul, the
   so-called Painful Letter; but with Zahn, Holtzmann and Bernard (in
   Expositors Gk. Test.) we believe it to be a rather gratuitous
   assumption that such an epistle ever existed.

   Shortly after Paul had sent I Corinthians, he left Ephesus for Troas,
   where a splendid opportunity for work offered. Yet he was keenly
   disappointed, for he had expected to find Titus there with tidings from
   Corinth; and when he did not find him, his very anxiety caused him to
   sail for Macedonia that he might meet his beloved brother and
   co-laborer the sooner and be reassured by him, II Cor. 2:12, 13. The
   mere change of the field of labor brought him no relief, for he says:
   "When we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were
   troubled on every side; without were fightings, within were fears." 7:
   5. Soon, however, he was comforted by the coming of Titus, 7: 6; the
   painful uncertainty now made place for calm assurance, yea even for joy
   and thanksgiving. But his happiness was not unalloyed, since the report
   of Titus was not altogether favorable. The Corinthian congregation as a
   whole had taken kindly to the warnings and directions of the previous
   letter. The words of reproof had made a deep impression on them, had
   saddened their hearts, had filled them with sorrow,--but it was a godly
   sorrow that worked repentance. Hence the apostle had occasion to
   rejoice and did rejoice, 7: 7-16. The enemies of Paul, however, had
   been embittered by the former Epistle and had increased their sinister
   work, attempting to undermine the apostolic authority of Paul by
   charging that he was fickle and vacillating, 1:15-24; that he was
   controlled by fleshly motives, 10: 2; that he was bold at a distance,
   but cowardly, when present, 10:10; that he was dealing deceitfully with
   the Corinthians even in taking no support from them, 11: 7-12; and that
   he had not shown himself an apostle by his works, 12:11-13.

   The question may be asked to which one of the four parties mentioned in
   I Corinthians the enemies belong with which the apostle deals in II
   Cor. 10-13. It is quite clear, and scholars are generally agreed, that
   they were in the main, if not exclusively, ultra-Judaeists. But there
   is no such unanimity in classifying them with one of the divisions of
   which the first Epistle speaks. Following F. C. Baur many, such as
   Baljon, Davidson, Weiss, identify them with those whose watchword was:
   "I am of Christ !" Others, however, as Meyer and Zahn regard them as
   belonging to the party that professed special allegiance to Peter. To
   this view we give preference; however, with the provisos that in this
   letter Paul does not deal with the whole party, but rather with its
   leaders, who had probably come from Judaea with letters of
   commendation, 3:1, and whom Paul qualifies as "false apostles,
   deceitful workers, transforming themselves in apostles of Christ,"
   11:13 ;--and that it is quite possible that some of his words refer to
   those who, ignoring and dispising all human authority, claimed to be of
   Christ, and did not uphold the honor and faithfulness of the apostle
   against the false teachers. Cf. 10: 7.

   This being the situation at Corinth, when the apostle wrote his second
   letter, he was naturally led to write with a twofold purpose. In the
   first place it was his desire to express his gratitude for the way in
   which the Corinthians had received his former letter, and to inform
   them of the joy he experienced, when they had manifested their
   willingness to mend their ways and had been filled with godly sorrow.
   And in the second place he considered it incumbent on him to defend his
   apostleship against the calumnies and the malignant attacks of the
   Judaeistic adversaries.

   2. Time and Place. In view of the account we have given of the course
   of events that followed the writing ofI Corinthians, it is not very
   difficult to establbish approximately both the time and the place of
   writing. We may assume that, in accordance with the plan expressed in I
   Cor.15 : 8, the apostle remained at Ephesus until Pentecost of A. D.
   57. On leaving Ephesus he went to Troas, from where he crossed over to
   Macedonia. There he soon met Titus, presumably in the summer of that
   same year, and therefore some time before he was ready to visit
   Corinth, and received information from him regarding the condition of
   the Corinthian church. Overjoyed by what he heard, but at the same time
   apprehending the danger that lurked in the agitation of the Judaeizers,
   he immediately wrote II Corinthians, and sent it to Corinth by the hand
   of Titus, who was accompanied on his journey by two of the brethren,
   whose names are not recorded, 8:18, 22. The letter was written,
   therefore, in the summer of A. D. 57, somewhere in Macedonia.

    INTEGRITY

   The integrity of the letter has been attacked especially on two points.
   It is claimed by some that the verses 6: 14--7: 1 do not belong, where
   they stand, but form an awkward interruption in the course of thought.
   A few scholars regard them as a part of the lost letter to which I Cor.
   5: 9 refers. Now it is true that at first sight these verses seem out
   of place, where they stand, but at the same time it is very well
   possible to give a plausible explanation for their insertion at this
   point. Cf. Meyer, Alford, Expositors Greek Testament.

   Several critics opine that the chapters 10-13 did not originally form a
   part of this letter. Hausrath and Schmiedel advocated the theory that
   they constituted a part of the so-called Painful letter that intervened
   between I and II Corinthians. The reasons why they would separate this
   section from the other nine chapters, are the following: (1) The 10th
   chapter begins with the words Autos de ego Paulos, which de marks these
   words as an antithesis to something that is not found in the preceding.
   (2) The tone of the apostle in these last chapters is strikingly
   different from that in the other nine; from a calm and joyful tone it
   has changed to one of stern rebuke and of sharp invective. (3) Certain
   passages found in the first part point back to statements that are
   found in the last chapters, and thus prove that these are part of a
   previous letter. Thus 2: 3 refers to 13:10; 1:23 to 13:2; and 2:9 to
   10:6.

   But to these arguments we may reply, in the first place, that de often
   does no more than mark the transition to a new subject (cf. I Cor. 15:
   1; II Cor. 8:1); in the second place, that the change of tone need not
   surprise us, if we take in consideration the possibility that Paul did
   not write the whole Epistle at a single sitting and therefore in the
   same mood; and the fact that in the last chapters he deals more
   particularly with the false teachers among the Corinthians; and in the
   third place, that the passages referred to do not necessitate the
   construction put on them by the above named critics. Moreover, if we
   adopt the theory that another letter intervened between our two
   canonical Epistles. we are led to a very complicated scheme of Pauls
   transactions with Corinth, a scheme so complicated that it is its own
   condemnation.

    CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The ancient Church was unanimous in accepting the Epistle as a part of
   the Word of God. Of the apostolic fathers Polycarp plainly quotes it.
   Marcion included it in his canon, and it is also named in the
   Muratorian Fragment. The Syriac and old Latin Versions contain it, and
   the three great witnesses of the end of the second century quote it by
   name.

   This Epistle too has permanent value for the Church of God. It is
   inseparably connected with I Corinthians, and as such also brings out
   that it is not the wisdom of the world but the foolishness of the cross
   that saves; and sheds further light on the application of Christian
   principles to social relations. More than any other Epistle it reveals
   to us the apostles personality, and is therefore a great psychological
   aid in the interpretation of his writings. It also has considerable
   doctrinal interest in that it exhibits a part of the apostles
   eschatology, 4: 16--5 : 8; brings out the contrast between the letter
   and the spirit, 3: 6-18; describes the beneficent influence of the
   glory of Christ, 3:18--A: 6; and contains an explicit statement of the
   reconciliation and renovation wrought by Christ, 5:17-21.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistle to the Galatians

  CONTENTS

   The Epistle to the Galatians may be divided into three parts:

   I. Pauls Defense of his Apostleship, 1:1--2: 21. After the usual
   introduction the apostle states the occasion of his writing, 1:1-10. In
   defense of his apostleship he points out that he has been called by God
   himself and received his Gospel by direct revelation, and had no
   occasion to learn it from the other apostles, 1: 11-24; that the
   apostles showed their agreement with him by not demanding the
   circumcision of Titus and by admitting his mission to the gentiles.
   2:1-10; and that he had even rebuked Peter, when this "pillar of the
   church" was not true to the doctrine of free grace, 2:11-21.

   II. His Defense of the Doctrine of Justification, 3:1--4: 31. Here the
   apostle clearly brings out that the Galatians received the gift of the
   Spirit by faith, 3:1-5; that Abraham was justified by faith, 3: 6-9;
   that delivery from the curse of the law is possible only through faith,
   3:10-14; and that the law has merely a parenthetic character, coming,
   as it does, between the promise and its fulfillment, 3:15-29. He
   compares Judaeism to a son who is minor, and Christianity to a son that
   has attained his majority, 4:1-7; admonishes the Galatians that,
   realizing their privilege, they should not return to the beggarly
   elements of knowledge, 4: 8-20; and says that the Jew is like the child
   of Hagar, while the Christian resembles the child of Sara, 4: 21-3 1.

   III. Practical Exhortations, 5:1--6:18. The Galatians are exhorted to
   stand in their Christian liberty, 5:1-12, a liberty that is not license
   but obedience, 5:13-18. The works of the flesh and the fruits of the
   Spirit are described that the Galatians may avoid the former and yield
   the latter, 5:19-26. The right way of treating the erring and weak is
   pointed out, and also the relation of what one sows to what one reaps,
   5:1-10. With a brief summary and benediction Paul ends his letter, 6:
   11-18.

    CHARACTERISTICS

   1. The Epistle to the Galatians has a great deal in common with that
   written to the Romans. They both treat the same general theme, viz,
   that by the works of the law no man will be justified before God. The
   same Old Testament passage is quoted in Rom. 4: 3 and Gal. 3:6; and the
   same general argument is built on it, that the promise belongs to those
   who have faith like that which Abraham had even before he was
   circumcized. In both Epistles Paul aims at reconciling his admission
   that the Mosaic law came from God with his contention that it was not
   binding on Christians. Besides these similarities there are also
   several verbal agreements and parallel passages in these letters. Of
   the latter we may mention Rom. 8:14-17 and Gal. 4:5-7; Rom. 6:6-8 and
   Gal. 2:20; Rom. 13: 13, 14 and Gal. 5:16, 17.

   2. But however similar these Epistles may be, there are also striking
   differences. In the Epistle to the Romans Paul does not directly
   encounter such as are hostile to the truth or personal adversaries;
   hence it is written in a calm spirit and is at most indirectly
   polemical. This is quite different in the Epistle to the Galatians.
   There were those in the churches of Galatia who perverted the doctrine
   of the cross and called the apostolic authority of Paul in question. As
   a result this is one of the most controversial writings of the apostle;
   it is an outburst of indignant feeling, written in a fiery tone.

   3. This Epistle abounds in striking contrasts. Grace is contrasted with
   the Law in its Jewish application, and especially on its ritual side;
   faith is placed in antithetic relation to the works of man; the fruits
   of the Spirit are set over against the works of the flesh; circumcision
   is opposed to the new creation; and the enmity of the world to the
   cross of Christ is brought out in strong relief.

   4. The style of this letter is rather unique in that it unites the two
   extreme affections of Paul's admirable character: severity and
   tenderness. At times he speaks in a cold severe tone, as if he would
   scarcely recognize the Galatians as brethren; then again his whole
   heart seems to yearn for them. It is hard to imagine anything more
   solemnly severe than the opening verses of the epistle and 3:1-5; but
   it is equally difficult to conceive of something more tenderly
   affectionate than appeals such as we find in 4:12-16,18-20. We find in
   this letter a beautiful blending of sharp invective and tender
   pleading.

    AUTHORSHIP

   The authorship of the Epistle need not be subject to doubt, since both
   the external and the internal evidence are very strong. The letter is
   found in Marcions canon, is named in the Muratorian Fragment, and from
   the time of Irenaeus is regularly quoted by name. But even if the
   external testimony were not so strong, internal evidence would be quite
   sufficient to establish the Pauline authorship. The letter is
   self-attested, 1: 1, and clearly reveals the character of the great
   apostle; it does this all the better, since it is so intensely
   personal. And though there are some harmonistic difficulties, when we
   compare 1: 18 and Acts 9: 23 ;--l:18, 19 and Acts 9:26;--1:18; 2:1 and
   A&ts 9:26; 11:30;

   12: 25; 15: 2,--yet these are not insuperable, and, on the whole, the
   historical allusions found in the epistle fit in well with the
   narrative in Acts.

   For a long time Bruno Bauer was the only one to question the
   authenticity of this letter, but since 1882 the Dutch school of Loman
   and Van Manen joined him, followed by Friedrich in Germany. The
   principal reason for doubting it is the supposed impossibility of so
   rapid a development of the contrast between Jewish and Pauline
   Christianity as this letter presupposes. But the facts do not permit us
   to doubt that the conflict did occur then, while in the second century
   it had died out.

    THE CHURCHES OF GALATIA

   Among the Epistles of Paul this is the only one that is expressly
   addressed, not to an individual nor to a single church, but a group of
   churches, tais ekklesiais tes Galatias, 1 :2. When did the apostle
   found these Galatian churches? The answer to that question will
   necessarily depend on our interpretation of the term Galatia, as it is
   used by the apostle. There is a twofold use of this appellative, viz,
   the geographical and the political. Geographically the term Galatia
   denotes one of the Northern districts of Asia Minor, a district that
   was bounded on the North by Bithynia and Paplagonia, on the East by the
   last named province and Pontus, on the West by Phrygia, and on the
   South by Lycaonia and Capadocia. The same name is employed in an
   official, political sense, however, to designate the Roman province
   which included Galatia proper, a part of Phrygia, Pisidia and Lycaonia.
   This twofold significance of the name Galatia has led to two theories
   respecting the location of the Galatian churches, viz, the North and
   the South Galatian theory. The former still represents the prevailing
   view; but the latter is accepted by an ever increasing number of
   scholars.

   According to the North Galatian theory the churches of Galatia were
   situated in the geographical district indicated by that name. Since
   about 280 B. C. this territory was inhabited by a Celtic people,
   consisting of three separate tribes, that had migrated thither from
   Western Europe, and who constituted shortly before Christ the kingdom
   of Galatia. They were given to the worship of Cybele "with its wild
   ceremonial and hideous mutilations;" and were characterized by
   fickleness and great instability of character. "Inconstant and
   quarrelsome," says Lightfoot, Corn. p. 14, "treacherous in their
   dealings, incapable of sustained effort, easily disheartened by
   failures, such they appear, when viewed on their darker side." The
   adherents of this theory are generally agreed that Paul, in all
   probability, founded the Galatian churches in the most important cities
   of this district, i. e. in the capital Ancyra, in Pessinus, the
   principal seat of the hideous service of Cybele, and at Tavium. at once
   a strong fortress and a great commercial center. The South Galatian
   theory, on the other hand, identifies the Galatian churches with those
   founded by Paul on his first missionary journey at Pisidian Antioch,
   Iconium, Lystra and Derbe, not excluding any other churches that may
   have been founded in the province.

   The North Galatian theory is supported by the following considerations:
   (1) It is unlikely that Paul would address the inhabitants of Phrygia,
   Pisidia and Lycaonia as Galatians. That name could properly be given
   only to the Celts, the Gauls that lived in Galatia proper. (2) It is
   improbable that Paul would have referred to the churches founded by him
   and Barnabas jointly, as if they had been established by him alone. (3)
   The character of the Galatians, as it is reflected in this letter, is
   in remarkable agreement with that of the Celts whose changeableness was
   a subject of common comment. (4) Since in the Acts of the Apostles
   Mysia, Phrygia and Pisidia are all geographical terms, without any
   political significance, the inference seems perfectly warranted that
   the name Galatia, when it is found alongside of these, is employed in a
   similar sense. (5) "The expression used in the Acts of Pauls visit to
   these parts, the Phrygian and Galatian country, shows that the district
   intended was not Lycaonia and Pisidia, but some region which might be
   said to belong either to Phrygia or Galatia, or the parts of each
   contiguous to the other." (Lightfoot).

   Now we are not inclined to underrate the value of these arguments, but
   yet it seems to us that they are not altogether conclusive. The first
   one impresses us as a rather gratuitous assumption. Taking in
   consideration that the Roman province of Galatia was organized as early
   as 25 B. C. (Cf. Ramsay, Historical Comm. on the Galatians, p. 103 ff.
   and J. Weiss, Real-Enc. Art. Kleinasien), and had therefore existed at
   least 75 years, when Paul wrote this letter, it is hard to see, why he
   could not address its inhabitants as Galatians. This is true especially
   in view of the fact that the apostle shows a decided preference for the
   imperial nomenclature, probably since it was the most honorable.
   Moreover in writing to the congregations in South Galatia he could not
   very well use any other name, if he did not wish to address them in a
   very cumbrous way.--In connection with the second argument we must bear
   in mind that this Epistle was written after the rupture between
   Barnabas and Paul, when, so it seems; the labor was divided so that
   Paul received charge of the South Galatian churches. It was but natural
   therefore that he should feel the sole responsibility for them.--On the
   third argument Salmon, who also advocates the North Galatian theory,
   would wisely place little reliance, because "it may be doubted whether
   Celts formed the predominating element in the churches of Galatia," and
   since "men of different nationalities show a common nature." Introd. p.
   412.--We do not feel the cogency of the fourth argument for, granted
   that Luke does use the term Galatia in its geographical sense, this
   does not prove anything as to Paul's usage. In fact the presumption is
   that the apostle did not so use it.--And the last argument is of rather
   dubious value, since it rests on an uncertain interpretation of the
   expressions ten Phrugian kai Galatiken, Acts 16:, and ten Galatiken
   Choran kai Phrugian, Acts 18: 23. The expression in 16: 6 can probably
   also be translated "the Phrygo-Galatic region," referring to that part
   of the province Galatia that included Antioch and Iconium, and that
   originally belonged to Phrygia. In 18: 23, however, where the names are
   reversed, we must translate, "the Galatic territory and Phrygia," the
   last name then, according to Ramsay, referring to either Phrygia
   Galatica or Phrygia Magna. In any event it seems peculiar that Paul, if
   in these places he has reference to Galatia proper, should speak of the
   Galatian territory rather than of Galatia.

   The North Galatian theory is defended by Weiss, Davidson, Julicher,
   Godet and especially by Lightfoot. But the South Galatian theory also
   has able defenders, such as Renan, Hausrath, Zahn, Baljon and above all
   Ramsay, whose extended travels and research in Asia Minor, combined
   with great learning, enable him to speak with authority on questions
   pertaining to that district. This theory assumes that Paul used the
   name Galatia in its official political sense, and that the Galatian
   churches were those of Antioch, Iconium, Lystra and Derbe, e. a.
   Although we do not feel inclined to speak dogmatically on the subject,
   it seems to us that this theory deserves preference for the following
   reasons: (1) It was evidently Paul's uniform custom to denote the
   location of the churches which he founded, not by the popular but by
   the official nomenclature. Thus he speaks of the churches of Asia, I
   Cor. 16:19; the churches of Macedonia, II Cor. 8:1; and the churches of
   Achaia, II Cor. 1:1. And that this was not something peculiar to Paul,
   is proved by the fact that Peter does the same in I Peter 1:1, where
   the term Galatia is obviously used in its political sense, since all
   the other names refer to Roman provinces. Even Light-foot admits that
   this is probably the case. (2) That Paul founded churches in the Roman
   province of Galatia is a well attested fact, of which we have a
   detailed narrative in Acts 13 and 14; on the other hand, we have no
   record whatever of his establishing churches in the district of that
   name. It is certainly not very obvious that Luke in Acts 16: 6 wants to
   convey the idea that the apostle established churches in North Galatia.
   The most that can be said, is that Acts 18: 23 implies such previous
   activity on the part of Paul; but even this depends on the correct
   interpretation of the phrase, "the country of Galatia and Phrygia."
   Lightfoot himself regards it as "strange that, while we have more or
   less acquaintance with all the other important churches of St. Paul's
   founding, not a single name of a person or place, scarcely a single
   incident of any kind, connected with the apostles preaching in Galatia,
   should be preserved either in the history or in the epistle." Comm. p.
   20. (3) The Epistle refers to the collection for the Judaean saints,
   2:10 and in I Cor. 16: 1 Paul says that he commanded the churches in
   Galatia to take part in this. What is the meaning of the term Galatia
   here? From the Epistles of Paul we gather that the churches of Galatia,
   I Cor. 16: 1, Macedonia, II Cor. 8:1; 9: 2; and Achaia, Rom. 15: 26,
   contributed for this cause; while from Acts 20: 4 we learn that
   representatives from Asia also accompanied Paul to Jerusalem, according
   to the principle laid down in I Cor. 16: 3, 4. Now if we take the name
   Galatia in its official sense here, then all the churches founded by
   Paul are seen to participate in this work of charity; while if we
   interpret it as referring to North Galatia, the churches of Antioch,
   Iconium, Lystra and Derbe are not mentioned, and the impression is
   created that they did not take part. But this is exceedingly
   improbable, and the improbability is heightened by the fact that among
   the representatives accompanying Paul we also find Secundus and Gajus
   of Derbe and Timotheus of Lystra, while there are none to represent
   North Galatia. (4) From Gal. 4:13 we learn that Paul first preached the
   gospel to the Galatians through infirmity of the flesh. This may mean
   that Paul, traveling through Galatia, was detained there by sickness,
   or that he repaired to this district, in order to recuperate from some
   disease. But the road through North Galatia did not lead to any place,
   where Paul was likely to go, and its climate was very undesirable for
   an invalid. On the other hand the supposition is altogether natural
   that the apostle contracted some disease in the marshy lowlands of
   Pamphylia, and therefore sought restoration in the bracing atmosphere
   of Pisidian Antioch. (5) In this Epistle Paul repeatedly mentions
   Barnabas as a person well known to the Galatians, 2:1, 9, 13. Now he
   was Pauls co-laborer in establishing the South Galatian churches, but
   did not accompany the apostle on his second missionary journey, when
   the churches of North Galatia are supposed to have been founded. It is
   true that this argument is somewhat neutralized by the fact that
   Barnabas is mentioned also in I Cor. 9: 6; yet this is not altogether
   the case, since the references in Galatians are more specific. In 2: 9,
   where Paul seeks to establish his apostleship, he also seems to
   consider it desirable to vindicate the legitimacy of Barnabas mission;
   while in 2:13 he presupposes that his readers have knowledge of the
   stand taken by Barnabas with reference to the doctrine of free grace.
   We conclude, therefore, that the Galatian churches were in all
   probability those founded by Paul on his first missionary journey in
   South Galatia. Cf. especially Ramsay, The Church in the Roman Empire
   pp. 3-112; St. Paul the Traveler and the Roman Citizen pp. 89-151; and
   Zahns Einleitung II pp. 124-139.

   The Galatian churches were mainly composed of Gentile-Christians, but
   also contained an important Jewish element. This can be inferred from
   the narrative in Acts 13 and 14. The Gentiles were eager to receive the
   truth, 13 : 42, 46-48; 14:1, while the Jews were very much divided,
   some believingly accepting the word of the apostles, 13 : 43; 14:1, and
   others rejecting it with scorn and maltreating the messengers of the
   cross, 13: 45, 50; 40: 2, 5, 19. The impression received from the
   narrative is corroborated by the Epistle, which in the main addresses
   itself to the Greeks who had not yet accepted circumcision, but had of
   late been urged to submit to this rite, if not to all the Jewish
   ceremonies, that they might share in the covenant blessings of Abraham.
   The apostle describes the whole congregation according to the majojrity
   of its members, when he says in 4: 8, "Howbeit then, when ye knew not
   God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no gods." Yet it is
   evident from 3 : 23-25, 28 that he also bears the Jewish element in
   mind. We need not doubt, however, that the majority of the Greeks that
   constituted the Galatian churches had already for some time attended
   the synagogue of the Jews before they were converted to Christianity,
   and therefore belonged to the proselytes, the so-called devout persons
   of whom Acts repeatedly speaks. This may be inferred from Acts 13 : 43;
   14:1, and from the fact that the apostle presupposes a certain
   familiarity in his readers with the patriarchal history, the Law, the
   Psalms and the Prophets.

    COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. After Paul had preached the gospel to the
   Galatians and had seen them well started on the royal road to
   salvation, Judaeizing teachers entered the field, jealous of their
   Jewish prerogatives. Probably they were emissaries from Jerusalem that
   abused a commission entrusted to them, or assumed an authority which
   they in no way possessed. They did not combat Christianity as such, but
   desired that it should be led in Judaeistic channels. Every convert to
   Christianity should submit to circumcision, if not to the whole
   ceremonial law. Their teaching was quite the opposite of Pauls
   doctrine, and could only be maintained by discrediting the apostle.
   Hence they sought to undermine his personal influence and to depreciate
   his apostolic authority by claiming that he had not been called of God
   and had received the truth at second-hand from the Twelve. It seems
   that Paul, when he last visited the Galatian churches, had already
   encountered some such enemies, 1: 9, but he now heard that their
   influence was increasing, and that they were successful in persuading
   the Galatians to forsake their Christian privileges, and thus virtually
   though perhaps unwittingly, to deny Christ who had bought them, 3:1;
   4:9-11, 17; 5:7,8, 10. Hence he deems it imperative to write them a
   letter.

   The purpose of the author in writing this Epistle was, of course,
   twofold. In order that his words might be effective, it was necessary,
   first of all, that he should defend his apostolic authority by proving
   that God had called him and had imparted the truth of the gospel to him
   by means of a direct revelation. And in the second place it was
   incumbent on him that he should expose the Judaeistic error by which
   they were led astray, and should defend the doctrine of justification
   by faith.

   2. Time and Place. There is great diversity of opinion as to the time,
   when the Epistle was written. Zahn, Hausrath, Baljon and Rendall (in
   The Exp. Gk. Test.) regard it as the earliest of Paul's Epistles, and
   assume that it was written during the early part of his stay in Corinth
   in the year 53. Ramsay thinks it was written from Antioch at the end of
   the second missionary journey, i. e. according to his dating, also in
   A. D. 53. Weiss, Holtzmann and Godet refer it to the early part of
   Paul's Ephesian residence, about the year 54 or 55, while Warfield
   prefers to place it towards the end of this period in A. D. 57. And
   finally Lightfoot and Salmon agree in dating it after Paul's departure
   from Ephesus. This great variety of opinion proves that the data for
   determining the time are few and uncertain. Those accepting the North
   Galatian theory are virtually confined to a date after the beginning of
   Paul's Ephesian residence in the year 54, because the proterron of Gal.
   4:13 seems to imply that the apostle had visited the churches of
   Galatia twice before he wrote his letter; while it is for the same
   reason most natural that they who advocate the South Galatiari theory,
   find their terminus a quo in A. D. 52 (McGiffert notwithstanding), when
   Paul had paid a second visit to the South Galatian churches. Assuming,
   as we do, that this letter was addressed to the churches of South
   Galatia, we may dismiss the idea that the apostle wrote it during the
   third missionary journey, because this would imply that he had already
   visited them three times, in which case he would have used proton
   instead of proteron in 4 :13. Moreover if Paul wrote it from Ephesus,
   the question is naturally raised, why he did not visit the Galatians
   rather than write to them, seeing that he had a great desire to be with
   them, 4: 20. We are inclined to think that Paul wrote this letter on
   his second missionary journey, after he had passed into Europe, and
   probably during the first part of his residence at Corinth, for: (1)
   Gal. 4: 20 implies that Paul was at some distance from the Galatian
   churches; (2) The letter presupposes that some time had elapsed between
   its composition and the second visit of the apostle; and (3) The letter
   contains no greetings from Silas and Timotheus, who were both well
   known to the Galatians. Evidently they had not yet reached Corinth.

    CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   There has never been any serious doubt respecting the canonicity of
   this Epistle. It was received as authoritative in all sections of the
   Church from the very earliest times. There are allusions to its
   language in the apostolic fathers, Clement of Rome, Polycarp and
   Ignatius. Justin Martyr, Melito and Athanagoras seem to have known it;
   and some of the heretics, especially the Ophites, used it extensively.
   It is found in Marcions canon, is named in the Muratorian Fragment, and
   the Syriac and old Latin versions contain it. From the end of the
   second century the quotations multiply and increase in directness and
   definiteness.

   This Epistle too has abiding significance for the Church of God. It is
   essentially a defense of the doctrine of free grace, of the Christian
   liberty of New Testament believers over against those that would bring
   them under the law in its Old Testament application, and would place
   them under the obligation to submit to circumcision and to participate
   in the shadowy ceremonies of a by-gone day. The great central
   exhortation of this letter is: "Stand fast in the liberty wherewith
   Christ has made us free, and be not tangled again with the yoke of
   bondage." The way of the ritualist is not the way of life, is the
   lesson that should be remembered by all those who are inclined to
   over-emphasize the outward form of religion to the neglect of its
   spirit and essence.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistle to the Ephesians

  CONTENTS

   The Epistle to the Ephesians is naturally divided into two parts:

   I. The Doctrinal Part, treating of the Unity of the Church, 1:1--3: 21.
   After the address and salutation, l:l, 2, the apostle praises God for
   the great spiritual blessings received in Christ, in whom the Ephesians
   have been chosen, adopted and sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,
   1: 3-14. He renders thanks for these blessings and prays that God may
   make known to the Church, the glorious body of Christ, who filleth all
   in all, the glory of its heavenly calling, 1: 15- 23. Then he compares
   the past and present condition of the readers, 2:1-13, and describes
   Christs work of reconciliation, resulting in the unity and glory of the
   Church, 2:14-22. Next he enlarges on the mystery of the Gospel and
   reminds his readers that he has been commissioned by God to make it
   known to mankind, 3:1-13. He prays that they may be strengthened and
   enabled to comprehend the greatness of the love of Christ to the glory
   of God, 3:14-21.

   II. The Practical Part, containing Exhortations to a Conversation
   worthy of the Calling and Unity of the Readers, 4: 1--6: 20. The
   readers are exhorted to maintain the unity which God seeks to establish
   among them by distributing spiritual gifts and instituting different
   offices, 4:1-16. They should not walk as the Gentiles do, but according
   to the principle of their new life, shunning the vices of the old man
   and practicing the virtues of the new, 4:17-32. In society if must be
   their constant endeavor to be separate from the evils of the world and
   to walk circumspectly; husbands and wives should conform in their
   mutual relation to the image of Christ and the Church; children should
   obey their parents and servants their masters, 5:1--6: 9. Finally Paul
   exhorts the readers to be strong in the Lord, having put on the whole
   armour of God and seeking strength in prayer and supplication; and he
   closes his Epistle with some personal intelligence and a twofold
   salutation, 6:10-24.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. This letter is marked first of all by its general character. It has
   this in common with the Epistle to the Romans, that it partakes
   somewhat of the nature of a treatise; yet it is as truly a letter, as
   any one of the other writings of Paul. Deissmann correctly remarks,
   however, that "the personal element is less prominent in it than the
   impersonal." St. Paul, p. 23. The letter does not presuppose, like
   those to the Corinthians and to the Galatians, some special clearly
   marked historical situation, does not refer to any historical incidents
   known to us from other sources, except the imprisonment of Paul, and
   contains no personal greetings. The only person mentioned is Tychicus,
   the bearer of the letter. It treats in a profound and sublime manner of
   the unity of all believers in Jesus Christ, and of the holy
   conversation in Christ that must issue from it.

   2. It is also characterized by its great similarity to the letter sent
   to the Colossians. This is so great that some critics have regarded it
   as merely a revised and enlarged edition of the latter; but this idea
   must be dismissed altogether, because the difference between them is
   too great and fundamental. The Epistle to the Colossians is more
   personal and controversial than that to the Ephesians; the former
   treats of Christ, the Head of the Church, while the latter is mainly
   concerned with the Church, the body of Christ. Notwithstanding this,
   however, the resemblance of the two is readily observed. There is good
   reason for calling them twin letters. In many cases the same words and
   forms of expression are found in both; the thought is often identical,
   while the language differs; and the general structure of the Epistles
   is very similar.

   3. The style of the letter is in general very exalted, and forms a
   great contrast with that of the epistle to the Galatians. Dr. Sanday
   says: "With few exceptions scholars of all different schools who have
   studied and interpreted this epistle have been at one in regarding it
   as one of the sublimest and most profound of all the New Testament
   writings. In the judgment of many who are well entitled to deliver an
   opinion, it is the grandest of all the Pauline letters." The Exp. Gk.
   Test. III p. 208. The style is characterized by a succession of
   participial clauses and dependent sentences that flow on like a
   torrent, and by lengthy-digressions. One is impressed by its grandeur,
   but often finds it difficult to follow the apostle as he soars to giddy
   heights. The language is further remarkable in that it contains a
   series of terms with far-reaching significance, such as the council
   (boule), of God, His will (thelema), His purpose (prothesis), His good
   pleasure (eudokia), etc., and also a great number of hapax legomena.
   According to Holtzmann there are 76 words that are peculiar to this
   epistle, of which 18 are found nowhere else in the Bible, 17 do not
   occur in the rest of the New Testament, and 51 are absent from all the
   other Pauline letters (the Pastoral epistles being excepted).
   Einleitung p. 259.

  AUTHORSHIP

   The historical evidence for the Pauline authorship of the Epistle is
   exceptionally strong. Some scholars claim that Ignatius even speaks of
   Paul as the author, when he says in his Epistle to the Ephesians:
   "--who (referring back to Paul) throughout all his Epistle (en pase
   epistole) makes mention of you in Christ Jesus." But it is very
   doubtful, whether the rendering, "in all the Epistle," should not
   rather be, "in every Epistle." Marcion ascribed the letter to Paul, and
   in the Muratorian Fragment the church of Ephesus is mentioned as one of
   the churches to which Paul wrote Epistles. Irenaeus and Clement of
   Alexandria refer to Paul by name as the author of this letter and quote
   it as his, while Tertullian mentions Ephesus among the churches that
   had apostolic Epistles.

   Internal evidence also points to Paul as the author. In the opening
   verse of the Epistle the writer is named, and the structure of the
   letter is characteristically Pauline. In the first place it contains
   the usual blessing and thanksgiving; this is followed in the regular
   way by the body of the epistle, consisting of a doctrinal and a
   practical part; and finally it ends with the customary salutations. The
   ideas developed are in perfect agreement with those found in the
   letters which we already discussed, although in certain particulars
   they advance beyond them, as f. i. in the theological conception of the
   doctrine of redemption; and in the doctrine of the Church as the body
   of Christ with its various organs. The style of the Epistle too is
   Pauline. It is true that it differs considerably from that of Romans,
   Corinthians and Galatians, but it shows great affinity with the style
   of Colossians and of the Pastorals.

   Notwithstanding all the evidence in favor of the Pauline authorship of
   this Epistle, its authenticity has been questioned by several New
   Testament scholars. De Wette, Baur and his school, Davidson, Holtzmann
   and Weizsacker are among the most prominent. The idea is that some
   later, probably a second century writer impersonated the great apostle.
   The principal grounds on which the Epistle was attacked, are the
   following: (1) It is so like the Epistle to the Colossians that it
   cannot be an original document. De Wette came to the conclusion that it
   was a "verbose amplification" of the Epistle to the Colossians.
   Holtzmann, finding that in some parts the priority must be ascribed to
   Ephesians rather than to Colossians, advocated the theory that Paul
   wrote an Epistle to the Colossians shorter than our canonical letter;
   that a forger, guided by this, fabricated the Epistle to the Ephesians;
   and that this plagiarist was so enamoured with his work that he, in
   turn, revised the Colossian Epistle in accordance with it. (2) The
   vocabulary and in general the style of the Epistle is so different from
   that of the other letters of Paul as to give it an un-Pauline stamp.
   This objection is based partly, though not primarily, on the numerous
   hapax lechomena; but especially on the use of Pauline words in a new
   souse, such as musterion, oikonomia and peripoiesis; on the expression
   of certain ideas by terms that differ from those employed elsewhere by
   the apostle for the same purpose, as f. i. ho theos tou kuriou hemon
   Iesou, 1:17, and above all tois hagiois apostolois kai prophetais, 3
   :5, which, it is said, smacks of a later time, when the apostles were
   held in great veneration, and does not agree with the apostles estimate
   of himself in 3 : 8; and on the fact that, as Davidson puts it, "there
   is a fulness of expression which approaches the verbose." (3) The line
   of thought in this letter is very different from that of the recognized
   Pauline Epistles. The law is contemplated, not in its moral and
   religious value, but only as the cause of enmity and separation between
   Jew and Gentile; the death of Christ is not dwelt on as much as in the
   other Epistles, while his exaltation is made far more prominent; the
   parousia is placed in the distant future; and instead of the diversity
   the unity of the Church in Jesus Christ if emphasized: (4) The Epistle
   contains traces of Gnostic and even of Montanist influences in such
   words as aiones, pleromaand geneai (5) The letter, along with the
   writings of John, evidently aims at reconciling the Petrine and Pauline
   factions, and therefore emphasizes the unity of the Church. This
   unmistakably points to the second century as the time of its
   composition.

   But these objections are not sufficient to discredit the Pauline
   authorship. Such men as Lightfoot, Ellicott, Eadie, Meyer, Hodge,
   Reuss, Godet, Weiss, Baljon, Zahn, Sanday and Abbot defend it. The
   similarity of the Epistle and that to the Colossians is most naturally
   explained by the fact that the two were written by the same author, at
   about the same time, under similar circumstances, and to neighboring
   congregations. The idea that it is but a copy of the Epistle to the
   Colossians is now generally given up, since it appears that many
   passages favor the priority of Ephesians. The theory of Holtzmann is
   too complicated to command serious consideration. This whole argument
   is very peculiar in view of the following ones. While it derives its
   point from the Epistles similarity to Colossians, their cogency depends
   on the unlikeness of this letter to the other Epistles of Paul. The
   linguistic features to which the critics call attention are not such as
   to disprove the Pauline authorship. If the hapax legomena found in this
   letter prove that it is unPauline, we must come to a similar conclusion
   with respect to the Epistle to the Romans, for this contains a hundred
   words that are peculiar. The terms that are said to be used in a new
   sense dwindle into insignificance on closer inspection. And of the
   expressions that are held to be unusual only the one in 3: 5 has any
   argumentative force. And even this need not cause surprise, especially
   not, if we take in consideration that Paul designates believers in
   general as hagioi, and that in this place he applies this epithet at
   once to the apostles and to the prophets. And further we may ask,
   whether it is reasonable to demand that such a fertile mind as that of
   Paul should always express itself in the same way. The argument derived
   from the line of thought in this Epistle simply succeeds in proving,
   what is perfectly obvious, that the apostle looks at the work of
   redemption from a point of view different from that of the other
   letters, that he views it sub specie aeternitatis. It is now generally
   admitted that the supposed traces of Gnosticism and Montanism have no
   argumentative value, since the terms referred to do not have the second
   century connotation in this Epistle. Similarly that other argument of
   the Tubingen school, that the letter was evidently written to heal the
   breach between the Judaeistic and the liberal factions of the Church,
   is now discarded, because it was found to rest on an unhistorical
   basis.

  DESTINATION

   There is considerable uncertainty respecting the destination of this
   Epistle. The question is whether the words en Epheso in 1:1 are
   genuine. They are indeed found in all the extant MSS. with the
   exception of three, viz, the important MSS. Aleph and B and codex 67.
   The testimony of Basil is that the most ancient MSS. in his day did not
   contain these words. Tertullian informs us that Marcion gave the
   Epistle the title ad Laodicenos; and Origen apparently did not regard
   the words as genuine. All the old Versions contain them; but, on the
   other hand, Westcott and Hort say: "Transcriptional evidence strongly
   supports the testimony of documents against en Epheso." New Testament
   in Greek, Appendix p. 123. Yet there was in the Church an early and,
   except as regards Marcion, universal tradition that the Epistle was
   addressed to the Ephesians. Present day scholars quite generally reject
   the words, although they are still defended by Meyer, Davidson, Eadie
   and Hodge. The conclusion to which the majority of scholars come is,
   either that the Epistle was not written to the Ephesians at all, or
   that it was not meant for them only, but also for the other churches in
   Asia.

   Now if we examine the internal evidence, we find that it certainly
   favors the idea that this Epistle was not intended for the Ephesian
   church exclusively, for (1) It contains no references to the peculiar
   circumstances of the Ephesian church, but might be addressed to any of
   the churches founded by Paul. (2) There are no salutations in it from
   Paul or his companions to any one in the Ephesian church. (3) The
   Epistle contemplates only heathen Christians. while the church at
   Ephesus was composed of both Jews and Gentiles, 2:11, 12; 4:17; 5: 8.
   (4) To these proofs is sometimes added that 1: 15 and 3: 2 make it
   appear as if Paul and his readers were not acquainted with each other;
   but this is not necessarily implied in these passages.

   In all probability the words en Epheso were not originally in the text.
   But now the question naturally arises, how we must interpret the
   following words tois hagiois tois ousin kai pistois; etc. Several
   suggestions have been made. Some would read: "The saints who are really
   such ;" others: "the saints existing and faithful in Jesus Christ ;"
   still others: "the saints who are also faithful." But none of these
   interpretations is satistactory: the first two are hardly grammatical;
   and the last one implies that there are also saints who are not
   faithful, and that the Epistle was written for a certain select view.
   Probably the hypothesis first suggested by Ussher is correct, that a
   blank was originally left after tois ousin, and that Tychicus or
   someone else was to make several copies of this Epistle and to fill in
   the blank with the name of the church to which each copy was to be
   sent. The fact that the church of Ephesus was the most prominent of the
   churches for which it was intended, will account for the insertion of
   the words en Epheso in transcribing the letter, and for the universal
   tradition regarding its destination. Most likely, therefore, this was a
   circular letter, sent to several churches in Asia, such as those of
   Ephesus, Laodicea, Hierapolis, e. a. Probably it is identical with the
   Epistle ek Laodikias, Col. 4 :16.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. There is nothing in the Epistle to indicate
   that it was called forth by any special circumstances in the churches
   of Asia. To all appearances it was merely the prospective departure of
   Tychicus and Onesimus for Colossae, 6: 21, 22; Col. 4: 7-9, combined
   with the intelligence that Paul received as to the faith of the readers
   in the Lord Jesus, and regarding their love to all the saints, 1: 15,
   that led to its composition.

   Since the Epistle was not called forth by any special historical
   situation, the purpose of Paul in writing it was naturally of a general
   character. It seems as if what he had heard of "the faith of the
   readers in the Lord Jesus, and of their love to all the saints,"
   involuntarily fixed his thought on the unity of believers in Christ,
   and therefore on that grand edifice,--the Church of God. He sets forth
   the origin, the development, the unity and holiness, and the glorious
   end of that mystical body of Christ. He pictures the transcendent
   beauty of that spiritual temple, of which Christ is the chief
   cornerstone and the saints form the superstructure.

   2. Time and Place. From 3: 1 and 4: 1 we notice that Paul was a
   prisoner, when he wrote this Epistle. From the mention of Tychicus as
   the bearer of it in 6: 21, compared with Col. 4: 7 and Philemon 13, we
   may infer that these three letters were written at the same time. And
   it has generally been thought that they were composed during the Roman
   imprisonment of Paul. There are a few scholars, however, such as Reuss
   and Meyer, who believe that they date from the imprisonment at
   Caesarea, A. D. 58-60. Meyer urges this view on the following grounds:
   (1) It is more natural and probable that the slave Onesimus had run
   away as far as Caesarea than that he had made the long journey to Rome.
   (2) If these Epistles had been sent from Rome, Tychicus and Onesimus
   would have arrived at Ephesus first and then at Colossae. But in that
   case the apostle would most likely have mentioned Onesimus along with
   Tychicus in Ephesians, like he does in Collossians 4: 9, to insure the
   runaway slave a good reception; which was not necessary however, if
   they reached Colossae first, as they would in coming from Casarea,
   since Onesimus would remain there.

   (3) In Eph. 6: 21 the expression, "But that ye also may know my
   affairs," implies that there were others who had already been informed
   of them, viz, the Collossians, Col. 4: 8, 9. (4) Pauls request to
   Philemon in Philem. 22, to prepare a lodging for him, and that too, for
   speedy use, favors the idea that the apostle was much nearer Coloss~e
   than the far distant Rome. Moreover Paul says in Phil. 2: 24 that he
   expected to proceed to Macedonia after his release from the Roman
   imprisonment.

   But these arguments are not conclusive. To the first one we may reply
   that Onesimus would be far safer from the pursuit of the fugitivarii in
   a large city like Rome than in a smaller one such as Caesarea. The
   second argument loses its force, if this Epistle was a circular letter,
   written to the Christians of Asia in general. The kai in Eph. 6 :21 is
   liable to different interpretations, but finds a sufficient explanation
   in the fact that the Epistle to the Colossians was written first. And
   in reply to the last argument we would say that Philem. 22 does not
   speak of a speedy coming, and that the apostle may have intended to
   pass through Macedonia to Colossae.

   It seems to us that the following considerations favor the idea that
   the three Epistles under consideration were written from Rome: (1) From
   Eph. 6:19, 20 we infer that Paul had sufficient liberty during his
   imprisonment to preach the gospel. Now this ill accords with what we
   learn of the imprisonment at Qesarea from Acts 24:23, while it
   perfectly agrees with the situation in which Paul found himself at Rome
   according to Acts 28:16. (2) The many companions of Paul, viz.
   Tychicus, Aristarchus, Marcus, Justus, Epaphras, Luke and Demas, quite
   different from those that accompanied him on his last journey to
   Jerusalem (cf. Acts 20: 4), also point to Rome, where the apostle might
   utilize them for evangelistic work. Cf. Phil. 1:14. (3) In all
   probability Philippians belongs to the same period as the other
   Epistles of the imprisonment; and if this is the case, the mention of
   Caesars household in Phil. 4: 22 also points to Rome. (4) Tradition
   also names Rome as the place of composition. Ephesians must probably be
   dated about A.D. 62.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The early Church leaves no doubt as to the canonicity of this Epistle.
   It is possible that we have the first mention of it in the New
   Testament itself, Col. 4:16. The writings of Igpatius, Polycarp, Herman
   and Hippolytus contain passages that seem to be derived from our
   Epistle. Marcion, the Muratorian Canon, Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria
   and Tertullian clearly testify to its early recognition and use. There
   is not a dissentient voice in all antiquity.

   The particular significance of the Epistle lies in its teaching
   regarding the unity of the Church: Jews and Gentiles are one in Christ.
   It constantly emphasizes the fact that believers have their unity in
   the Lord and therefore contains the expression "in Christ" about twenty
   times. The unity of the faithful originates in their election, since
   God the Father chose them in Christ before the foundation of the world,
   1: 4; it finds expression in a holy conversation, sanctified by true
   love, that naturally results from their living relation with Christ, in
   whom they are builded together for a habitation of God in the Spirit;
   and it issues in their coming in the "unity of the faith, and of the
   knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
   the stature of the fulness of Christ." The great practical exhortation
   of the Epistle is that believers live worthily of their union with
   Christ, since they were sometime darkness, but are now light in the
   Lord, and should therefore walk as children of light, 5:8.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistle to the Philippians

  CONTENTS

   In the Epistle to the Philippians we may distinguish five parts:

   I. Pauls Account of his Condition, 1: 1-26. The apostle addresses the
   Philippians in the usual way, 1, 2; and then informs them of his
   gratitude for their participation in the work of the Gospel, of his
   prayer for their increase in spiritual strength and labor, of the fact
   that even his imprisonment was instrumental in spreading the Gospel,
   and of his personal feelings and desires, 3-26.

   II. His Exhortation to Imitate Christ, 1: 27--2:18. He exhorts the
   Philippians to strive after unity by exercising the necessary
   self-denial, 1: 27--2: 4; points them to the pattern of Christ, who
   humiliated himself and was glorified by God, 2: 5-11; and expresses his
   desire that they follow the example of their Lord, 12-18.

   III. In formation respecting Paul's Efforts in behalf of the
   Philippians, 2:19-30. He intends to send Timotheus to them that he may
   know of their condition, and therefore commends this worthy servant of
   Christ to them, 19-23; and though he trusted that he himself would come
   shortly he now sends Epaphroditus back to them, and bespeaks a good
   reception for him, 24-30.

   IV. Warnings against Judaeism and Antinomian Error, 3:1-21. The apostle
   warns his readers against Judaeistic zealots that boasted in the flesh,
   pointed to his own example in renouncing his fleshly prerogatives that
   he might gain Christ and experience the power of His resurrection, and
   in striving after perfection, 1:15. By way of contrast this induces him
   to warn them also for the example of those whose lives are worldly and
   licentious, 16-21.

   V. Final Exhortations and Acknowledgment, 4:1-23. He urges the
   Philippians to avoid all dissension, 1-3; exhorts them to joyfulness,
   freedom from care, and the pursuit of all good things, 4-9; gratefully
   acknowledges their gifts, invoking a blessing on their love, 10-20; and
   closes his Epistle with salutation and benediction, 21-23.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. The Epistle to the Philippians is one of the most personal of Paul's
   letters, resembling in that respect II Corinthians. It has been called
   the most letter-like of all the writings of Paul, and may be compared
   in this respect with I Thessalonians and Philemon. The personal note is
   very marked throughout the Epistle. There is not much dogma, and what
   little is found is introduced for practical purposes. This holds true
   even with reference to the classical passage in 2:6-11. The apostle,
   with the prospect of an early martyrdom before him, yet not without
   hope of a speedy release, opens his heart to his most beloved
   congregation. He speaks of the blessings that attend his labors at
   Rome, of the strait in which he finds himself, and expresses his desire
   to remain with them. He manifests his love for the Philippians, shows
   himself concerned for their spiritual welfare, and expresses his
   profound gratitude for their support. Though in bonds, he rejoices, and
   bids the readers be joyful. The tone of joyous gratitude rings through
   the entire Epistle.

   2. The letter is in no sense a controversial one. There are in it no
   direct polemics; there is very little that has to any degree a
   polemical character. The apostle warns against errorists that are
   without the church, but might disturb its peace, and forestalls their
   attacks; he hints at dissensions, most likely of a practical nature, in
   the congregation, and admonishes the readers to be peaceful and
   self-denying; but he never once assumes a polemical attitude, like he
   does in Corinthians or Galatians. Stronger still, the Epistle is
   singularly free from all denunciation and reproof; it is written
   throughout in a lauditory spirit. The apostle finds little to chide and
   much to praise in the Philippian church.

   3. The address of the Epistle is peculiar in that it names not only,
   "the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi," but adds, "with the
   bishops and deacons." In that respect it stands in a class by itself.
   The greetings at the end of the Epistle are also unique. On the one
   hand they are very general, while, on the other, "the household of
   Caesar" is singled out for special mention.

   4. As to style, Alford reminds us, that this letter, like all those in
   which Paul writes with fervor, "is discontinuous and abrupt, passing
   rapidly from one theme to another; full of earnest exhortation,
   affectionate warnings, deep and wonderful settings-forth of his
   individual spiritual condition and feelings, of the state of the
   Christian and of the sinful world, of the loving councils of our Father
   respecting us, and the self-sacrifice and triumph of our Redeemer."
   Prolegomena Sec. IV. There are constant expressions of affection, such
   as agapetoi andadelphoi. Notice especially 4:1, "Therefore my brethren,
   my dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in
   the Lord, my dearly beloved."

  AUTHORSHIP

   The Pauline authorship of this Epistle is established as well as
   anything can be. We probably find the first reference to it in the
   epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians, where we read: "The glorious
   Paul who, being personally among you, taught you exactly and surely the
   word of truth; who also, being absent, wrote you letters (or, a letter)
   which you have only to study to be edified in the faith that has been
   given you." The passage does not necessarily refer to more than one
   letter. Our Epistle formed a part of Marcions collection, is mentioned
   in the Muratorian canon, is found in the Syriac and old Latin Versions,
   and is quoted by Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian and many
   others.

   And this testimony of antiquity is clearly borne out by the evidence
   furnished by the Epistle itself. It is self-attested and has, at the
   beginning, the usual Pauline blessing and thanksgiving. Above all,
   however, it is like II Corinthians in that the personality of the
   apostle is so strongly stamped on it as to leave little room for doubt.
   The historical circumstances which the Epistle presupposes, the type of
   thought which it contains, the language in which it is couched, and the
   character which it reveals,--it is all Pauline.

   The evidence in its favor is so strong that its authenticity has been
   generally admitted, even by radical critics. Of course, Baur and the
   majority of his school rejected it, but even Hilgenfeld, Julicher and
   Pfleiderer accept it as Pauline. The great majority of New Testament
   scholars regard the objections of Baur as frivolous, as f. i. that the
   mention of bishops and deacons points to a post-Pauline stage of
   ecclesiastical organization; that there is no originality in the
   Epistle; that it contains evident traces of Gnosticism; that the
   doctrine of justification which it sets forth is not that of Paul; and
   that the Epistle aims at reconciling the opposing parties of the second
   century, typified by Euodia and Syntyche.

   Of late Holsten has taken up the cudgels against the genuineness of
   this letter. Dismissing several of the arguments of Baur as irrelevant,
   he bases his attack especially on the Christological and Soteriological
   differences that he discerns between this Epistle and the other
   writings of Paul. The most important points to which he refers are
   these: (1) The idea of the pre-existent Christ in 2: 6-11 does not
   agree with that found in I Cor. 15 : 45-49. According to the first
   passage the manhood of Christ begins with his incarnation; according to
   the second, He was even in his pre-existence "a heavenly man." (2)
   There is a glaring contradiction between 3 : 6, where the writer says
   that he was blameless as touching the righteousness which is in the
   law, and Rom. 7: 21, where the apostle declares:--when I would do good,
   evil is present." (3) The doctrine of forensic, imputed righteousness
   is replaced by that of an infused righteousness in 3: 9-11. (4) The
   writer shows a singular indifference to the objective truth of his
   Gospel in 1: 15-18, an attitude which compares strangely with that of
   Paul in II Cor. 11:1-4, and especially in Gal. 1: 8, 9.

   But these objections are not of sufficient weight to disprove the
   Pauline authorship. In I Cor. 15 the apostle does not speak of the
   pre-existent Christ, but of Christ as he will appear at the parousia in
   a glorified body. With what Paul says in 3: 6 we may compare Gal. 1:
   14. In both places he speaks of himself from the standpoint of the Jew
   who regards the law merely as an external carnal commandment. From that
   point of view he might consider himself blameless, but it was quite
   different, if he contemplated the law in its deep spiritual sense. It
   is not true that Paul substitutes an infused for an imputed
   righteousness in this Epistle. He clearly speaks of the latter in 2: 9,
   and then by means of an infinitive of purpose passes on to speak of the
   subjective righteousness of life. The persons spoken of in 1:15-18 are
   not said to preach a Gospel different from that of the apostle; they
   preached Christ, but from impure motives. Hence they can not be
   compared with the adversaries of whom Paul speaks in Corinthians and
   Galatians. To these he probably refers in 3: 2. Schurer says: "The
   arguments of Holsten are such that one might sometimes believe them due
   to a slip of the pen."

  THE CHURCH AT PHILIPPI

   The city of Philippi was formerly called Crenides, and derived its
   later name from Philip, the king of Macedonia, who rebuilt it and made
   it a frontier city between his kingdom and Thrace. It was situated on
   the river Gangites and on the important Egnatian highway that connected
   the Adriatic with the Hellespont. After the defeat of his enemies
   Octavius about 42 B. C. determined on Philippi as one of the places,
   where Roman soldiers who had served their time were to dwell. He
   constituted it a Roman colony, with the special privilege of the jus
   Italicum, which included "(1) exemption from the oversight of the
   provincial governors; (2) immunity from the poll and property taxes;
   and (3) right to property in the soil regulated by Roman law." These
   privileges, no doubt, attracted many colonists, so that Philippi soon
   became a city of considerable size. It is described in Acts 16:12 as,
   "the chief city of that part of Macedonia and a colony."

   To that city Paul first came, when about the year 52, in obedience to
   the vision of the Macedonian man, he passed from Asia into Europe. This
   was in harmony with his general policy of preaching in the main centers
   of the Roman empire. Apparently the Jews were not numerous in Philippi:
   there was no synagogue, so that the small band of Jews and proselytes
   simply repaired to the river side for prayer; and one of the charges
   brought against Paul and Silas was that they were Jews. At the place of
   prayer the missionaries addressed the assembled women, and were
   instrumental in converting Lydia who, with characteristic generosity,
   immediately received them in her house. We read no more of the
   blessings that crowned their labors there, but find that on their
   departure there was a company of brethren to whom they spoke words of
   comfort.

   Little can be said regarding the composition of the Philippian church.
   In the narrative of its founding we find no specific mention of Jews,
   although the assembly by the river points to their presence. However
   the fact that there was no synagogue, and that the enemies
   contemptuously emphasized the Jewish nationality of the missionaries
   leads us to think that they were few and greatly despised. It may be
   that those who did live there had, under the pressure of their
   environment, already lost many of their distinctive features. The
   presumption is that some of them accepted the teaching of Paul and
   Silas, but we cannot tell how large a proportion of the church they
   formed. In all probability they were a small minority and caused no
   friction in the congregation. Paul does not even refer to them in his
   letter, much less condemn their Jewish tenets, like he does the errors
   of the false brethren at Corinth and in the Galatian churches. The
   adversaries of whom he speaks in 3: 2 were evidently outside of the
   church. On the whole the Philippian church was an ideal one, consisting
   of warmhearted people, diligent in the work of the Lord, and faithfully
   devoted to their apostle.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. The immediate occasion of this Epistle was a
   contribution brought by Epaphroditus from the Philippian church. They
   had often sent the apostle similar tokens of their love (cf. 4:15, 16;
   II Cor. 11:9), and now, after they had for some time lacked the
   opportunity to communicate with him, 4:10, they again ministered to his
   wants. From over-exertion in the work of Gods Kingdom their messenger
   was taken sick at Rome. On his recovery Paul immediately sends him back
   to Philippi, in order to allay all possible fears as to his condition;
   and utilizes this opportunity to send the Philippians a letter.

   His purpose in writing this Epistle was evidently fourfold. In the
   first place he desired to express his gratitude for the munificence of
   the Philippians, especially because it testified to the abundance of
   their faith. In the second place he wished to give utterance to his
   sincere love for the Philippian church that constituted his crown in
   the Lord. In the third place he felt it incumbent on him to warn them
   against the dangers that were present within the fold, and the enemies
   that were threatening them from without. Apparently there was some
   dissension in the church, 1: 27--2:17; 4: 2, 3, but, in all probability
   this was not of a doctrinal character, but rather consisted of personal
   rivalries and divisions among some of the church members. In 3 : 2 the
   apostle most likely referred to the Judaeizing Christians that traveled
   about to make proselytes, and also threatened the church of Philippi.
   Finally he desires to exhort his most beloved church to be joyful,
   notwithstanding his imprisonment, and to lead a truly Christian life.

   2. Time and Place. Like the Epistle to the Ephesians that to the
   Philippians was written at Rome. While several scholars assign the
   former to the Caesarean captivity, very few refer the latter to that
   period. The apostles evident residing in some great center of activity,
   the many friends that surrounded him, his joyful expectation of being
   set free soon, his mention of the pr~torium, 1:13, which may be the
   praetorian guard (so most commentators), or the supreme imperial court
   (so Mommsen and Ramsay), and the greetings of Caesars household,--all
   point to Rome.

   The Epistle was written, therefore, between the years 61-63. The only
   remaining question is, whether it was composed before or after the
   other three Epistles of the captivity. The prevailing view is that
   Philippians is the last of the group. This view is supported by the
   following arguments: (1) The apostles words in 1: 12 seem to imply that
   a long period of imprisonment has already elapsed. (2) A rather long
   time was required in the communications between Rome and Philippi
   indicated in the letter. The Philippians had heard of Pauls
   imprisonment, had sent Epaphroditus to Rome, had heard of the latters
   illness there, and of this their messenger, in turn, had received
   intelligence. Four journeys are, therefore, implied. (3) Paul
   anticipates that his case will soon come up for decision, and although
   uncertain as to the outcome, he somewhat expects a speedy release.
   These arguments are not absolutely conclusive, but certainly create a
   strong presumption in favor of dating the Epistle after the other
   three.

   Bleek was inclined to regard Philippians as the earliest of the
   Epistles of the captivity. This view found a strong defender in
   Lightfoot, who is followed by Farrar in his St. Paul. Lightfoot defends
   his position by pointing to the similarity of this Epistle to Romans,
   which implies, according to him, that it immediately follows this in
   order of time; and to the fact that in this Epistle we have the last
   trace of Paul's Judaeistic controversy, while in Ephesians and
   Cobssians he begins to deal with an incipient Gnosticism, and his
   teachings respecting the Church bear a close resemblance and are
   intimately related to the views presented in the pastorals. These
   Epistles, therefore, represent a further developmnt in the doctrine of
   the Church. But these proofs do not carry conviction, since the
   character of Paul's Epistles was not necessarily determined by the
   order in which they were written, and the apostle did not write as one
   who is presenting his system of thought to the world in successive
   letters. His Epistles were called forth and determined by special
   situations. And the question may be asked, whether it seems plausible
   that any considerable development of doctrine should take place within
   the course of at most a year and a half.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The Epistle to the Philippians is not quoted as much as some of the
   preceding ones, which is probably due to the fact that it contains
   little doctrinal matter. Notwithstanding this its canonicity is well
   established. There are traces of its language in Clement of Rome and
   Ignatius. Polycarp, addressing the Philippians, speaks more than once
   of Pauls writing to them. The Epistle to Diognetus, Justin Martyr and
   Theophilus contain references to our letter. In the Epistle of the
   churches of Vienne and Lyons Phil. 2: 6 is quoted. Marcion has it and
   the Muratorian canon speaks of it. And it is often directly quoted and
   ascribed to Paul by Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian.

   Though the Epistle is primarily of a practical nature, it has also
   great and abiding dogmatic significance. It contains the classical
   passage on the important doctrine of the kenosis of Christ, 2:6-11.
   Aside from this, however, its great permanent value is of a practical
   character. It reveals to us the ideal relation between Paul and his
   Philippian church, a relation such as the church of God should
   constantly seek to realize: he, sedulously seeking to promote the
   spiritual welfare of those entrusted to his care, even in a time of
   dire distress; and they, though possessing no great wealth, willingly
   and lovingly ministering to the natural wants of their beloved apostle.
   It points us to Christ as the pattern of that self-denial and
   humiliation that should always characterize his followers. It comes to
   us with the grand exhortation, enforced by the example of the great
   apostle, to press forward for "the prize of the high calling of God in
   Christ Jesus." And finally it pictures us the Christian satisfied and
   joyful, even when the shades of night are falling.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistle to the Colossians

  CONTENTS

   The Epistle to the Colossians may best be divided into two parts:

   I. The Doctrinal Part, emphasizing the unique Significance of Christ,
   1:1--2: 23. Paul begins the letter with the apostolic blessing, the
   usual thanksgiving and a prayer for his readers, 1:1-13. Then he
   describes the pre-eminence of Christ as the Head of both the natural
   and the spiritual creation, who has reconciled all things to God,
   14-23, of which mystery the apostle himself was made a minister, 24-29.
   He warns his readers against the inroads of a false philosophy that
   dishonored Christ. Since the Colossians have all the fulness of the
   Godhead in their Lord and Saviour, are rooted in him, and have arisen
   with him to a new life, they should walk in him and avoid semi-Jewish
   practices and the worship of angels, 2:1-19. This was all the more
   necessary, because they had died with Christ to their old life and to
   the beggarly elements of the world, 20-23.

   II. The Practical Part, containing divers Directions and Exhortations,
   3: 1--4:18. Where believers have risen with Christ to newness of life,
   they must part with the vices of the old man and clothe themselves with
   Christian virtues, 3:1-17. Wives should submit themselves to their
   husbands and husbands should love their wives; children must obey their
   parents and parents must beware of discouraging their children;
   servants should obey their masters and these should give the servants
   their due, 18--4:1. The duty of prayer and thanksgiving is urged, and
   directions are given for the right behavior of believers toward the
   unconverted, 2-6. With a few personal notices, several greetings and a
   salutation the apostle closes his Epistle, 7-18.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. On its formal side this Epistle differs from that to the Ephesians
   in its polemical character. It is not a general exposition of the truth
   that is in Christ Jesus, without reference to antagonistic principles,
   but a statement of it with a special view to the errors that were
   gradually creeping into the Colossian church, insidious errors of which
   the Cobssians, so it seems, little realized the danger. It is true that
   we find none of the fiery polemics of the Epistle to the Galatians
   here, nor any of the sharp invective of II Corinthians;--yet the
   controversial character of this letter is very evident.

   2. On its material side it exhibits great affinity with the Epistle to
   the Ephesians. Hence the contention of the critics that the one is but
   a copy of the other. We should not infer from this, however, that the
   teaching of these Epistles is identical. While that contained in
   Ephesians is in the main Theological, that found in Colossians is
   primarily Christological, the summing up of all things in Christ, the
   Head. Essentially the Christology of this letter is in perfect harmony
   with that of previous Epistles, but there is a difference of emphasis.
   The writer here places prominently before his readers, not only the
   Soteriological, but also the Cosmical significance of Christ. He is the
   Head both of the Church and of the new creation. All things were
   created by him, and find the purpose of their existence in him.

   3. In point of style and language too this Epistle shows great
   similarity to its twin-letter. Of the 155 verses in Ephesians 78
   contain expressions that find parallels in Colossians. There are the
   same involved sentences of difficult interpretation, and also a great
   number of hapax legomena. The letter contains 34 words that are absent
   from all the other writings of Paul, 12 of which are found in other New
   Testament books, however, (cf. lists of these words in Alford and in
   Abbotts Comm.) Of these 34 words at least 18, and therefore more than
   half, are found in the second chapter. Owing to the polemical character
   of this letter the author is generally speaking in a more
   matter-of-fact manner than he is in Ephesians, and it is only, when he
   sets forth the majesty of Christ, that he soars to sublime heights.
   Comparing this Epistle with those to the Corinthians and the
   Philippians, Lightfoot says: "It is distinguished from them by a
   certain ruggedness of expression, a want of finish often bordering on
   obscurity." Comm. p.123.

  AUTHORSHIP

   There are no good reasons to doubt the Pauline authorship of this
   Epistle. Marcion and the school of Valentinus recognized it as genuine.
   And the great witnesses of the end of the second century, Irenaeus,
   Clement of Alexandria and Tertuilian repeatedly quote it by name.

   Moreover the internal evidence decidedly favors the authenticity of the
   letter. It claims to be written by the apostle in 1: 1; the line of
   thought developed in it is distinctly Pauline and is in striking
   harmony with that of the Epistle to the Ephesians; and if we do not
   first rule out several of the Pauline Epistles and then compare the
   style of this letter with those that remain, we may confidently assert
   that the style is Pauline. Moreover the persons named in 4:7-17 are
   all, with but a couple exceptions (viz. Jesus called Justus and
   Nymphas) known to have been companions or fellow-laborers of Paul.

   Yet the Epistle did not go unchallenged. Mayerhoff began the attack on
   it is 1838, rejecting it, because its vocabulary, style and thought
   were not Pauline; it was so similar to Ephesians; and it contained
   references to the heresy of Cerinthus. The school of Baur and many
   other critics, such as Hoekstra, Straatman, Hausrath, Davidson,
   Schmiedel e. a., followed his lead and considered this Epistle as a
   second century production. Holtzmann, as we have already seen, found a
   genuine nucleus in it.

   There are especially three objections that are urged against the
   Pauline authorship of this letter. (1) The style is not that of the
   apostle. The fact that the letter contains 34 hapax legomena that
   characteristically Pauline terms, such as dikaiosune, soteria,
   apokalupsis and katargein are absent, while some of the particles often
   employed by the apostle, as gar, oun, dioti and hara are rarely found;
   and that the construction is often very involved and characterized by a
   certain heaviness, is urged against its genuineness. (2) The error
   combated in this Epistle, it is said, shows clear traces of second
   century Gnosticism. These are found in the use of the terms sophia,
   gnosis, 2 :3, musterion, 1 :26, 27; 2 :2, pleroma,1 :19, aiones, 1 :26,
   etc.; in the series of angels named in 1: 16; and in the conception of
   Christ in 1: 15. It is held that they point to the Valentinian system.
   (3) Closely related to the preceding is the objection that the
   Christology of this Epistle is un-Pauline. Davidson regards this as the
   chief feature that points to the Gnostics, Introd. I p. 246, but it is
   also thought to conflict with the representation of Paul in his other
   writings, and to approach very closely the Johannine doctrine of the
   Logos. Christ is represented as the image of the invisible God, 1:15,
   the central Being of the universe, absolutely pre-eminent above all
   visible and invisible beings, 1: 16-18, the originator and the goal of
   creation, and the perfect Mediator, who reconciles not only sinners but
   all things in heaven and on earth to God, 1: 16-20.

   In answer to the first objection we may say that the argument derived
   from the hapax legomena is irrelevant and would apply with equal force
   in the case of the Epistle to the Romans. From the fact that more than
   half of them are found in the second chapter it is quite evident that
   they are due to the special subject-matter of this letter. The
   difference between Colossians and some of the other Pauline writings
   also explains why the characteristically Pauline terms referred to
   above are absent from our Epistle. Had Paul used exactly the same words
   that he employs elsewhere, that would also, in all probability, have
   been proof positive for many critics that the letter was a forgery.
   Moreover it should not be regarded as very strange that a persons
   vocabulary changes somewhat in the course of time, especially not, when
   he is placed in an altogether different environment, as was the case
   with Paul. We fully agree with Dr. Salmon, when he says: "I cannot
   subscribe to the doctrine that a man, writing a new composition, must
   not, on pain of losing his identity, employ any word that he has not
   used in a former one." Introd. p. 148.

   As to the second objection we would reply that there is absolutely no
   proof that the Epistle presupposes second century Gnosticism. The
   Gnostics evidently did not regard it as a polemic directed against
   their tenets, for Marcion and the Valentinians made extensive use of
   it. Moreover some of the most important elements of Gnosticism, such as
   the creation of the world by a demiurge, ignorant of the supreme God or
   opposed to Him, are not referred to in the Epistle. An incipient
   Gnosticism there may have been in Paul's time; but it is also possible
   that the error of the Colossian church is in no way to be identified
   with the Gnostic heresy. Present day scholarship strongly inclines to
   the view that it is not Gnosticism at all to which Paul refers in this
   letter.

   And with respect to the third argument, we do not see why the further
   development of the Pauline Christology cannot have been the work of
   Paul himself. There is nothing in the Christology of this Epistle that
   conflicts with the recognized representation of Paul. We clearly find
   the essence of it in Rom. 8:19-22; I Cor. 8:6; II Cor. 4:4; Phil,
   2:5-11. These passages prepare us for the statement of Paul regarding
   the Cosmical significance of Christ,. 1: 16,17. And the representation
   that all the forces of creation culminate in the glory of Christ does
   not necessarily run counter to Rom. 11: 36 and I Cor. 15 : 28,
   according to which all things exist to the praise of God, their
   Creator.

  THE CHURCH AT COLOSSAE

   Colossae was one of the cities of the beautiful Lycus Valley in
   Phrygia, situated but a short distance from Laodicea and Hierapolis.
   Herodotus speaks of it as a great city, but it did not retain its
   magnitude until New Testament times, for Strabo only reckons it as a
   polisma. We have no information respecting the founding of the
   Colossian church. From the Acts of the Apostles we learn that Paul
   passed through Phrygia twice, once at the start of his second, and
   again at the beginning of his third missionary journey, Acts 16: 6; 18:
   23. But on the first of these journeys he remained well to the East of
   Western Phrygia, where Colossae was situated; and though on the second
   he may have gone into the Lycus Valley, he certainly did not find nor
   found the Colossian church there, since he himself says in Col. 2: 1
   that the Colossians had not seen his face in the flesh. In all
   probability Paul's prolonged residence at Ephesus and his preaching
   there for three years, so that "all those in Asia heard the word of the
   Lord Jesus," Acts 19:10, was indirectly responsible for the founding of
   the churches in the Lycus Valley. The most plausible theory is that
   Epaphras was one of Paul's Ephesian converts and became the founder of
   the Colossian church. This is favored by 1 :7, where the correct
   reading is kathos emathate,and not kathos kai emathete.

   The church consisted, so it seems, of Gentile Christians, 1: 21, 27; 2:
   11-13; the Epistle certainly does not contain a single hint that there
   were Jews among them. Yet they were clearly exposed to Jewish
   influences, and this need not cause surprise in view of the fact that
   Antiochus the Great transplanted two thousand families of Jews from
   Babylonia into Lydia and Phrygia, Jos. Ant. XII 6. 4. This number had,
   of course, greatly increased by the time the Epistle was written.
   Lightfoot estimates that the number of Jewish freemen was more than
   eleven thousand in the single district of which Laodicea was the
   capital. Cf. his essay on The Churches of the Lycus Valley in his Comm.
   p. 20.

   According to the Epistle the Colossians were in danger of being misled
   by certain false teachings. As to the exact nature of the Colossian
   heresy there is a great variety of opinion. Some regard it as a mixture
   of Judaeistic and theosophic elements; others dub it Gnosticism or
   Gnostic Ebionism; and still others consider it to be a form of
   Essenism. We can infer from the Epistle that the errorists were members
   of the congregation, for they are described as those "not holding the
   head," 2:19, an expression that is applicable only to those that had
   accepted Christ. And it seems perfectly clear that their error was
   primarily of a Jewish character, since they urged circumcision, not,
   indeed, as an absolute necessity, but as a means to perfection,
   2:10-13; they appealed to the law and emphasized its ceremonial
   requirements and probably also the ordinances of the rabbis, 2:14-17,
   20-23. Yet they clearly went beyond the Judaism that Paul encountered
   in his earlier Epistles, falsely emphasizing certain requirements of
   the law and adjusting their views to those of their Gentile neighbors.
   Their dualistic conception of the world led them, on the one hand, to
   an asceticism that was not demanded by the law. They regarded it as
   essential to abstain from the use of meat and wine, not because these
   were Levitically unclean, but since this abstinence was necessary for
   the mortification of the body, which they regarded as the seat of sin.
   They neglected the body and apparently aspired after a pure spiritual
   existence; to be like the angels was their ideal. On the other hand the
   consciousness of their great sinfulness as material beings made them
   hesitate to approach God directly. And the Jewish doctrine that the law
   was mediated by the angels, in connection with the influence that was
   ascribed to the spirits in their heathen environment, naturally led
   them to a worship of the angels as intermediaries between God and man.
   Among the higher spirits they also ranked Christ and thus failed to
   recognize his unique significance. The Colossian error was, therefore,
   a strange mixture of Jewish doctrines, Christian ideas and heathen
   speculation; and this composite character makes it impossible to
   identify it with any one heretical system of the apostolic time. Cf.
   especially Zahn, Einl. I p. 329 if.; Holtzmann, Einl. p. 248 if.;
   Lightfoot, Comm. pp. 71-111; Biesterveld, Comm. pp. 18-28.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. From the Epistle itself we can readily infer
   what gave Paul occasion to write it. Epaphras, the founder and probably
   also the minister of the congregation, had evidently seen the danger,
   gradually increasing, that was threatening the spiritual welfare of the
   church. The errorists did not directly antagonize him or Paul; yet
   their teaching was a subversion of the Pauline gospel. Hence he
   informed the apostle of the state of affairs, and this information led
   to the composition of the Epistle.

   The object Paul has in view is the correction of the Colossian heresy.
   Hence he clearly sets forth the unique significance of Christ, and the
   all-sufficient character of his redemption. Christ is the image of the
   invisible God, the Creator of the world, and also of the angels, and
   the only Mediator between God and man. He in whom all the fulness of
   the Godhead dwells, has reconciled all things to God and has delivered
   men from the power of sin and death. In his death He abrogated the
   shadows of the Old Testament and terminated the special ministry of the
   angels that was connected with the law, so that even this vestige of a
   supposed Biblical foundation for the worship of angels has been
   removed. In him believers are perfect and in him only. Hence the
   Colossians should not fall back on the beggarly elements of the world,
   nor in sham humility worship the angels. Having their life in Christ,
   they should conform to his image in all their domestic and social
   relations.

   2. Time and Place. For the discussion of these we refer to what we have
   said in connection with the Epistle to the Ephesians. The letter was
   written at Rome about A. D. 61 or 62. Of course the majority of those
   who reject this Epistle date it somewhere in the second century.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The canonical character of this Epistle has never been doubted by the
   Church. There are slight but uncertain indications of its use in
   Clement of Rome, Barnabas and Ignatius. More important references to it
   are found in Justin Martyr and Theophilus. Marcion gave it a place in
   his canon, and in the Muratorian Fragment it is named as one of the
   Pauline Epistles. With Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian
   the quotations increase both in number and definiteness. That the
   Epistle is not quoted as often as Ephesians is probably due to its
   polemical character.

   The permanent value of this letter is found primarily in its central
   teaching, that the Church of God is made perfect in Christ, its
   glorious Head. Since He is a perfect Mediator and the complete
   redemption of his people, they grow into him, as the Head of the body,
   they find the fulfillment of all their desires in him, as their
   Saviour, and they reach their perfection in him, as the Goal of the new
   creation. His perfect life is the life of the entire Church. Hence
   believers should seek to realize ever more in every atom of their
   existence the complete union with their divine Head. They should avoid
   all arbitrary practices, all human inventions and all will-worship that
   is derogatory to the only Mediator and Head of the Church, Jesus
   Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

The First Epistle to the Thessalonians

  CONTENTS

   In the first Epistle to the Thessalonians we distinguish two parts:

   I. Pauls Apologia, 1:1--3:13. The letter opens with the usual apostolic
   blessing and thanksgiving, 1: 1-4. This thanksgiving was called forth
   by the fact that the apostles work in Thessalonica had not been in
   vain, but had resulted in a faith that was spoken of throughout
   Macedonia and Achaia, 5-10. The writer reminds the readers of his
   labors among them, emphasizing his suffering, good moral behavior,
   honesty, faithfulness, diligence and love, 2:1-12. He thanks God that
   they had received him and his message and had suffered willingly for
   the cause of Christ at the hands of the Jews, and informs them that he
   had often intended to visit them, 13-20. His great love to them had
   induced him to send Timothy to establish them and to strengthen them in
   their affliction, 3:1-5; who had now returned and gladdened his heart
   by a report of their steadfastness, 6-10. He prays that the Lord may
   strengthen them, 11-13.

   II. Practical Exhortations and Instruction regarding the Parousia,
   4:1--5 : 28. The apostle exhorts the Thessalonians that they follow
   after sanctification, abstaining from fornication and fraud, and
   exercising love, diligence and honesty, 4:1-12. He allays their fears
   respecting the future of those that have died in Christ, 13-8, and
   admonishes the Thessalonians in view of the sudden coming of Christ to
   walk as children of the light that they may be prepared for the day of
   Christs return, 5:1-11. After exhorting the brethren to honor their
   spiritual leaders, and urging them to warn the unruly, to comfort the
   feeble-minded, to support the weak, and to practice all Christian
   virtues, the apostle closes his Epistle by invoking on the
   Thessalonians the blessing of God, by expressing his desire that the
   Epistle be read to all the brethren, and with the usual salutations,
   12-28.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. This Epistle is like that to the Philippians one of the most
   letterlike of all the writings of Paul. It is, as Deissmann says, "full
   of moving personal reminiscences." The practical interest greatly
   predominates over the doctrinal; and though the polemical element is
   not altogether absent, it is not at all prominent. The letter is
   primarily one of practical guidance, instruction and encouragement, for
   a faithful, persecuted church, whose knowledge is still deficient, and
   whose weak and faint-hearted and idlers greatly need the counsel of the
   apostle.

   2. Doctrinally I Thessalonians is one of the eschatological Epistles of
   Paul. It refers very little to Christ's coming in the flesh to give
   himself a ransom for sin, but discusses all the more his future coming
   as the Lord of Glory. There are at least six references to the parousia
   in this short letter, two of which are rather extensive passages,
   1:10;2:19; 3:13; 4:13-18; 5:1-11, 23. This doctrine is at once the
   impelling motive for the exhortations of the apostle, and the
   sufficient ground for the encouragement of his readers, who expected
   the return of Christ in the near future.

   3. The Epistle never appeals to the Old Testament as an authority, and
   contains no quotations from it. We find a reference to its history,
   however, in 2:15, and probable reminiscences of its language in 2:16;
   4: 5, 6, 8, 9; 5: 8. The language of 4:15-17 shows some similarity to
   II Esdras 5:42, but the thought is quite different.

   4. The style of this letter is thoroughly Pauline, containing an
   abundance of phrases and expressions that have parallels in the other
   Epistles of Paul, especially in those to the Corinthians. Comparing it
   with the other polemical writings of the apostle, we find that it is
   written in a quiet unimpassioned style, a style, too, far more simple
   and direct than that of Ephesians and Colossians. There are 42 words
   peculiar to it, of which 22 are not found elsewhere in the New
   Testament, and 20 are, but not in the writings of Paul.

  AUTHORSHIP

   The external testimony in favor of the Pauline authorship is in no way
   deficient. Marcion included the letter in his canon, and the Muratorian
   Fragment mentions it as one of the Pauline writings. It is contained in
   the old Latin and Syriac Versions; and from the time of Irenaeus,
   Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian it is regularly quoted by name.

   The internal evidence also clearly points to Paul as the writer. The
   Epistle comes to us under the name of Paul; and those that were
   associated with him in writing it, viz. Silvanus (Silas) and Timotheus,
   are known to have been Pauls companions on the second missionary
   journey. It is marked by the usual Pauline blessing, thanksgiving and
   salutation, and clearly reflects the character of the great apostle to
   the Gentiles. Although it has been subject to attack, it is now
   defended by critics of nearly every school as an authentic production
   of Paul.

   Schrader and Baur were the first ones to attack it in 1835. The great
   majority of critics, even those of Baur's own school, turned against
   them; such men as Hilgenfeld, Pfleiderer, Holtzmann, Davidson, Von
   Soden and Julicher defending the genuineness of the letter. They found
   followers, however, especially in Holsten and Van der Vies.

   Of the objections brought against the Epistle the following deserve
   consideration: (1) As compared with the other writings of Paul, the
   contents of this Epistle are very insignificant, not a single doctrine,
   except that in 4:13-18, being made prominent. In the main it is but a
   reiteration of Pauls work among the Thessalonians, and of the
   circumstances attending their conversion, all of which they knew very
   well. (2) The letter reveals a progress in the Christian life that is
   altogether improbable, if a period of only a few months had elapsed
   between its composition and the founding of the church, cf. 1:7, 8;
   4:10. (3) The passage 2:14-16 does not fit in the mouth of him who
   wrote Rom. 9--11 and who was himself at one time a fierce persecutor of
   the Church. Moreover it implies that the destruction of Jerusalem was
   already a thing of the past. (4) The Epistle is clearly dependent on
   some of the other Pauline writings, especially I and II Corinthians.
   Compare 1: 5 with I Cor. 2: 4 ;-- 1:6 with I Cor. 11:1;--2:4 ff. with I
   Cor. 2:4; 4:3ff.; 9:15 ff.; II Cor. 2:17; 5:11.

   The cogency of these arguments is not apparent. Paul's letters have an
   occasional character, and the situation at Thessalonica did not call
   for an exposition of Christian doctrine, save a deliverance on the
   parousia; but did require words of encouragement, guidance and
   exhortation, and also, in view of the insinuations against the apostle,
   a careful review of all that he had done among them. Looked at from
   that point of view the Epistle is in no sense insignificant. The words
   of 1: 7, 8 and 4:10 do not imply a long existence of the Thessalonian
   church, but simply prove the intensity of its faith and love. Three or
   four months were quite sufficient for the report of their great faith
   to spread in Macedonia and Achaia. Moreover the very shortcomings of
   the Thessalonians imply that their religious experience was as yet of
   but short duration. In view of what Paul writes in II Corinthians and
   Galatians respecting the Judaeizers, we certainly need not be surprised
   at what he says in 2:14-16. If the words are severe, let us remember
   that they were called forth by a bitter and dogged opposition that
   followed the apostle from place to place, and on which he had brooded
   for some time. The last words of this passage do not necessarily imply
   that Jerusalem had already been destroyed. They are perfectly
   intelligible on the supposition that Paul, in view of the wickedness of
   the Jews and of the calamities that were already overtaking them, Jos.
   Ant. XX 2, 5, 6, had a lively presentiment of their impending doom. The
   last argument is a very peculiar one. It is tantamount to saying that
   the Epistle cannot be Pauline, because there are so many Pauline
   phrases and expressions in it. Such an argument is its own refutation,
   and is neutralized by the fact that in the case of other letters
   dissimilarity leads the critics to the same conclusion.

  THE CHURCH AT THESSALONICA

   Thessalonica, originally called Thermae (Herodotus), and now bearing
   the slightly altered name Saloniki, a city of Macedonia, has always
   been very prominent in history and still ranks, after Constantinople,
   as the second town in European Turkey. It is situated on what was
   formerly known as the Thermaic gulf, and is built "in the form of an
   amphitheater on the slopes at the head of the bay." The great Egnatian
   highway passed through it from East to West. Hence it was of old an
   important trade center and as such had special attraction for the Jews,
   who were found there in great numbers. Cassander, who rebuilt the city
   in 315 B. C. in all probability gave it the name Thessalonica in honor
   of his wife. In the time of the Romans it was the capital of the second
   part of Macedonia and the seat of the Roman governor of the entire
   province.

   Paul, accompanied by Silas and Timothy, came to that city, after they
   had left Philippi about the year 52. As was his custom, he repaired to
   the synagogue to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ. The result of this
   work was a spiritual harvest consisting of some Jews, a great number of
   proselytes (taking the word in its widest significance) and several of
   the citys chief women. From the Acts of the Apostles we get the
   impression (though it is not definitely stated) that Pauls labors at
   Thessalonica terminated at the end of three weeks; but the Epistles
   rather favor the idea that his stay there was of longer duration. They
   pre-suppose a flourishing, well organized congregation, 5:12, whose
   faith had become a matter of common comment, 1: 7-9; and show us that
   Paul, while he was in Thessalonica, worked for his daily bread, 2: 9;
   II Thess. 3 : 8, and received aid at least twice from the Philippians,
   Phil. 4:16.

   His fruitful labor was cut short, however, by the malign influence of
   envious Jews, who attacked the house of Jason, where they expected to
   find the missionaries, and failing in this, they drew Jason and some of
   the brethren before the rulers, politachas (a name found only in Acts
   17:6, 8, but proved absolutely correct by inscriptions, cf. Ramsey, St.
   Paul the Traveler and the Roman Citizen p. 227) and charged them with
   treason. "The step taken by the politarchs was the mildest that was
   prudent in the circumstances; they bound the accused over in security
   that peace should be kept." (Ramsay) As a result the brethren deemed it
   advisable to send Paul and his companions to Berea, where many accepted
   the truth, but their labors were again interrupted by the Jews from
   Thessalonica. Leaving Silas and Timothy here, the apostle went to
   Athens, where he expected them to join him shortly. From the narrative
   in the Acts it seems that they did not come to the apostle until after
   his arrival at Corinth, but I Thess. 3: 1 implies that Timothy was with
   him at Athens. The most natural theory is that both soon followed the
   apostle to Athens, and that he sent Timothy from there to Thessalonica
   to establish and comfort the church, and Silas on some other mission,
   possibly to Philippi, both returning to him at Corinth.

   From the data in Acts 17:4 and I Thess. 1:9; 2:14 we may infer that the
   church of Thessalonica was of a mixed character, consisting of Jewish
   and Gentile Christians. Since no reference is made in the Epistles to
   the tenets of the Jews and not a single Old Testament passage is
   quoted, it is all but certain that its members were mostly Christians
   of the Gentiles. Only three of them are known to us from Scripture,
   viz. Jason, Acts 17:5-9, and Aristarchus and Secundus, Acts 20: 4. The
   congregation was not wealthy, II Cor. 8: 2, 3; with the exception of a
   few women of the better class, it seems to have consisted chiefly of
   laboring people that had to work for their daily bread, 4:11; II Thess.
   3: 6-12. They had not yet parted company with all their old vices, for
   there was still found among them fornication 4: 3-5, fraud 4: 6 and
   idleness 4:11. Yet they were zealous in the work of the Lord and formed
   one of the most beloved churches of the apostle.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. What led Paul to write this letter, was
   undoubtedly the report Timothy brought him respecting the condition of
   the Thessalonian church. The apostle felt that he had been torn away
   from them all too soon and had not had sufficient time to establish
   them in the truth. Hence he was greatly concerned about their spiritual
   welfare after his forced departure. The coming of Timothy brought him
   some relief, for he learnt from that fellow-laborer that the church,
   though persecuted, did not waver, and that their faith had become an
   example to many. Yet he was not entirely at ease, since he also heard
   that the Jews were insinuating that his moral conduct left a great deal
   to be desired, while he had misled the Thessalonians for temporal gain
   and vainglory, 2: 3-10; that some heathen vices were still prevalent in
   the church; and that the doctrine of the parousia had been
   misconstrued, giving some occasion to cease their daily labors, and
   others, to feel concerned about the future condition of those who had
   recently died in their midst. That information led to the composition
   of our Epistle.

   In view of all these things it was but natural that the apostle should
   have a threefold purpose in writing this letter. In the first place he
   desired to express his gratitude for the faithful perseverance of the
   Thessalonians. In the second place he sought to establish them in
   faith, which was all the more necessary, since the enemy had sown tares
   among the wheat. Hence he reminds them of his work among them, pointing
   out that his conversation among them was above reproach, and that as a
   true apostle he had labored among them without covetousness and
   vainglory. And in the third place he aimed at correcting their
   conception of the Lords return, emphasizing its importance as a motive
   for sanctification,

   2. Time and Place. There is little uncertainty as to the time and place
   of composition, except in the ranks of those who regard the Epistle as
   a forgery. When Paul wrote this letter, the memory of his visit to
   Thessalonica was still vivid, chs. 1 and 2; and he was evidently in
   some central place, where he could keep posted on the state of affairs
   in Macedonia and Achaia, 1: 7, 8, and from where he could easily
   communicate with the Thessalonian church. Moreover Silas and Timothy
   were with him, of which the former attended the apostle only on his
   second missionary journey. and the latter could not bring him a report
   of conditions at Thessalonica, until he returned to the apostle at
   Corinth, Acts 18: 5. Therefore the Epistle was written during Paul's
   stay in that city. However it should not be dated at the beginning of
   Paul's Corinthian residence, since the faith of the Thessalonians had
   already become manifest throughout Macedonia and Achaia, and some
   deaths had occurred in the church of Thessalonica. Neither can we place
   it toward the end of that period, for II Thessalonians was also written
   before the apostle left Corinth. Most likely it was composed towards
   the end of A. D. 52.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The canonicity of this Epistle was never questioned in ancient times.
   There are some supposed references to it in the apostolic fathers,
   Clement of Rome, Barnabas, Ignatius and Polycarp, but they are very
   uncertain. Marcion and the Muratorian Fragment and the old Latin and
   Syriac Versions testify to its canonicity, however, and from the end of
   the second century its canonical use is a well established fact.

   In this letter we behold Paul, the missionary, in the absence of any
   direct controversy, carefully guarding the interest of one of his most
   beloved churches, comforting and encouraging her like a father. He
   strengthens the heart of his persecuted spiritual children with the
   hope of Christ's return, when the persecutors shall be punished for
   their evil work, and the persecuted saints, both the dead and the
   living, shall receive their eternal reward in the Kingdom of their
   heavenly Lord. And thus the apostle is an example worthy of imitation;
   his lesson is a lesson of permanent value. The glorious parousia of
   Christ is the cheering hope of the militant church in all her struggles
   to the end of time.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Second Epistle to the Thessalonians

  CONTENTS

   The contents of the letter naturally falls into three parts:

   I. Introduction, ch. 1. The apostle begins his letter with the regular
   blessing, 1, 2. He thanks God for the increasing faith and patience of
   the Thessalonians, reminding them of the fact that in the day of
   Christ's coming God will provide rest for his persecuted church and
   will punish her persecutors; and prays that God may fulfil his good
   pleasure in them to the glory of his Name, 3--12.

   II. Instruction respecting the Parousia, ch. 2. The church is warned
   against deception regarding the imminence of the great day of Christ
   and is informed that it will not come until the mystery of iniquity has
   resulted in the great apostacy, and the man of sin has been revealed
   whose coming is after the work of satan, and who will utterly deceive
   men to their own destruction, 1--12. The Thessalonians need not fear
   the manifestation of Christ, since they were chosen and called to
   everlasting glory; and it is the apostles wish that the Lord may
   comfort their hearts and establish them in all good work, 13--17.

   III. Practical Exhortations, ch. 3. The writer requests the prayer of
   the church for himself that he may be delivered from unreasonable and
   wicked men, and exhorts her to do what he commanded, 1--5. They should
   withdraw from those who are disorderly and do not work, because each
   one should labor for his daily bread and thus follow the example of the
   apostle, 6--12. Those who do not heed the apostolic word should be
   censured, 13--15. With a blessing and a salutation the apostle closes
   his letter, 16--18.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. The main characteristic of this letter is found in the apocalyptic
   passage, 2:1-12. In these verses, that contain the most essential part
   of the Epistle, Paul speaks as a prophet, revealing to his beloved
   church that the return of Christ will be preceded by a great final
   apostacy and by the revelation of the man of sin, the son of perdition
   who, as the instrument of satan, will deceive men, so that they accept
   the lie and are condemned in the great day of Christ. II Thessalonians,
   no doubt, was written primarily for the sake of this instruction.

   2. Aside from this important doctrinal passage the Epistle has a
   personal and practical character. It contains expressions of gratitude
   for the faith and endurance of the persecuted church, words of
   encouragement for the afflicted, fatherly advice for the spiritual
   children of the apostle, and directions as to their proper behavior.

   3. The style of this letter, like that of I Thessalonians, is simple
   and direct, except in 2:1-12, where the tone is more elevated. This
   change is accounted for by the prophetic contents of that passage. The
   language clearly reveals the working of the vigorous mind of Paul, who
   in the expression of his thoughts was not limited to a few stock
   phrases. Besides the many expressions that are characteristically
   Pauline the Epistle contains several that are peculiar to it, and also
   a goodly number which it has in common only with I Thessalonians. Of
   the 26 hapax legomena in the letter 10 are not found in the rest of the
   New Testament, and 16 are used elsewhere in the New Testament but not
   in the writings of Paul.

  AUTHORSHIP

   The external testimony for the authenticity of this Epistle is just as
   strong as that for the genuineness of the first letter. Marcion has it
   in his canon, the Muratorian Fragment names it, and it is also found in
   the old Latin and Syriac Versions. From the time of Irenaeus it is
   regularly quoted as a letter of Paul, and Origen and Eusebius claim
   that it was universally received in their time.

   The Epistle itself claims to be the work of Paul, 1: 1; and again in
   3:17, where the apostle calls attention to the salutation as a mark of
   genuineness. The persons associated with the writer in the composition
   of this letter are the same as those mentioned in I Thessalonians. As
   in the majority of Paul's letters the apostolic blessing is followed by
   a thanksgiving. The Epistle is very similar to I Thessalonians and
   contains some cross-references to it, as f. i. in the case of the
   parousia and of the idlers. It clearly reveals the character of the
   great apostle, and its style may confidently be termed Pauline.

   Nevertheless the genuineness of the Epistle has been doubted far more
   than that of I Thessalonians. Schmidt was the first one to assail it in
   1804; in this he was followed by Schrader, Mayerhof and De Wette, who
   afterwards changed his mind, however. The attack was renewed by Kern
   and Baur in whose school the rejection of the Epistle became general.
   Its authenticity is defended by Reuss, Sabatier, Hofmann, Weiss, Zahn,
   Julicher, Farrar, Godet, Baljon, Moffat e. a.

   The principal objections urged against the genuineness of this letter
   are the following: (1) The teaching of Paul regarding the parousia in
   2:1-12 is not consistent with what he wrote in I Thessalonians 4:13-18;
   5:1-11. According to the first letter the day of Christ is imminent and
   will come suddenly and unexpectedly; the second emphasizes the fact
   that it is not close at hand and that several signs will precede it.
   (2) The eschatology of this passage 2:1-12 is not Paul's but clearly
   dates from a later time and was probably borrowed from the Revelation
   of John. Some identify the man of sin with Nero who, though reported
   dead, was supposed to be hiding in the East and was expected to return;
   and find the one still restraining the evil in Vespasian. Others hold
   that this passage clearly refers to the time of Trajan, when the
   mystery of iniquity was seen in the advancing tide of Gnosticism. (3)
   This letter is to a great extent but a repitition of I Thessalonians,
   and therefore looks more like the work of a forger than like a genuine
   production of Paul. Holtzmann says that, with the exception of
   1:5,6,9,12; 2:2-9, 11, 12, 15; 3:2, 13, 14, 17, the entire Epistle
   consists of a reproduction of parallel passages from the first letter.
   Einl. p. 214. (4) The Epistle contains a conspicuously large number of
   peculiar expressions that are not found in the rest of Paul's writings,
   nor in the entire New Testament. Cf. lists in Frames Comm. pp. 28-34,
   in the Intern. Crit. Comm. (5) The salutation in 3:17 has a suspicious
   look. It seems like the attempt of a later writer to ward off
   objections and to attest the Pauline authorship.

   But the objections raised are not sufficient to discredit the
   authenticity of our Epistle. The contradictions in Paul's teaching
   regarding the parousia of Christ, are more apparent than real. The
   signs that precede the great day will not detract from its suddenness
   any more than the signs of Noah's time prevented the flood from taking
   his contemporaries by surprise. Moreover these two features, the
   suddenness of Christ's appearance and the portentous facts that are the
   harbingers of his coming, always go hand in hand in the eschatological
   teachings of Scripture. Dan. 11:1--12: 3; Mt. 24: 1-44; Lk. 17:20-37.
   As to the immediacy of Christ's coming we can at most say that the
   first Epistle intimates that the Lord might appear during that
   generation (though possibly it does not even imply that), but it
   certainly does not teach that Christ will presently come.

   The eschatology of the second chapter has given rise to much discussion
   and speculation regarding the date and authorship of the Epistle, but
   recent investigations into the conditions of the early church have
   clearly brought out that the contents of this chapter in no way
   militate against the genuineness of the letter. Hence they who deny the
   Pauline authorship have ceased to place great reliance on it. There is
   nothing improbable in the supposition that Paul wrote the passage
   regarding the man of sin. We find similar representations as early as
   the time of Daniel (cf. Dan. 11), in the pseudepigraphic literature of
   the Jews (cf. Schfirer, Geschichte des fiidischen Volkes II p. 621 f.),
   and in the eschatological discourses of the Lord. The words and
   expressions found in this chapter are very well susceptible of an
   interpretation that does not necessitate our dating the Epistle after
   the time of Paul. We cannot delay to review all the preterist and
   futurist expositions that have been given (for which cf. Alford,
   Prolegomena Section V), but can only indicate in a general way in what
   direction we must look for the interpretation of this difficult
   passage. In interpreting it we should continually bear in mind its
   prophetic import and its reference to something that is still future.
   No doubt, there were in history prefigurations of the great day of
   Christ in which this prophecy found a partial fulfilment, but the
   parousia of which Paul speaks in these verses is even now only a matter
   of faithful expectation. The history of the world is gradually leading
   up to it. Paul was witnessing some apostacy in his day, the musterion
   tes anomias was already working, but the great apostacy (he apostasia)
   could not come in his day, because there had been as yet but a very
   partial dissemination of the truth; and will not come until the days
   immediately preceding the second coming of Christ, when the mystery of
   godlessness will complete itself, and will finally be embodied in a
   single person, in the man of sin, the son of perdition, who will then
   develop into a power antagonistic to Christ (anti-christ, ho
   antikeimenos), yea to every form of religion, the very incarnation of
   satan. Cf. vs. 9. This can only come to pass, however, after the
   restraining power is taken out of the way, a power that is at once
   impersonal (katechon) and personal (katechon), and which may refer
   first of all to the strict administration of justice in the Roman
   empire and to the emperor as the chief executive, but certainly has a
   wider signification and probably refers in general to "the fabric of
   human polity and those who rule that polity." (Alford). For a more
   detailed exposition cf. especially, Alford, Prolegomena Section V;
   Zahn, Einleitung I p. 162 if.; Godet, Introduction p .171 if.; and
   Eadie, Essay on the Man of Sin in Comm. p. 329 if.

   We fail to see the force of the third argument, unless it is an
   established fact that Paul could not repeat himself to a certain
   degree, even in two Epistles written within the space of a few months,
   on a subject that engaged the mind of the apostle for some time, to the
   same church and therefore with a view to almost identical conditions.
   This argument looks strange especially in view of the following one,
   which urges the rejection of this letter, because it is so unlike the
   other Pauline writings. The points of difference between our letter and
   I Thessalonians are generally exaggerated, and the examples cited by
   Davidson to prove the dissimilarity are justly ridiculed by Salmon, who
   styles such criticism "childish criticism, that is to say, criticism
   such as might proceed from a child who insists that a story shall
   always be told to him in precisely the same way." Introd. p. 398. The
   salutation in 3:17 does not point to a time later than that of Paul,
   since he too had reason to fear the evil influence of forged Epistles,
   2: 2. He merely states that, with a view to such deception, he would in
   the future authenticate all his letters by attaching an autographic
   salutation.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. Evidently some additional information
   regarding the state of affairs at Thessalonica had reached Paul, it may
   be through the bearers of the first Epistle, or by means of a
   communication from the elders of the church. It seems that some letter
   had been circulated among them, purporting to come from Paul, and that
   some false spirit was at work in the congregation. The persecution of
   the Thessalonians still continued and had probably increased in force,
   and in some way the impression had been created that the day of the
   Lord was at hand. This led on the one hand to feverish anxiety, and on
   the other, to idleness. Hence the apostle deemed it necessary to write
   a second letter to the Thessalonians.

   The purpose of the writer was to encourage the sorely pressed church;
   to calm the excitement by pointing out that the second advent of the
   Lord could not be expected immediately, since the mystery of
   lawlessness had to develop first and to issue in the man of sin; and to
   exhort the irregular ones to a quiet, industrious and orderly conduct.

   2. Time and Place. Some writers, such as Grotius, Ewald, Vander Vies
   and Laurent advocated the theory that II Thessalonians was written
   before I Thessalonians, but the arguments adduced to support that
   position cannot bear the burden. Moreover II Thess. 2:15 clearly refers
   to a former letter of the apostle. In all probability our Epistle was
   composed a few months after the first one, for on the one hand Silas
   and Timothy were still with the apostle, 1: 1, which was not the case
   after he left Corinth, and they were still antagonized by the Jews so
   that most likely their case had not yet been brought before Gallio,
   Acts 18:12-17; and on the other hand a change had come about both in
   the sentiment of the apostle, who speaks no more of his desire to visit
   the Thessalonians, and in the condition of the church to which he was
   writing, a change that would necessarily require some time. We should
   most likely date the letter about the middle of A. D. 53.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The early Church found no reason to doubt the canonicity of this
   letter. Little stress can be laid, it is true, on the supposed
   reference to its language in Ignatius, Barnabas, the Didache and Justin
   Martyr. It is quite evident, however, that Polycarp used the Epistle.
   Moreover it has a place in the canon of Marcion, is mentioned among the
   Pauline letters in the Muratorian Fragment, and is contained in the old
   Latin and Syriac Versions. Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian
   and others since their time, quote it by name. The great permanent
   value of this Epistle lies in the fact that it corrects false notions
   regarding the second advent of Christ, notions that led to indolence
   and disorderliness. We are taught in this Epistle that the great day of
   Christ will not come until the mystery of iniquity that is working in
   the world receives its full development, and brings forth the son of
   perdition who as the very incarnation of satan will set himself against
   Christ and his Church. If the Church of God had always remembered this
   lesson, she would have been spared many an irregularity and
   disappointment. The letter also reminds us once more of the fact that
   the day of the Lord will be a day of terror to the wicked, but a day of
   deliverance and glory for the Church of Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Pastoral Epistles

  AUTHORSHIP

   In the case of these Epistles it seems best to consider the question of
   authorship first, and to treat them as a unity in the discussion of
   their authenticity. When we examine the external testimony to these
   letters we find that this is in no way deficient. If many have doubted
   their genuineness, it was not because they discovered that the early
   Church did not recognize them. It is true that some early heretics, who
   acknowledged the genuineness of the other letters attributed to Paul,
   rejected these, such as Basilides and Marcion, but Jerome says that
   their adverse judgment was purely arbitrary. From the time of Irenaeus,
   Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian, who were the first to quote the
   New Testament books by name, until the beginning of the nineteenth
   century, no one doubted the Pauline authorship of these letters. The
   Muratorian Fragment ascribes them to Paul, and they are included in all
   MSS., Versions and Lists of the Pauline letters, in all of which (with
   the single exception of the Muratorian Fragment) they are arranged in
   the same order, viz. I Timothy, II Timothy, Titus.

   As far as the internal evidence is concerned we may call attention in a
   preliminary way to a few facts that favor the authenticity of these
   letters and take up the consideration of other features in connection
   with the objections that are urged against them. They are all
   self-attested; they contain the characteristic Pauline blessing at the
   beginning, end with the customary salutation, and reveal the usual
   solicitude of Paul for his churches and for those associated with him
   in the work; they point to the same relation between Paul and his
   spiritual sons Timothy and Titus that we know from other sources; and
   they refer to persons (cf. II Tim. 4. Titus 3) that are also mentioned
   elsewhere as companions and co-laborers of Paul.

   Yet it is especially on the strength of internal evidence that these
   Epistles have been attacked. J. E. C. Schmidt in 1804, soon followed by
   Schleiermacher, was the first one to cast doubt on their genuineness.
   Since that time they have been rejected, not only by the Tubingen
   school and by practically all negative critics, but also by some
   scholars that usually incline to the conservative side, such as Neander
   (rejecting only I Timothy), Meyer; (Introd.to Romans) and Sabatier.
   While the majority of radical critics reject these letters
   unconditionally, Credner, Harnack, Hausrath and McGiffert believe that
   they contain some genuine Pauline sections; the last named scholar
   regarding especially the passages that contain personal references,
   such as II Tim. 1:15-18; 4: 9-21; Titus 3:12,13, as authentic, and
   surmising that some others may be saved from the ruins, The Apostolic
   Age p. 405 if. The genuineness of the Pastorals is defended by Weiss,
   Zahn, Salmon, Godet, Barth, and nearly all the Commentators, such as
   Huther, Van Oosterzee, Ellicott, Alford, White (in The Exp. Gk. Test.)
   e. a.

   Several arguments are employed to discredit the authenticity of these
   letters. We shall briefly consider the most important ones. (1) It is
   impossible to find a place for their composition and the historical
   situation which they reflect in the life of Paul, as we know it from
   the Acts of the Apostles. Reuss, who provisionally accepted their
   Pauline authorship in his, History of the New Testament I pp. 80-85;
   121-129, did so with the distinct proviso that they had to fit into the
   narrative of Acts somewhere. Finding that his scheme did not work out
   well, he afterwards rejected I Timothy and Titus. Cf. his Commentary on
   the Pastorals. (2) The conception of Christianity found in these
   letters is un-Pauline and clearly represents a later development. They
   contain indeed some Pauline ideas, but these are exceptional. "There is
   no trace whatever," says McGiifert, "of the great fundamental truth of
   Paul's gospel,--death unto the flesh and life in the Spirit." Instead
   of the faith by which we are justified and united to Christ, we find
   piety and good works prominently in the foreground. Cf. I Tim. 1: 5; 2:
   2,15; 4:7 f.; 5:4; 6:6;--II Tim. 1:3; 3:5, 12;--Titus 1:1; 2:12.
   Moreover the word faith does not, as in the letters of Paul, denote the
   faith that believes, but rather the sum and substance of that which is
   believed, I Tim. 1: 19; 3: 9; 4:1, 6; 5 :8. And sound doctrine is
   spoken of in a way that reminds one of the characteristic esteem in
   which orthodoxy was later held, cf. I Tim. 1:10; 4: 6; 6: 3 ;-- II Tim.
   4: 3 ;--Titus 1: 9; 2:1, 7. (3) The church organization that is
   reflected in these letters points to a later age. It is unlikely that
   Paul, believing as he did in the speedy second coming of Christ, would
   pay so much attention to details of organization; nor does it seem
   probable that he would lay such stress on the offices received by
   ecclesiastical appointment, and have so little regard to the spiritual
   gifts that are independent of official position and that occupy a very
   prominent place in the undoubted writings of the apostle. Moreover the
   organization assumed in these letters reveals second century
   conditions. Alongside of the presbuteroithe episkoposis named as a
   primus inter pares (notice the singular in I Tim. 3:1; Titus 1: 7); and
   the office-bearers in general are given undue prominence. There is a
   separate class of widows, of which some held an official position in
   the Church, just as there was in the second century, I Tim. 5.
   Ecclesiastical office is conferred by the laying on of hands, I Tim. 5:
   22; and the second marriage of bishops, deacons, and ministering widows
   was not to be tolerated, I Tim. 3: 2, 12; 5 : 9-11; Tit. 1: 6. (4) The
   false teachers and teachings to which the Epistles refer are evidently
   second century Gnostics and Gnosticism. The term antitheseis, I Tim. 6
   :20, according to Baur, contains a reference to the work of Marcion
   which bore that title. And the endless genealogies of I Tim. 1: 4 are
   supposed to refer to the Aeons of Valentinus. (5) The most weighty
   objection is, however, that the style of these letters differs from
   that of the Pauline Epistles to such a degree as to imply diversity of
   authorship. Says Davidson: "The change of style is too great to comport
   with identity of authorship. Imitations of phrases and terms occurring
   in Pauls authentic Epistles are obvious; inferiority and feebleness
   show dependence; while the new constructions and words betray a writer
   treating of new circumstances and giving expression to new ideas, yet
   personating the apostle all the while. The change is palpable; though
   the author throws himself back into the situation of Paul the
   prisoner." Introd. II p. 66. Holtzmann claims that of the 897 words
   that constitute these letters (proper names excepted) 171 (read 148)
   are hapax legomena of which 74 are found in I Timothy, 46 in II
   Timothy, and 28 in Titus. Besides these there is a great number of
   phrases and expressions that are peculiar and point away from Paul,
   such as dokein dikaiosunen, I Tim. 6:11; II Tim. 2:22; phulassein ten
   paratheken, I Tim. 6:20; II Tim. 1:12, 14; parakolouthein te
   didaskalia?, I Tim. 4:6; II Tim. 3:10; bebeloi kenophoniai, I Tim.
   6:20; II Tim. 2:16; hanthropos theou I Tim. 6:11; II Tim. 3 :17; etc.
   On the other hand many expressions that play a prominent part in
   Pauline literature are absent from these letters, as adikos,
   akrobustia, gnopizein, dikaiosune theou, dikaioma, e'rga nomou,
   homoioma, paradosis, etc.

   As far as the first argument is concerned, it must be admitted that
   these Epistles do not fit in the life of Paul, as we know it from the
   Acts of the Apostles. Their genuineness depends on the question,
   whether or not Paul was set free again after the imprisonment described
   in Acts 28. Now we have reasons, aside from the contents of these
   Epistles, to believe that he was liberated and resumed his missionary
   labors. In view of the fact that Felix, Festus and Agrippa found no
   guilt in Paul, and that the apostle was sent to Rome, only because he
   appealed to Caesar, the presumption is that he was not condemned at
   Rome. This presumption is greatly strengthened by the fact that, when
   the apostle wrote his letters to the Philippians and to Philemon, the
   prospect of his release seemed favorable, Phil. 1: 25; 2: 24; Philem.
   22; compare II Tim. 4: 6-8. It is objected to this that Paul, in taking
   his farewell of the Ephesan elders, says to them: "I know (hoida) that
   ye all--shall see my face no more," Acts 20: 25. But it may be doubted,
   whether we have the right to press this hoida so that it becomes
   prophetic; if we have, it is counterbalanced by the hoida in Phil. 1
   :25. The most natural inference from the data of Scripture (outside of
   these Epistles) is that Paul was set free; and this is confirmed by the
   tradition of the early Church, as it is expressed by Eusebius, Church
   Hist. II 22: Paul is said (logos hechei)after having defended himself
   to have set forth again upon the ministry of preaching, and to have
   entered the same city a second time, and to have ended his life by
   martyrdom. Whilst then a prisoner, he wrote the second Epistle to
   Timothy, in which he both mentions his first defense, and his impending
   death." Moreover the Muratorian Fragment speaks of a visit that Paul
   paid to Spain, which cannot be placed before the first Roman
   imprisonment. And Clement of Rome states in his letter to the
   Corinthians, after relating that the apostle labored in the East and in
   the West, that he came to "the bounderies of the West." Now it does not
   seem likely that he, who himself lived in Rome, would refer to the city
   on the Tiber in those terms. And if this is not the import of those
   words, the presumption is that he too has reference to Spain.

   Paul's movements after his release are uncertain, and all that can be
   said regarding, them is conjectural. Leaving Rome he probably first
   repaired to Macedonia and Asia Minor for the intended visits, Phil. 1:
   23-26; Philem. 22, and then undertook his long looked for journey to
   Spain, Rom. 15 : 24. Returning from there, he possibly went to Ephesus,
   where he had a dispute with Hymenaeus and Alexander, I Tim. 1: 20, and
   engaged the services of Onesiphorus, II Tim. 1: 16-18. Leaving Timothy
   in charge of the Ephesian church, he departed for Macedonia, I Tim. 1:
   3, from where he most likely wrote I Timothy. After this he may have
   visited Crete with Titus, leaving the latter there to organize the
   churches, Tit. 1: 5, and returning to Ephesus according to his wishes,
   I Tim. 3:14; 4:13, where Alexander the coppersmith did him great evil,
   II Tim. 4:14. From here he probably wrote the Epistle to Titus, for he
   was evidently in some center of missionary enterprise, when he composed
   it, Tit. 3:12-15. Departing from Ephesus, he went through Miletus, II
   Tim. 4: 20 to Troas, II Tim. 4:13, where he was probably re-arrested,
   and whence he was taken to Rome by way of Corinth, the abode of
   Erastus, II Tim. 4: 20; Rom. 16: 23. In that case he did not reach
   Nicopolis, where he intended to spend the winter. In this statement we
   proceed on the assumption that the winter mentioned in II Tim. 4: 21 is
   the same as that of Titus 3:12. The second imprisonment of Paul was
   more severe than the first, II Tim. 1: 16, 17; 2: 9. His first defense
   appears to have been successful, II Tim. 4:16, 17, but as his final
   hearing drew nigh, he had a presentiment of approaching martyrdom.
   According to the Chronicles of Eusebius Paul died as a martyr in the
   thirteenth year of Nero, or A. D. 67.

   The objection that the theological teaching of these Epistles is
   different from that of Paul, must be taken cum grano salis, because
   this teaching merely complements and in no way contradicts the
   representation of the undoubted Epistles. We find no further objective
   development of the truth here, but only a practical application of the
   doctrines already unfolded in previous letters. And it was entirely
   fitting that, as every individual letter, so too the entire cycle of
   Pauline Epistles should end with practical admonitions. Historically
   this is easily explained, on the one hand, by the fact that the
   productive period of the apostles life had come to an end, and it is
   now Paul the aged--for all the vicissitudes of a busy and stormy life
   must greatly have sapped his strength--that speaks to us, cf. Philem.
   9; and, on the other hand, by the fact that the heresy which the
   apostle here encounters had developed into ethical corruption. If it is
   said that the writer of these Epistles ascribes a meritorious character
   to good works, we take exception and qualify that as a false statement.
   The passages referred to, such as I Tim. 1:15; 3:13; 4:8; 6:18 if.; II
   Tim. 4:8, do not prove the assertion. Since a rather full statement of
   the Christian truth had preceded these letters, it need not cause
   surprise that Paul should refer to it as "the sound doctrine," Cf. Rom.
   6:17. Nor does it seem strange, in view of this, that alongside of the
   subjective the objective sense of the word faith should begin to assert
   itself. We find an approach to this already in Rom. 12: 6; Gal. 1: 23;
   Phil. 1: 27.

   It is a mistake to think that the emphasis which these letters place on
   the external organization of the churches, and the particular type of
   ecclesiastical polity which they reflect, precludes their Pauline
   authorship. There is nothing strange in the fact that Paul, knowing
   that the day of Christ was not at hand (II Thess. 2:1-12), should lay
   special stress on church government now that his ministry was drawing
   to a close. It might rather have caused surprise, if he had not thus
   made provision for the future of his churches. And it is perfectly
   natural also that he should emphasize the offices in the church rather
   than the extraordinary spiritual gifts, since these gradually vanished
   and made place for the ordinary ministry of the Word. The position that
   the office-bearers mentioned in these letters prove a development
   beyond that of the apostolic age. is not substantiated by the facts.
   Deacons were appointed shortly after the establishment of the Church,
   Acts 6; elders were chosen from place to place, as the apostle founded
   churches among the Gentiles, Acts 14: 23; and in Phil, 1: 1 Paul
   addresses not only the Philippians in general, but also "the bishops
   and deacons." Moreover in Eph. 4:11 the apostle says: "And He gave you
   some apostles; and some prophets; and some evangelists; and some
   pastors and teachers." Surely it does not seem that the Pastoral
   Epistles are strikingly different in this respect from the others. If
   it be said that the bishop becomes so prominent here as to indicate
   that the leaven of hierarchy was already working, we answer that in the
   New Testament the terms episkopos and presbuteros; are clearly
   synonymous. The fact that the bishop is spoken of in the singular
   proves nothing to the contrary. Not once are bishops and presbyters
   arranged alongside of each other as denoting two separate classes, and
   in Titus 1: 5-7 the terms are clearly interchangeable. The case of
   Phebe, Rom. 16: 1 certainly does not countenance the theory that the
   office of deaconess was not called into existence until the second
   century. And the passages that are supposed to prohibit the second
   marriage of office-bearers are of too uncertain interpretation to
   justify the conclusions drawn from them.

   Granted that the errors to which these letters refer were of a Gnostic
   character--as Alford is willing to grant--, it by no means follows that
   the Epistles are second century productions, since the first signs of
   the Gnostic heresy are known to have made their appearance in the
   apostolic age. But it is an unproved assumption that the writer refers
   to Gnosticism of any kind. It is perfectly evident from the letters
   that the heresy was of a Judaeistic, though not of a Pharisaic type,
   resembling very much the error that threatened the Colossian church.
   Hort, after examining it carefully comes to the conclusion that "there
   is a total want of evidence for anything pointing to even rudimentary
   Gnosticism or Essenism." In view of the fact that the errorists prided
   themselves as being teachers of the law, I Tim. 1: 7, and that the term
   genealogia is brought in close connection with "strivings about the
   law" in Titus 3: 9, the presumption is that it contains no reference
   whatever to the emanations of Gnostic aeons, but rather, as Zahn
   surmises, to rabbinic disputations regarding Jewish genealogies. And
   the word "antitheses," of which Hort says that it cannot refer to
   Marcions work, is simply descriptive of the opposition in which the
   heretics that boasted of a higher knowledge placed themselves to the
   Gospel.

   The argument from style has often proved to be a very precarious one.
   If a persons vocabulary were a fixed quantity, he were limited to the
   use of certain set phrases and expressions, and his style, once
   acquired, were unchangeable and necessarily wanting in flexibility, a
   plausible case might be made out. But as a matter of fact such is not
   the usual condition of things, and certainly was not the case with
   Paul, who to a great extent moulded the language of the New Testament.
   We need not and cannot deny that the language of the Pastorals has many
   peculiarities, but in seeking to explain these we should not
   immediately take refuge in a supposed difference of authorship, but
   rather make allowance for the influence of Paul's advancing years, of
   the altered conditions of his life, of the situation in which his
   readers were placed. And of the subjects with which he was obliged to
   deal in these Epistles. And let us not forget what N. J. D. White says,
   Exp. Gk. Test. IV p. 63, that "the acknowledged peculiarities must not
   be allowed to obscure the equally undoubted fact that the Epistles
   present not only as many characteristic Pauline words as the writer had
   use for, but that, in the more significant matter of turns of
   expression, the style of the letters is fundamentally Pauline. Cf. also
   the judicious remarks of Reuss on the style of these letters.History of
   the New Testament, I p. 123.

   In concluding our discussion of the authenticity of the Pastoral
   Epistles we desire to remark: (1) The critics admit that the objections
   urged by them against the genuineness of these letters do not apply to
   all three of them in the same degree. According to Baur II Timothy and
   Titus are the least suspicious. He maintains, however, that I Timothy
   will always be "the betrayer of its spurious brothers." But it would be
   reasonable to turn the statement about with Reuss, and to say that "so
   long as no decisive and palpable proofs of the contrary are presented
   the two which are in and of themselves less suspicious ought always to
   afford protection to the third which is more so." Ibid. p. 84. (2) Baur
   and his followers rightly held that, in order to prove the spuriousness
   of these letters, they had to point out the positive purpose of the
   forgery; in which, according to Reuss, they utterly failed, when they
   said that it was to combat the Gnostic heresies that were prevalent
   after A. D. 150, Ibid. p. 124 f. (3) It looks a great deal like a
   confession of defeat, when several of the negative critics admit that
   the passages in which personal reminiscences are found, must be
   regarded as genuine, for it means that they yield their case wherever
   they can be controlled. For a broader discussion of the authenticity of
   these letters, cf. Alford, Prolegomena Section I; Holtzmann, Einl. pp.
   274-292; Zahn, Einl. I pp. 459-491; Godet, Introd. pp. 567-611; Farrar,
   St. Paul, II pp. 607-622; Salmon, Introd. pp. 433-452; McGiffert,
   Apostolic Age pp. 399-423; Davidson, Introd. II pp. 21-76. Lock (in
   Hastings D. B. Artt. I Timothy, II Timothy and Titus.)
     __________________________________________________________________

The First Epistle to Timothy

  CONTENTS

   The first Epistle to Timothy may be divided into four parts:

   I. Introduction, 1:1-20. The apostle begins by reminding Timothy that
   he had been left at Ephesus to counteract prevalent heresies, 1-10. He
   directs the attention of his spiritual son to the Gospel contradicted
   by these errors, thanks the Lord that he was made a minister of it, and
   charges Timothy to act in accordance with that Gospel, 11-20.

   II. General Regulations for Church Life, 2: 1--4: 5. Here we find first
   of all directions for public intercession and for the behavior of men
   and women in the meetings of the church, 2:1-15. These are followed by
   an explicit statement of the qualities that are necessary in bishops
   and deacons, 3:1-13. The expressed purpose of these directions is, to
   promote the good order of the church, the pillar and ground of the
   truth, essentially revealed in Christ, from which the false brethren
   were departing, 3:14--A: 5.

   III. Personal Advice to Timothy, 4: 6--6: 2. Here the apostle speaks of
   Timothys behavior towards the false teachers, 4: 6-11; of the way in
   which he should regard and discharge his ministerial duties, 12-16; and
   of the attitude he ought to assume towards the individual members of
   the church, especially towards the widows, the elders and the slaves,
   5: 1--6: 2.

   IV. Conclusion, 6: 3-21. The apostle now makes another attack on the
   heretical teachers, 3--10; and exhorts Timothy to be true to his
   calling and to avoid all erroneous teachings, giving him special
   directions with respect to the rich, 11-21.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. This letter is one of the Pastoral Epistles of Paul, which are so
   called, because they were written to persons engaged in pastoral work
   and contain many directions for pastoral duties. They were sent, not to
   churches, but to office-bearers, instructing them how to behave in the
   house of God. It is evident, however, that, with the possible exception
   of II Timothy, they were not intended exclusively for the persons to
   whom they were addressed, but also for the churches in which these
   labored. Cf. as far as this Epistle is concerned, 4:6, 11; 5:7; 6:17.

   2. From the preceding it follows that this letter is not doctrinal but
   practical. We find no further objective development of the truth here,
   but clear directions as to its practical application, especially in
   view of divergent tendencies. The truth developed in previous Epistles
   is here represented as the "sound doctrine" that must be the standard
   of life and action, as "the faith" that should be kept, and as "a
   faithful word worthy of all acceptation." rhe emphasis clearly falls on
   the ethical requirements of the truth.

   3. The letter emphasizes, as no other Epistle does, the external
   organization of the church. The apostle feels that the end of his life
   is fast approaching, and therefore deems it necessary to give more
   detailed instruction regarding the office-bearers in the church, in
   order that, when he is gone, his youthful co-laborers and the church
   itself may know how its affairs should be regulated. Of the
   office-bearers the apostle mentions the episkos and the presbuteroi,
   which are evidently identical, the first name indicating their work,
   and the second emphasizing their age; the diakonoi, the gunaikes, if 3
   :11 refers to deaconesses, which is very probable (so Ellicott, Alford,
   White in Exp. Gk. Test.) and the cherai, ch. 5, though it is doubtful,
   whether these were indeed office-bearers.

   4. Regarding the style of the Pastoral Epistles in general Huther
   remarks: "In the other Pauline Epistles the fulness of the apostles
   thoughts struggle with the expression, and cause peculiar difficulties
   in exposition. The thoughts slide into one another, and are so
   intertwined in many forms that not seldom the new thought begins before
   a correct expression has been given of the thought that preceded. Of
   this confusion there is no example in the Pastoral Epistles. Even in
   such passages as come nearest to this confused style, such as the
   beginning of the first and second Epistles of Timothy (Tit. 2: 11 if.;
   3: 4 if.) the connection of ideas is still on the whole simple." Comm.
   p. 9. This estimate is in general correct, though we would hardly speak
   of Pauls style in his other letters as "a confused style."

  THE PERSON TO WHOM THE EPISTLE WAS WRITTEN

   Paul addresses this letter to "Timothy my own son in the faith," 1: 2.
   We find the first mention of Timothy in Acts 16:1, where he is
   introduced as an inhabitant of Lystra. He was the son of a Jewish
   mother and a Greek father, of whom we have no further knowledge. Both
   his mother Eunice and his grandmother Lois are spoken of as Christians
   in II Tim. 1: 5. In all probability he was converted by Paul on his
   first missionary journey, since he was already a disciple, when the
   apostle entered Lystra on his second tour. He had a good report in his
   home town, Acts 16: 2, and, being circumcised for the sake of the Jews,
   he joined Paul and Silas in their missionary labors. Passing with the
   missionaries into Europe and helping them at Philippi, Thessalonica and
   Berea, he remained with Silas in the last named place, while Paul
   pressed on to Athens and Corinth, where they finally joined the apostle
   again, Acts 17:14; 18: 5. Cf. however also I Thess. 3: 1 and p. 222
   above. He abode there with the missionaries and his name appears with
   those of Paul and Silvanus in the addresses of the two Epistles to the
   Thessalonians. We next find him ministering to the apostle during his
   long stay at Ephesus, Acts 19: 22, from where he was sent to Macedonia
   and Corinth, Acts 19: 21, 22; I Cor. 4:17; 16:10, though it is
   doubtful, whether he reached that city. He was again in Paul's company,
   when II Corinthians was written, II Cor. 1:1, and accompanied the
   apostle to Corinth, Rom. 16: 21, and again on his return through
   Macedonia to Asia, Acts 20: 3, 4, probably also to Jerusalem, I Cor.
   16: 3. He is then mentioned in the Epistles of the imprisonment, which
   show that he was with the apostle at Rome, Phil. 1: 1; Col. 1:1;
   Philem. 1. From this time on we hear no more of him until the Pastoral
   Epistles show him to be in charge of the Ephesian church, I Tim. 1: 3.

   From I Tim. 4:14, and II Tim. 1:6 we learn that he was set apart for
   the ministry by Paul with the laying on of hands, in accordance with
   prophetic utterances of the Spirit, I Tim. 1: 18, when he probably
   received the title of evangelist, II Tim. 4: 5, though in I Thess. 2: 6
   he is loosely classed with Paul and Silas as an apostle. We do not know
   when this formal ordination took place, whether at the very beginning
   of his work, or when he was placed in charge of the church at Ephesus.

   The character of Timothy is clearly marked in Scripture. His readiness
   to leave his home and to submit to the rite of circumcision reveal his
   self-denial and earnestness of purpose. This is all the more striking,
   since he was very affectionate, II Tim. 1: 4, delicate and often ill, 1
   Tim. 5 : 23. At the same time he was timid, I Cor. 16:10, hesitating to
   assert his authority, I Tim. 4:12, and needed to be warned against
   youthful lusts, II Tim. 2: 22, and to be encouraged in the work of
   Christ, II Tim. 1: 8. Yet withal he was a worthy servant of Jesus
   Christ, Rom. 16: 21, I Thess. 3 : 2; Phil. 1: 1; 2:19-21; and the
   beloved spiritual son of the apostle, I Tim. 1: 2; II Tim. 1: 2; I Cor.
   4:17.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. This letter was occasioned by Paul's necessary
   departure from Ephesus for Macedonia, 1: 3, the apprehension that he
   might be absent longer than he at first expected, 3:14, 15, and the
   painful consciousness that insidkus errors were threatening the
   Ephesian church. Since Timothy was acquainted with these heresies, the
   apostle refers to them only in general terms which convey no very
   definite idea as to their real character. The persons who propagated
   them were prominent members of the church, possibly even
   office-bearers, 1: 6, 7, 20; 3:1-12; 5:19-25. Their heresy was
   primarily of a Jewish character, 1: 7, and probably resulted from an
   exaggeration of the demands of the law, a mistaken application of
   Christian ideas and a smattering of Oriental speculation. They claimed
   to be teachers of the law, 1: 7, laid great stress on myths and
   genealogies, 1:4; 4: 7, prided themselves like the rabbis on the
   possession of special knowledge, 6: 20, and, perhaps assuming that
   matter was evil or at least the seat of evil, they propagated a false
   asceticism, prohibiting marriage and requiring abstenence from certain
   foods, 4: 3, and taught that the resurrection was already past, most
   likely recognizing only a spiritual resurrection, II Tim. 2:18. The
   charge entrusted to Timothy was therefore a difficult one, hence the
   apostle deemed it necessary to write this Epistle.

   In connection with the situation described the purpose of Paul was
   twofold. In the first place he desired to encourage Timothy. This
   brother, being young and of a timid disposition, needed very much the
   cheering word of the apostle. And in the second place it was his aim to
   direct Timothy's warfare against the false doctrines that were
   disseminated in the church. Possibly it was also to prevent the havoc
   which these might work, if they who taught them were allowed in office,
   that he places such emphasis on the careful choice of office-bearers,
   and on the necessity of censuring them, should they go wrong.

   2. Time and Place. The Epistle shows that Paul had left Ephesus for
   Macedonia with the intention of returning soon. And it was because he
   anticipated some delay that he wrote this letter to Timothy. Hence we
   may be sure that it was written from some place in Macedonia.

   But the time when the apostle wrote this letter is not so easily
   determined. On what occasion did Paul quit Ephesus for Macedonia,
   leaving Timothy behind? Not after his first visit to Ephesus, Acts 18:
   20, 21, for on that occasion the apostle did not depart for Macedonia
   but for Jerusalem. Neither was it when he left Ephesus on his third
   missionary journey after a three years residence, since Timothy was not
   left behind then, but had been sent before him to Corinth, Acts 19: 22;
   I Cor. 4:17. Some are inclined to think that we must assume a visit of
   Paul to Macedonia during his Ephesian residence, a visit not recorded
   in the Acts of the Apostles. But then we must also find room there for
   the apostles journey to Crete, since it is improbable that the Epistle
   of Paul to Titus was separated by any great interval of time from I
   Timothy. And to this must be added a trip to Corinth, cf. above p. 168.
   This theory is very unlikely in view of the time Paul spent at Ephesus,
   as compared with the work he did there, and of the utter silence of
   Luke regarding these visits. We must date the letter somewhere between
   the first and the second imprisonment of Paul. It was most likely after
   the apostles journey to Spain, since on the only previous occasion that
   he visited Ephesus after his release he came to that city by way of
   Macedonia, and therefore would not be likely to return thither
   immediately. Probably the letter should be dated about A. D. 65 or 66.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   There was not the slightest doubt in the ancient church as to the
   canonicity of this Epistle. XVe find allusions more or less clear to
   its language in Clement of Rome, Polycarp, Ilegesippus, Athenagoras and
   Theophilus. It was contained in the old Latin and Syriac Versions and
   referred to Paul by the Muratorian Fragment. Irenaeus, Clement of
   Alexandria and Tertullian quote it by name, and Eusebius reckons it
   among the generally accepted canonical writings.

   The great abiding value of the Epistle is found in the fact that it
   teaches the Church of all generations, how one, especially an
   office-bearer, should behave in the house of God, holding the faith,
   guarding his precious trust against the inroads of false doctrines,
   combating the evil that is found in the Lords heritage, and maintaining
   good order in church life. "It witnesses," says Lock (Hastings D. B.
   Art. I Timothy) "that a highly ethical and spiritual conception of
   religion is consistent with and is safeguarded by careful regulations
   about worship, ritual and organized ministry. There is no opposition
   between the outward and the inward, between the spirit and the
   organized body.".
     __________________________________________________________________

The Second Epistle to Timothy

  CONTENTS

   The contents of this Epistle falls into three parts:

   I. Considerations to strengthen Timothy's Courage, 1: 1--2:13. After
   the greeting, 1, 2, the apostle urges Timothy to stir up his
   ministerial gift, to be bold in suffering, and to hold fast the truth
   entrusted to him, 3--14, enforcing these appeals by pointing to the
   deterrent example of the unfaithful and the stimulating example of
   Onesiphorus, 15--18. Further he exhorts him to be strong in the power
   of grace, to commit the true teaching to others, and to be ready to
   face suffering, 2:1-13.

   II. Exhortations primarily dealing with Timothy's Teaching, 2: l4--4:
   8. Timothy should urge Christians to avoid idle and useless
   discussions, and should rightly teach the truth, shunning vain
   babblings, 14-21. He must also avoid youthful passions, foolish
   investigations, and false teachers who, for selfish purposes, turn the
   truth of God into unrighteousness, 2: 22--3: 9. He is further exhorted
   to abide loyally by his past teaching, knowing that sufferings will
   come to every true soldier and that deceivers will grow worse, 10-17;
   and to fulfil his whole duty as an evangelist with sobriety and
   courage, especially since Paul is now ready to be offered up, 4:1-8.

   III. Personal Reminiscences, 4: 9-22. Paul appeals to Timothy to come
   to Rome quickly, bringing Mark and also taking his cloak and books, and
   to avoid Alexander, 9-15. He speaks of his desertion by men, the
   protection afforded him by the Lord, and his trust for the future,
   16-18. With special greetings, a further account of his
   fellow-laborers, and a final salutation the apostle ends his letter,
   19-22.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. II Timothy is the most personal of the Pastoral Epistles.
   Doctrinally it has no great importance, though it does contain the
   strongest proof-passage for the inspiration of Scripture. In the main
   the thought centers about Timothy, the faithful co-laborer of Paul,
   whom the apostle gives encouragement in the presence of great
   difficulties, whom he inspires to noble, self-denying efforts in the
   Kingdom of God, and whom he exhorts to fight worthily in the spiritual
   warfare against the powers of darkness, that he may once receive an
   eternal reward.

   2. It is the last Epistle of Paul, the swan-song of the great apostle,
   after a life of devotion to a noble cause, a life of Christian service.
   We see him here with work done, facing a martyrs death. Looking back
   his heart is filled with gratitude for the grace of God that saved him
   from the abyss that yawned at his feet, that called and qualified him
   to be a messenger of the cross, that protected him when dangers were
   threatening, and that crowned his work with rich spiritual fruits. And
   as he turns his eyes to the future, calm assurance and joyous hope are
   the strength of his soul, for he knows that the firm foundation of God
   will stand, since the Lord will punish the evil-doers and be the
   eternal reward of his children. He already has visions of the heavenly
   Kingdom, of eternal glory, of the coming righteous Judge, and of the
   crown of righteousness, the blessed inheritance of all those that love
   Christs appearance.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. The immediate occasion for writing this
   Epistle was the apostles presentiment of his fast approaching end. He
   was anxious that Timothy should come to him soon, bringing Mark with
   him. In all probability he desired to give his spiritual son some
   fatherly advice and some practical instruction before his departure.
   But we feel that ths alone did not call for a letter such as II Timothy
   really is. Another factor must be taken in consideration. Paul was not
   sure that Timothy would succeed in reaching Rome before his death, and
   yet realized that the condition of the Ephesian church, the danger to
   which Timothy was there exposed, and the importance of the work
   entrusted to this youthful minister, called for a word of apostolic
   advice, encouragement and exhortation. It seems that the Ephesian
   church was threatened by persecution, 1:8; 2:3, 12; 3:12; 4:5; and the
   heresy to which the apostle referred in his first epistle was evidently
   still rife in the circle of believers. There were those who strove
   about words, 2:14, were unspiritual, 2:16, corrupted in mind, 3: 8,
   indulging in foolish and ignorant questionings, 2: 23, and fables, 4:4,
   tending to a low standard of morality, 2:19, and teaching that the
   resurrection was already past, 2:18.

   Hence the object of the Epistle is twofold. The writer wants to warn
   Timothy of his impending departure, to inform him of his past
   experiences at Rome and of his present loneliness, and to exhort him to
   come speedily. Besides this, however, he desired to strengthen his
   spiritual son in view of the deepening gloom of trials and persecution
   that were threatening the church from without; and to fore-arm him
   against the still sadder danger of heresy and apostasy that were
   lurking within the fold. Timothy is exhorted to hold fast the faith, 1:
   5, 13; to endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, 2: 3-10;
   to shun every form of heresy, 2:16-18; to instruct in meekness those
   that withstand the Gospel, 2:24-26; and to continue in the things he
   had learnt, 3:14-17.

   2. Time and Place. From 1: 17 it is perfectly evident that this letter
   was written at Rome. The apostle was again a prisoner in the imperial
   city. Though we have no absolute certainty, we deem it probable that he
   was re-arrested at Troas in the year 67. The situation in which he
   finds himself at Rome is quite different from that reflected in the
   other epistles of the captivity. He is now treated like a common
   criminal, 2: 9; his Asiatic friends with the exception of Onesiphorus
   turned from him, 1: 15; the friends who were with him during his first
   imprisonment are absent now, Col. 4:10-14; II Tim. 4:10-12; and the
   outlook of the apostle is quite different from that found in
   Philippians and Philemon. It is impossible to tell just how long the
   apostle had already been in prison, when he wrote the Epistle, but from
   the fact that he had had one hearing, 4:16 (which cannot refer to that
   of the first imprisonment, cf. Phil, 1: 7, 12-14), and expected to be
   offered up soon, we infer that he composed the letter towards the end
   of his imprisonment, i. e. in the fall of A. D. 67.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The canonicity of this Epistle has never been questioned by the Church;
   and the testimony to its early and general use is in no way deficient.
   There are quite clear traces of its language in Clement of Rome,
   Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin Martyr, The Acts of Paul and Thecla, and
   Theophilus of Antioch. The letter is included in all the MSS., the old
   Versions and the Lists of the Pauline Epistles. The Muratorian Fragment
   names it as a production of Paul, and from the end of the second
   century it is quoted by name.

   The Epistle has some permanent doctrinal value as containing the most
   important proof-passage for the inspiration of Scripture, 3:16, and
   also abiding historical significance in that it contains the clearest
   Scriptural testimony to the life of Paul after his first Roman
   imprisonment. But Lock truly says that "its main interest is one of
   character, and two portraits emerge from it." We have here (1) the
   portrait of the ideal Christian minister, busily engaged in the work of
   his Master, confessing His Name, proclaiming His truth, shepherding His
   fold, defending his heritage, and battling with the powers of evil; and
   (2) the "portrait of the Christian minister, with his work done, facing
   death. He acquiesces gladly in the present, but his eyes are turned
   mainly to the past or to the future." (Lock in Hastings D. B. Art. II
   Timothy) He is thankful for the work he was permitted to do, and
   serenely awaits the day of his crowning.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistle to Titus

  CONTENTS

   The contents of this Epistle may be divided into three parts:

   I. Instruction regarding the Appointment of Ministers, 1: 1-16. After
   the opening salutation, 1-4, the apostle reminds Titus of his past
   instruction to appoint presbyters, 5. He emphasizes the importance of
   high moral character in an overseer, in order that such an
   office-bearer may maintain the sound doctrine and may refute the
   opponents that mislead others and, claiming to know God, deny Him with
   their words, 6-16.

   II. Directions as to the Teaching of Titus, 2:1--3: 11. Paul would have
   Titus urge all the different classes that were found in the Cretan
   church, viz, the elder men and women, the younger women and men, and
   the slaves, to regulate their life in harmony with the teachings of the
   Gospel, since they were all trained by the saving grace of God to rise
   above sin and to lead godly lives, 2:1-14. As regards their relation to
   the outer world, Titus should teach believers to subject themselves to
   the authorities, and to be gentle towards all men, remembering that God
   had delivered them from the old heathen vices, in order that they
   should set others an example of noble and useful lives, 3:1-8. He
   himself must avoid foolish questionings and reject the heretics, who
   refused to listen to his admonition, 9-11.

   III. Personal Details, 3:12-15. Instructing Titus to join him at
   Nicopolis after Artemus or Tychicus has come to Crete, bringing with
   him Zenos and Apollos, the writer ends his letter with a final
   salutation.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. Like the other Pastoral Epistles this letter is also of a personal
   nature. It was not directed to any individual church or to a group of
   churches, but to a single person, one of Pauls spiritual sons and
   co-laborers in the work of the Lord. At the same time it is not as
   personal as II Timothy, but has distinctly a semi-private character. It
   is perfectly evident from the Epistle itself (cf. 2:15) that its
   teaching was also intended for the church in Crete to which Titus was
   ministering.

   2. This letter is in every way very much like I Timothy, which is due
   to the fact that the two were written about the same time and were
   called forth by very similar situations. It is shorter than the earlier
   Epistle, but covers almost the same ground. We do not find in it any
   advance on the doctrinal teachings of the other letters of Paul; in
   fact it contains very little doctrinal teaching, aside from the
   comprehensive statements of the doctrine of grace in 2: 11-14 and
   3:4-8. The former of these passages is a locus classicus. The main
   interest of the Epistle is ecclesiastical and ethical, the government
   of the church and the moral life of its members receiving due
   consideration.

  THE PERSON TO WHOM THE EPISTLE WAS WRITTEN

   Paul addressed the letter to "Titus mine own son after the common
   faith," 1:4. We do not meet with Titus in the Acts of the Apostles,
   which is all the more remarkable, since he was one of the most trusted
   companions of Paul. For this reason some surmised that he is to be
   identified with some one of the other co-laborers of Paul, as ~. i.
   Timothy, Silas or Justus, Acts 18: 7. But neither of these satisfy the
   conditions.

   He is first mentioned in Gal. 2:1, 3, where we learn that he was a
   Greek, who was not compelled to submit to circumcision, lest Paul
   should give his enemies a handle against himself. From Titus 1: 4 we
   infer that he was one of the apostles converts, and Gal. 2: 3 informs
   us that he accompanied Paul to the council of Jerusalem. According to
   some the phrase ho sun emoi in this passage implies that he was also
   with Paul, when he wrote the Epistle to the Galatians, but the
   inference is rather unwarranted. He probably bore I Corinthians to its
   destination, II Cor. 2:13, and after his return to Paul, was sent to
   Corinth again to complete the collection for the saints in Judaea, II
   Cor. 8:16 if. Most likely he was also the bearer of II Corinthians.
   When next we hear of him, he is on the island of Crete in charge of the
   church(es) that had been founded there. Titus 1: 4. 5. and is requested
   to join Paul at Nicopolis, 3:12. Evidently he was with the apostle in
   the early part of his second imprisonment, but soon left him for
   Dalmatia, either at the behest, or against the desire of Paul. The
   traditions regarding his later life are of doubtful value.

   If we compare I Tim. 4:12 with Titus 2:15, we get the impression that
   Titus was older than his co-laborer at Ephesus. The timidity of the
   latter did not characterize the former. While Timothy went to Corinth,
   so it seems, with some hesitation, I Cor. 16:10, Titus did not flinch
   from the delicate task of completing the collection for the saints in
   Judaea, but undertook it of his own accord, II Cor. 8:16,

   17. He was full of enthusiasm for the Corinthians, was free from wrong
   motives in his work among them, and followed in the footsteps of the
   apostle, II Cor. 12:18.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. The occasion for writing this Epistle is found
   in the desire of Paul that Titus should come to him in the near future,
   and in the condition of the Cretan church(es), whose origin is lost in
   obscurity. Probably the island was evangelized soon after the first
   Pentecost by those Cretans that were converted at Jerusalem, Acts 2:
   11. During the last part of his life Paul visited the island and made
   provision for the external organization of the church(es) there. When
   he left, he entrusted this important task to his spiritual son, Titus,
   1:5. The church (es) consisted of both Jews and Gentiles, 1: 10,
   ofdifferent ages and of various classes, 2:1-10. The Cretans did not
   have a very good reputation, 1: 12, and some of them did not believe
   their reputed character, even after they had turned to Christ.
   Apparently the errors that had crept into the church(es) there were
   very similar to those with which Timothy had to contend at Ephesus,
   though probably the Judaeistic element was still more prominent in
   them, 1: 10, 11, 14; 3: 9.

   The object of Paul in writing this letter is to summon Titus to come to
   him, as soon as another has taken his place; to give him directions
   regarding the ordination of presbyters in the different cities; to warn
   him against the heretics on the island; and guide him in his teaching
   and in his dealing with those that would not accept his word.

   2. Time and Place. Respecting the time when this Epistle was written
   there is no unanimity. Those who believe in the genuineness of the
   letter, and at the same time postulate but one Roman imprisonment, seek
   a place for it in the life of Paul, as we know it from the Acts.
   According to some it was written during the apostles first stay at
   Corinth, from where, in that case, he must have made a trip to Crete;
   others think it was composed at Ephesus, after Paul left Corinth and
   had on the way visited Crete. But the word "continued" in Acts 18: 11
   seems to preclude a trip from Corinth to Crete. Moreover both of these
   theories leave Pauls acquaintance with Apollos, presupposed in this
   letter, unexplained, 3:13. Still others would date the visit to Crete
   and the composition of this letThr somewhere between the years 54-57,
   when the apostle resided at Ephesus, but this hypothesis is also
   burdened with insuperable objections. Cf. above p. 249. The Epistle
   must have been composed in the interval between the first and the
   second imprisonment of the apostle, and supposing the winter of 3:13 to
   be the same as that of 11 Tim. 4: 21, probably in the early part of the
   year 67. We have no means to determine, where the letter was written,
   though something can be said in favor of Ephesus, cf. p. 639 above.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The Church from the beginning accepted this Epistle as canonical. There
   are passages in Clement of Rome, Ignatius, Barnabas, Justin Martyr and
   Theophilus that suggest literary dependence. Moreover the letter is
   found in all the MSS. and in the old Latin and Syriac Versions; and is
   referred to in the Muratorian Fragment. Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria
   and Tertullian quote it by name.

   The permanent value of the letter is in some respects quite similar to
   that of I Timothy. It has historical significance in that it informs us
   of the spread of Christianity on the island of Crete, a piece of
   information that we could not gather from any other Biblical source.
   Like I Timothy it emphasizes for all ages to come the necessity of
   church organization and the special qualifications of the
   officebearers. It is unique in placing prominently before us the
   educative value of the grace of God for the life of every man, of male
   and female, young and old, bond and free.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistle to Philemon

  CONTENTS

   We can distinguish three parts in this brief letter:

   I. The Introduction, 1-7. This contains the address, the customary
   blessing, and a thanksgiving of the apostle for the charity of
   Philemon, for the increase of which Paul hopes, because it greatly
   refreshes the saints.

   II. The Request, 8-21. Rather than command Philemon the apostle comes
   to him with a request, viz, that he receive back the converted slave
   Onesimus and forgive him his wrong-doing. Paul enforces his request by
   pointing to the conversion of Onesimus, and to his own willingness to
   repay Philemon what he lost, though he might ask retribution of him;
   and trusts that Philemon will do more than he asks.

   III. Conclusion, 22-25. Trusting that he will be set free, the apostle
   requests Philemon to prepare for him lodging. With greetings of his
   fellow-laborers and a final salutation he ends his letter.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. This letter is closely related to the Epistle that was sent to the
   Colossian church. They were composed at the same time, were sent to the
   same city and, with a single exception (that of Justus), contain
   identical greetings. At the same time it is distinguished from
   Colossians in that it is a private letter. Yet it is not addressed to a
   single individual, but to a family and to the believers at their house.

   2. The letter is further characterized by its great delicacy and
   tactfulness. It bears strong evidence to Christian courtesy, and has
   therefore been called "the polite epistle." In it we see Paul, the
   gentleman, handling a delicate question with consummate skill. Though
   he might command, he prefers to request that Philemon forgive and
   receive again his former slave. Tactfully he refers to the spiritual
   benefit that accrued from what might be called material loss. In a
   delicate manner he reminds Philemon of the debt the latter owed him,
   and expresses his confidence that this brother in Christ would even do
   more than he requested.

  AUTHORSHIP

   Marcion included this letter in his Pauline collection, and the
   Muratorian Fragment also ascribes it to Paul. Tertullian and Origen
   quote it by name, and Eusebius reckons it among the Pauline letters.

   Moreover the Epistle has all the marks of a genuine Pauline production.
   It is self-attested, contains the usual Pauline blessing, thanksgiving
   and salutation, reveals the character of the great apostle and clearly
   exhibits his style.

   Yet even this short and admirable Epistle has not enjoyed universal
   recognition. Baur rejected it because of its close relation to
   Colossians and Ephesians, which he regarded as spurious. He called it
   "the embryo of a Christian romance," like that of the Clementine
   Recognitions, its tendency being to show that what is lost on earth is
   gained in heaven. He also objects to it that it contains seven words
   which Paul uses nowhere else. Weizsacker and Pfleiderer are somewhat
   inclined to follow Baur. They find proof for the allegorical character
   of the letter in the name Onesimus =profitable, helpful. The latter
   thinks that this note may have accompanied the Epistle to the
   Colossians, to illustrate by a fictitious example the social precepts
   contained in that letter. Such criticism need not be taken seriously.
   Hilgenfelds dictum is that Baur has not succeeded in raising his
   explanation to the level of probability. And Renan says: "Paul alone
   can have written this little masterpiece."

  THE PERSON TO WHOM THE LETTER IS WRITTEN

   The letter is addressed to "Philemon our dearly beloved and
   fellow-laborer, and to our beloved Apphia, and Archippus, our
   fellow-soldier, and to the church in thy house," 1, 2. Little is known
   of this Philemon. He was evidently an inhabitant of Colossae, Col. 4:
   9, and apparently belonged to the wealthy class. He had slaves,
   received a circle of friends in his house, and was able to prepare a
   lodging for Paul, 22. His munificence was generally known, 5-7, and he
   made himself useful in Christian service. He was converted by Paul, 19,
   most likely during the apostles three years residence at Ephesus.
   Apphia is generally regarded as the wife of Philemon, while many
   consider Archippus as their son. We notice from Col. 4:17 that the
   latter had an office in the church. Probably he was temporarily taking
   the place of Epaphras. The expression "the church in thy house"
   undoubtedly refers to the Christians of Colossae that gathered in the
   dwelling of Philemon for worship.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. The occasion for writing this Epistle is
   clearly indicated in the letter itself. Onesimus, the slave of Philemon
   absconded and, so it seems, defrauded his master, 18, 19. He fled to
   Rome, where in some way--it is useless to guess just how--he fell in
   with Paul, whom he may have known from the time of his Ephesian
   residence. The apostle was instrumental in converting him and in
   showing him the evil of his way, 10, and although he would gladly have
   retained him for the work, sent him back to Colossae in deference to
   the claims of Philemon. He did not send him empty-handed, however, but
   gave him a letter of recommendation, in which he informs Philemon of
   the change wrought in Onesimus by which the former slave became a
   brother, bespeaks for him a favorable reception in the family of his
   master and in the circle that gathered at their house for worship, and
   even hints at the desirability of emancipating him.

   2. Time and place. For the discussion of the time and place of
   composition cf. what was said respecting the Epistle to the Ephesians.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   This Epistle is rarely quoted by the early church fathers, which is
   undoubtedly due to its brevity and to its lack of doctrinal contents.
   The letter is recognized by Marcion and the Muratorian Fragment, and is
   contained in the old Latin and Syriac Versions. Tertullian quotes it
   more than once, but no trace of it is found in Irenaeus and Clement of
   Alexandria. Eusebius classes it with the Homologoumena and Jerome
   argues at length against those who refused to accept it as Pauline. The
   Church never doubted its canonicity.

   The permanent value of this little letter is both psychological and
   ethical. It shows us Paul as he corresponds in a friendly way with a
   brother in Christ, and thus gives us a new glimpse of his character,
   the character of a perfect gentleman, unobtrusive, refined, skillful
   and withal firm,--a character worthy of imitation. Moreover it reveals
   to us how Paul, in view of the unity of bond and free in Jesus Christ,
   deals with the perplexing question of slavery. He does not demand the
   abolishment of the institution, since the time for such a drastic
   measure had not yet come; but he does clearly hint at emancipation as
   the natural result of the redemptive work of Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Epistle to the Hebrews

  CONTENTS

   In this Epistle we may distinguish five parts.

   I. The Superiority of Christ as Mediator, 1: 1--4:16. The writer begins
   by saying that the New Testament revelation was mediated by the very
   Son of God, who is far superior to the angels, 1: 1-14; whose
   revelation one can only neglect to the peril of one's soul, 2: 1-4, and
   in whom and through whom the ideal of man is realized through
   suffering, 5-18. Then he points out that Christ is greater than Moses,
   as the builder is greater than the house and the son is superior to the
   servant, 3:1-6, wherefore it is necessary that we should listen to his
   voice, since unbelief deprives us of the blessings of salvation, as is
   clearly seen in the history of Israel, 7-19. They were not brought into
   the rest by Joshua, so that the promise remains to be fulfilled, and we
   should labor to enter into that rest, seeking strength in our great
   High Priest, 4:1-16.

   II. Christ the true High Priest, 5:1--7: 28. Like every high priest
   Christ was taken from among men to represent them in worship, and was
   called by God, 5:1-5; but in distinction from these He was made a
   Priest after the order of Melchizedek, and thus became the author of
   eternal salvation for those that obey him, 6-10. Since the readers were
   not yet able to understand all that might be said regarding the
   Priesthood of Christ after the order of Melchizedek, the author exhorts
   them to press on to more perfect knowledge, to beware of apostasy, and
   to be diligent to inherit, through faith and patience, the promises of
   the ever faithful God, 5: 1 1--6: 20. Returning now to the subject in
   hand, the writer describes the unique character of Melchizedek, 7:1-10,
   and contrasts the priesthood of Christ with that of the order of Aaron
   with respect to fleshly descent (Levi--Judah), 11-14; endurance
   (temporal--eternal) 15-19; solemnity and weight (without oath--with
   oath) 20-22; number (many--one) 23-24; and then argues the necessity of
   such a High Priest for us, 25-28.

   III. Pre-eminence of the New Covenant mediated by Jesus Christ,
   8:1--10:18. As High Priest Christ is now ministering in heaven, of
   which the tabernacle on earth was but a shadow, since He is the
   Mediator, not of the Old, but of the New Covenant, 8:1-13. The ordained
   services and the sanctuary of the old dispensation were merely figures
   for the time then present, and pointed to the better services which
   Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant would render at the heavenly
   sanctuary, since He would not enter with the blood of bulls and goats,
   but with his own blood, thus bringing eternal redemption, 9:1-28. The
   sacrifices of the old dispensation could not take away sin, and
   therefore Christ offered himself for our purification and to give us
   access to the throne of God, 10:1-18.

   IV. Application of the Truths presented and Personal Epilogue,
   10:19--13: 25. The writer exhorts the readers to draw near to God with
   confidence, and warns them against apostasy, reminding them of its dire
   consequences and of their former endurance, and assuring them that the
   just shall live by faith, 10:19-39. He illustrates this point by
   presenting to their view a long line of heroes that triumphed in faith,
   11:1-40. In view of these examples he urges them to endure chastening
   which is a sign of their sonship and ministers to their sanctification,
   and warns them against despising the grace of God, 12:1-17. Since they
   have received far greater privileges than Old Testament saints, they
   should strive to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly feat,
   18-29. Then follow some general exhortations respecting hospitality,
   marriage, contentment, the following in the footsteps of their
   teachers, and the necessity of guarding against strange doctrines,
   13:1-17; after which the writer closes the letter with a few personal
   notices and salutations, 18-25.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. The Epistle to the Hebrews has not the letter-like appearance of the
   confessedly Pauline writings. It does not contain the name of the
   author, nor that of the addressees. And if it were not for a few stray
   personal notes, 10: 34; 13:18, 25, and for the greetings and
   salutations found at the end, we might regard this writing as a
   treatise rather than an Epistle. Deissmann, who emphasizes the
   nonliterary character of the admittedly Pauline compositions, and
   insists that they be looked upon as real letters, considers this
   writing to be an Epistle as distinguished from a letter, and thinks it
   is very important to recognize its literary character. According to him
   "it is historically the earliest example of Christian artistic
   literature." Light from the Ancient East p.64 f.;236 f.; 243.

   2. The relation in which the teaching of this book stands to that of
   the Old Testament is unique. It does not view the Law as a body of
   commandments imposed on the obedience of man, but as a system of ritual
   provided by the mercy of God; and clearly reveals its insufficiency as
   an institution for the removal of sin, since it could only remove
   ceremonial defilement and could not purify the heart. In harmony with
   this divergence from the prevailing Pauline conception of the Law, it
   does not, like the undoubted letters of Paul, regard the Law as an
   episode temporarily intervening, on account of sin, between the promise
   and its fulfilment; but as a typical representation, as a primitive
   revelation of the blessings to which the promise pointed. In it the
   image of the New Testament realities is dimly seen; it is the bud that
   gradually develops into a beautiful flower. The realities that answer
   to the shadows of the Old Testament are pointed out in detail, and
   thereby this Epistle is for all ages the inspired commentary on the
   ritual of the Old Covenant, making the pages of Leviticus luminous with
   heavenly light. We should bear in mind that the terms type and antitype
   are employed in a rather unusual sense in this letter; their meaning is
   in a way reversed. The holy places of the earthly tabernacle are called
   the antitupaof the true and heavenly, 9: 24, according to which usage
   the latter are, of course, the types of the former, cf. 8: 5.

   3. This letter is peculiar also in the way in which it quotes the Old
   Testament. While in the writings that bear Paul's name the quotations
   are partly from the Hebrew and partly from the Septuagint, in this
   Epistle they are uniformly derived from the Greek. Moreover the
   formulae of quotation are different from those in the other letters.
   While these generally refer the passages quoted to their human authors,
   except in cases where God speaks in the first person in the Old
   Testament, our Epistle with but few exceptions refers them to the
   primary author, i. e. to God or to the Holy Spirit, thus offering
   indubitable proof of the authors belief in the inspiration of the
   Scriptures.

   4. The language of this Epistle is the best literary Greek of the New
   Testament. We do not find the author struggling, as it were, with a
   scanty language to express the abundance of the thoughts that are
   crowding in upon him. There are no broken constructions, no halting
   sentences, and, although a few parentheses are introduced, they do not
   disturb the thought, cf. 11: 38; 12: 20, 21. The sentences are all
   evenly balanced and the style flows on with great regularity. The
   writer seems to have given special attention to the rhetorical rhythm
   and equilibrium of words and sentences. Westcott says: "The style of
   the book is characteristically Hellenistic, perhaps we may say, as far
   as our scanty knowledge goes, Alexandrian." Comm. p. LXI.

  AUTHORSHIP

   The authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews constitutes a very
   difficult question. The external testimony is of a conflicting
   character. The oldest and most explicit tradition is that of
   Alexandria, where Clement testified that the Epistle was written by
   Paul in the Hebrew language and was translated by Luke into Greek.
   Origen regards the thoughts of the Epistle as Paul's, but the language
   as that of a disciple of the great apostle, and finally comes to the
   conclusion that God only knows who wrote this letter. He does not make
   mention of a Hebrew original. Both Clement and Origen agree, however,
   in regarding the Greek Epistle as Pauline only in a secondary sense. In
   Italy and Western Europe generally the letter was not held to be
   Paul's. This is the more remarkable, since we find the first trace of
   its existence in the West, in the writings of Clement of Rome.
   Hippolytus and Irenaeus were acquainted with it, but did not accept it
   as Paul's; Cajus reckoned only thirteen Pauline Epistles and Eusebius
   says that even in his time the negative opinion was still held by some
   Romans. In North Africa, where the Roman tradition is usually followed,
   the letter was not regarded as the work of Paul. Tertullian ascribes it
   to Barnabas. In the fourth century the Eastern tradition gradually
   prevailed over the Western, especially through the influence of
   Augustine and Jerome, though they felt by no means certain that Paul
   was the author. During the Middle Ages this mooted question hardly ever
   came up for discussion, but when the light of the Reformation dawned,
   doubts were again expressed as to the authorship of Paul. Erasmus
   questioned whether Paul had written the letter; Luther conjectured that
   Apollos was the writer; Calvin thought that it might be the work of
   Luke or of Clement; and Beza held that it was written by a disciple of
   Paul. At present there are comparatively few that maintain the
   authorship of Paul.

   And if we examine the internal evidence of the Epistle, we find that it
   points away from Paul. It must be admitted that its teaching is in a
   general sense Pauline, but this does not prove that Paul was the
   author. There are also some expressions in the letter to which
   parallels are found in the Epistles of Paul. Compare f. i. 2:14 with II
   Tim. 1: 10; I Cor. 15 : 26 ;--2: 8 with I Cor. 15 : 27. But this
   similarity may find its explanation in the authors acquaintance with
   the Pauline writings. The statement in 10: 34 cannot be urged in favor
   of Paul, especially not, if we adopt the reading tois desmiois
   sunepatesate, in which almost all the critical editors concur, and
   which is certainly favored by the context. The expression in 13:19 does
   not prove that the writer was a prisoner, when he wrote these words,
   much less that he was Paul. Neither does the notice respecting Timothy
   in 13: 23 necessarily point to the apostle, for some of the older
   companions of Paul might have made that same statement. Moreover we
   know of no time in the life of Paul when Timothy was a prisoner. If
   there were other positive evidence for the Pauline authorship, some of
   these supposed criteria might serve as corroborative proofs, but such
   evidence is not forthcoming. The main features of the Epistle are such
   as to discredit the authorship of Paul: (1) The letter, in distinction
   from the Pauline Epistles, is entirely anonymous. It contains neither
   the name of the author nor that of the addressees. Moreover the
   customary blessing and thanksgiving are altogether wanting. (2) In 2: 3
   the writer clearly distinguishes himself and his hearers from those who
   heard the Lord, i. e. from his immediate disciples and apostles. Would
   Paul say that he had heard the word of the Gospel only from the
   immediate followers of the Lord, and not of the Lord himself ? The
   assumption does not seem reasonable in view of Gal. 1:12. (3) Though
   the teaching of the Epistle is in full harmony with that of Paul, yet
   it does not reveal the usual trend of Paul's reasoning. As Bruce points
   out (Hastings D. B. Art. Hebrews, Epistle to), there is an entire
   absence of the Pauline antitheses law and grace, faith and works, flesh
   and spirit; while there are found instead the antitheses of shadow and
   reality, type and antitype. (4) While Paul is wont to take some of his
   quotations from the Hebrew and often quotes from memory, the writer of
   this Epistle always derives his quotations from the Septaugint, and
   with such exactness that he seems to have had the manuscript before
   him. He does not like Paul refer his quotations to the human author,
   but to the auctor primarius. And instead of the Pauline formuke of
   quotation, gegraptai or he graphe legei he often employs martureior
   phesi (5) There is also a great difference in the names ascribed to the
   Mediator. In the writings of Paul we find the names, Christ, the Lord,
   the Lord Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ our Lord, our Lord Jesus Christ,
   and very seldom the simple Jesus. In our Epistle, on the other hand,
   Jesus is the regular name for the Saviour; Jesus Christ is used three
   times, the Lord, twice, but the full Pauline name, our Lord Jesus
   Christ is wanting altogether. (6) The strongest proof against the
   Pauline authorship is generally considered to be the argument from
   style. Says Dr. Salmon: "There is here none of the ruggedness of St.
   Paul, who never seems to be solicitous about forms of expression, and
   whose thoughts come pouring out so fast as to jostle one another in the
   struggle for utterance. This is a calm composition, exhibiting sonorous
   words and well balanced sentences. I have already shown that I do not
   ascribe to Paul any rigid uniformity of utterance, and that I am not
   tempted to deny a letter to be his merely because it contains a number
   of words and phrases which are not found in his other compositions; but
   in this case I find myself unable to assert the Pauline authorship in
   the face of so much unlikeness, in the structure of sentences, in the
   general tone of the Epistle, in the general way of presenting
   doctrines, and in other points that I will not delay to enumerate."
   Introd. p. 464 f.

   In view of all the foregoing it is all but certain that Paul did not
   write the Epistle to the Hebrews. But now the question naturally
   arises: Who did? Several answers have given, as Barnabas (Tertullian),
   Luke or Clement (Calvin), Apollos (Luther), Silas (Bohme, Godet),
   (Aquila and) Priscilla (Harnack), of which only two are at present
   seriously considered, viz. Barnabas and Apollos, though the suggestion
   of Harnack has found favor with some. Renan, Hausrath, Weiss, Salmon
   and Barth accept the authorship of Barnabas, relying especially on the
   facts: (1) that Tertullian points to him as the author, thereby
   transmitting not only his own private opinion, but the North African
   tradition; (2) that Barnabas was an apostolic man and as a Levite would
   be well acquainted with the Jewish ritual; and (3) that, as an
   inhabitant of the island Cyprus, he would in all probability have been
   subject to the influence of Alexandrian culture. On the other hand,
   Lunemann, Farrar, Alford and Zahn hold that Apollos best answers the
   requirements, since (1) he was a man of fine Greek culture; (2) was
   well acquainted with the writings of Paul; and (3) as a native of
   Alexandria was deeply embued with the thoughts of the Alexandrian
   school. But it has been objected to Barnabas that he could not reckon
   himself to the second generation of Christians, 2: 3; and that he
   certainly knew Hebrew, with which, so it seems, the author of this
   Epistle was not acquainted ;--and to Apollos, that there is no
   tradition whatever connecting his name with the Epistle; and that the
   historical allusions in 13:18-24 have no point of contact in the life
   of Apollos as we know it from the Acts of the Apostles. If we had to
   choose between the two, Barnabas would be our choice, but we prefer
   with Moll, Westcott, Dods, Baljon and Bruce (Hastings D. B.) to confess
   our ignorance on this point and to abide by the dictum of Origen. The
   general thought of the Epistle is Pauline, but God only knows who wrote
   it.

  DESTINATION

   Under this head we must consider two questions: 1. Was the letter
   written for Jewish or for Gentile Christians? 2. Where were the first
   readers located?

   1. Until a comparatively recent date the general opinion was that this
   Epistle was composed for Jewish Christians. Of late, however, some
   scholars, as Schuirer, Weizsacker, Von Soden, Julicher and McGiffert
   reached the opposite conclusion. They argue that the fundamentals
   enumerated in 6: 1, 2 are such as were suitable only to Gentile
   catechumens; that the expression "the living God" in 9:14 implies a
   contrast between the true God and pagan idols; and that the
   exhortations at the end of the Epistle were more appropriate to Gentile
   than to Jewish Christians. From these passages it has been argued with
   great ingenuity that the original readers were Christians of the
   Gentiles; but they are also susceptible of a plausible interpretation
   on the opposite view. Cf. the Commentaries and also Dods, Exp. Gk.
   Test. IV p. 231. It seems preferable to hold that the first readers
   were of Jewish extraction. In support of this theory we cannot rely on
   the title pros Ebraios, because the presumption is that this, though it
   can be traced to the second century, is not original. Yet it does
   express the early conviction of the Church that the letter was destined
   first of all for Jewish Christians. The general features of the letter
   point in the same direction. The Epistle presupposes that its readers
   are in danger of a relapse into Judaeism; and its symbolism, based
   entirely on the tabernacle and its services, is peculiarly adapted to
   converted Jews. The whole Epistle has a Jewish physiognomy. With Bruce
   we say: "If the readers were indeed Gentiles, they were Gentiles so
   completely disguised in Jewish dress and wearing a mask with so
   pronounced Jewish features, that the true nationality has been hidden
   for nineteen centuries. Hastings D. B.

   2. But where must we look for the first readers? Some scholars,
   regarding this writing as a treatise, are of the opinion that it was
   not intended for any definite locality, but for Christians in general,
   (Lipsius, Reuss); this opinion cannot pass muster, however, in view of
   the many passages that have no meaning unless they are addressed to a
   definite circle of Christians, f. i. 5:11, 12; 6:9, 10; 10:32; 12:4. At
   the same time it is impossible to determine with certainty the exact
   locality in which the readers were found. The four places that received
   the most prominent consideration in this connection are Alexandria,
   Antioch (in Syria), Rome and Jerusalem, of which, it would appear, the
   choice really lies between the last two. The position that the letter
   was sent to the Jewish Christians of Jerusalem or of entire Judaea, is
   defended by Moll, Lunemann, Salmon, Weiss and Westcott, and is
   supported by the following considerations: (1) The name Ebraios,
   embodying an early tradition, certainly fits them better than it does
   Christians of any other community. (2) They were the most likely to
   develop great love for the Jewish ritual and to be exposed to danger
   from these quarters. (3) Their church(es) was (were) well nigh purely
   Jewish, which best accords with the total absence of any reference to
   Gentile Christians in the Epistle. (4) They would certainly understand
   the symbolism of the letter far better than the Christians of the
   diaspora. (5) A passage like 13:12, 13 has a peculiar appropriateness,
   if it was written to them. The objections are urged against this
   hypothesis, however, that the passages 3:2 and 5:12 are hardly
   applicable to the Christians of Jerusalem or Judaea; that these, rather
   than exercise liberality, 6:10, were continually the objects of
   charity; that the letter was written in Greek and not in Hebrew; and
   that, as far as we know, Timothy stood in no particular relation to the
   Jerusalem church. Many present day scholars, such as Alford, Zahn,
   Baljon, Dods, Holtzmann, Julicher and Von Soden fixed on Rome as the
   destination of this letter. In favor of this they urge: (1) The
   greeting of 13: 24 is evidently one of such as had gone forth from
   Italy, to their old friends at home. (2) The first traces of the use of
   this Epistle are found in the writings of Clement and in the Shepherd
   of Hermas, both issuing from Rome. (3) The term heroegoumenoi, 13 :7,
   17, 24 was not in vogue in the Pauline churches, but was used at Rome,
   since Clement speaks of proegoumenoi. (4) The persecutions mentioned in
   10:32-34 probably refer to those of Nero and his predecessors. But this
   theory is burdened with the objections; that it was exactly at Rome
   that the canonicity of the letter was questioned for centuries; that
   the congregation at Rome was primarily Gentile-Christian (which Zahn
   denies, however); and that the words of 12: 4 were hardly applicable to
   the Christians at Rome after the Neronian persecution. To our mind the
   first theory deserves the preference, unless we are prepared to admit
   that the Epistle was written to Gentile Christians.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. This letter was occasioned by the danger of
   apostasy that threatened the readers. For a time they had professed
   Christianity, 5:12, and for the sake of it had endured persecution, and
   had even joyfully borne the spoiling of their goods, 10: 32-34. But
   they were disappointed, so it seems, in two respects. In the first
   place in their expectation of the speedy return of Christ to trimph
   over his enemies and to transform the affliction of his followers into
   everlasting bliss. Christ remained hidden from their view and their
   sufferings continued, yea even increased in severity. In the encircling
   gloom they had no visible support for their faith. And in the second
   place they were disappointed in the attitude their own people took to
   the new religion. For a time they had combined their Christian services
   with the worship of their fathers, but it became ever increasingly
   evident that the Jews as a people would not accept Christ. Their
   brethren according to the flesh persisted in their opposition and waxed
   ever more intolerant of the followers of Jesus. The time was fast
   approaching, when these would have to break with the ministrations of
   the temple and look elsewhere for the support of their faith. Hence
   they had become feeble, 12:12, had ceased to make progress, 5:12, were
   inclined to unbelief, 3:12, and in danger of falling away, 6:4-6.
   Returning to Jewry, they might escape the persecution to which they
   were subjected, and enjoy their former privileges.

   The writer desires to warn them against the danger to which they were
   exposed, and to exhort them to remain loyal to their Christian
   standard. In order to do this he points out by way of contrast the true
   nature and intrinsic worth of the Christian religion. The Old Testament
   service of God contained but the shadows of the New Testament
   realities. Christ is higher than the angels, ch. 1, is greater than
   Moses, ch. 3, is our only true High Priest, who through suffering
   opened up the way to heaven and gives us free unrestricted access to
   God, chs. 5--10. He was perfected through sufferings, that He might
   sympathize with his followers in their trials and afflictions, 2:10,
   17, 18; 4:15, and might lead them through suffering to glory. If He is
   now invisible to the eye, it is only because He has entered the
   sanctuary, where He continually ministers to the spiritual needs of his
   followers, and insures them free access to the throne of God, 4:16;
   6:18-20; 9:24; 10:18-22. He may seem distant, yet He is near, and they
   who believe can enjoy his presence and strength through faith. That is
   their true support in time of need, ch. 11, 12:1, 2. And though He
   tarry for a while, He will surely come in due time to lead his children
   to glory. They should willingly go forth without the camp, bearing his
   reproach, since they enjoy far greater privileges than the Old
   Testament saints and will at last enter their eternal inheritance.

   2. Time and Place. It is not easy to determine the date of this letter,
   since it contains no definite notes of time. The majority of scholars
   agree in placing it before the destruction of Jerusalem. Thus Moll,
   Kurtz, Hilgenfeld, Reuss, Davidson, Weiss, Godet, Westcott, Salmon,
   Bruce, Barth, Dods. Others, however, as Baur, Kluge, Zahn, Meijboom,
   Volkmar and Hausrath bring it down to a later date. To our mind the
   evidence favors a date before the destruction of the temple, for (1)
   Though it is true that the author does not speak of the temple but of
   the tabernacle, the danger to which the Hebrew Christians were exposed
   seems to imply that the temple services were still carried on. (2) If
   the Jewish ritual had already ceased, it is strange that the writer
   does not refer to this, when he describes the transitory character of
   the old dispensation. And (3) the present tense used by the writer in
   the description of the Jewish services, 8:4 f.; 9:6, 9 (cf. Gk.); 10:1
   ff.; 13:10 creates the presumption that the ministry of the temple was
   still continued. It is true that parallels to such presents use of past
   events can be pointed out in Clement of Rome. But as a rule the use of
   the present implies the existence of the subject spoken of, at the time
   of the speaker; and the question of 10:2, "Else would they not have
   ceased to be offered ?" is certainly difficult to interpret on any
   other view. It is not possible to say, how long before the destruction
   of Jerusalem the Epistle was written, but from the solemn tone of the
   writer, and from the fact that, according to him, the readers saw the
   day of the Lord approaching, 10:25, we infer that it was but shortly
   before that great catastrophe. Cf. also 12:26, 27. We shall not go far
   wrong, if we date the Epistle about the year 69.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The letter was not regarded as canonical in the Western church until
   the fourth century; in the Eastern church, however, the recognition of
   its apostolicity and canonicity went hand in hand. Clement of
   Alexandria often quotes the letter as canonical, and Origen does
   sometimes, though he felt uncertain as to its Pauline authorship. The
   Epistle is found in the Peshito, but it is uncertain, whether it also
   had a place in the earliest Syriac translation. From the fourth century
   the Western church also admitted its canonical authority. The intrinsic
   value of the letter naturally commended it as authoritative and as a
   part of the Word of God. Augustine and Jerome regarded it as canonical,
   though they still had scruples about the authorship of Paul; and it
   was. included in the Lists authorized by the Councils of Hippo in 393
   and of Carthage in 397 and 419. From that time the Church did not again
   question the canonical authority of the Epistle until the time of the
   Reformation, when some Lutheran theologians had serious doubts.

   The permanent value of this Epistle lies especially in two facts, which
   may be said to imply a third. In the first place it brings out, as no
   other New Testament book does, the essential unity of both the Old and
   the New Testament religions. They are both from God; they both center
   in Christ; they both pertain to the same spiritual verities; and they
   both aim at bringing man to God. In the second place the Epistle
   emphasizes the difference between the two dispensations, the one
   containing the shadows, the other the corresponding realities; the
   services of the one being earthly and therefore carnal and temporal,
   those of the other being heavenly and therefore spiritual and abiding;
   the ministry of the one effecting only ceremonial purity and union with
   God, that of the other issuing in the purification of the soul and in
   spiritual communion with God in heaven. And because the letter so
   presents the relation of the Old Covenant to the New, it is an inspired
   commentary on the entire Mosaic ritual.
     __________________________________________________________________

The General Epistle of James

  CONTENTS

   There are no clearly defined parts in this Epistle; hence no
   classification of its contents is attempted. After the opening
   salutation the writer points out the significance of temptation in the
   life of his readers, exhorts them to ask in faith for the wisdom needed
   in bearing them and warns them not to refer their inward temptations to
   God, 1:1-18. Then he admonishes them to receive the Word in all
   humility and to carry it out in action, 19-27. He warns them against
   that respect of persons that reveals itself in favoring the rich at the
   expense of the poor, reminding them of the fact that he who violates
   the law in one point breaks the whole law; 2:1-13; and asserts that it
   is foolish to trust to a faith without works, since this is dead,
   14-26. A warning against rash teaching and reproving follows, based on
   the difficulty of controlling the tongue, which is yet of the very
   greatest importance, 3:1-12. Wisdom from above is commended to the
   readers, since the wisdom of this world is full of bitter envy and
   works confusion and evil, while heavenly wisdom is plenteous in mercy
   and yields good fruits, 13-18. The author then reprimands the readers
   for their quarrelsomeness, which results from a selfishness and lust
   that infects even one's prayers and renders them futile; and exhorts
   them to humble themselves before God, 4:1-12. He condemns those who, in
   the pride of possession, forget their dependence on God, and denounces
   the rich that oppress and rob the poor, 4:13--5: 6; after which he
   urges the brethren to be patient, knowing the Lord is at hand, 7-11.
   Finally he warns his readers against false swearing, gives special
   advice to the sick, exhorts them all to pray for one another, reminding
   them of the efficacy of prayer, and of the blessedness of turning a
   sinner from his sinful way, 12-20.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. From a literary point of view the Epistle of James is quite
   different from those of Paul. The latter are real letters, which cannot
   be said of this Epistle. There is no benediction at the beginning, nor
   any salutation or greeting at the end. Moreover it contains very little
   that points to definite historical circumstances such as are known to
   us from other sources. Zahn calls this Epistle, "eine . . . in
   schriftliche Form gefasste Ansprache." Einl. I p. 73. Barth speaks of
   it as, "eine Sammlung von Ansprachen des Jakobus an die Gemeinde zu
   Jerusalem," which, he thinks were taken down by a hearer and sent to
   the Jewish Christians of the diaspora. Einl. p. 140. And Deissmann
   says: "The Epistle of James is from the beginning a little work of
   literature, a pamphlet addressed to the whole of Christendom, a
   veritable Epistle (as distinguished from a letter). The whole of the
   contents agrees therewith. There is none of the unique detail peculiar
   to the situation, such as we have in the letters of Paul, but simply
   general questions, most of them still conceivable under the present
   conditions of church life." Light from the Ancient East p. 235.

   2. The contents of the Epistle are not doctrinal but ethical. The
   writer does not discuss any of the great truths of redemption, but
   gives moral precepts for the life of his readers. There is no
   Christological teaching whatever, the name of Christ being mentioned
   but twice, viz. 1: 1; 2: 1. Beischlag correctly remarks that it is "so
   wesentlich noch Lehre Christi und so wenig noch Lehre von Christo." The
   letter may be called, the Epistle of the Royal Law, 2:8. The emphasis
   does not rest on faith, but on the works of the law, which the writer
   views, not in its ceremonial aspect, but in its deep moral significance
   and as an organic whole, so that transgressing a single precept is
   equivalent to a violation of the whole law. The essential element of
   life according to the law is a love that reveals itself in grateful
   obedience to God and in self-denying devotion to one's neighbor.

   3. Some scholars, as f. i. Spitta, claim that this Epistle is really
   not a Christian but a Jewish writing; but the contents clearly prove
   the contrary. Yet it must be admitted that the Epistle has a somewhat
   Jewish complexion. While the writer never once points to the examplary
   life of Christ, he does refer to the examples of Abraham, Rahab, Job
   and Elijah. In several passages he reveals his dependence on the Jewish
   Chokmah literature, on the Sermon on the Mount, and on the words of
   Jesus generally; compare 1: 2 with Matt. 5:12 ;--1 : 4 with Matt. 5 :
   48 ;--1 : 5 with Matt. 7:7;--1:6 with Mark 11:23;--1:22 with Matt.
   7:24;--2:8 with Mark 12:31;--2:13 with Matt. 5:7; 18:33;--4:10 with
   Matt. 23:12; etc. Moreover the author does not borrow his figurative
   language from the social and civil institutions of the Greek and Roman
   world, as Paul often does, but derives it, like the Lord himself had
   done, from the native soil of Palestine, when he speaks of the sea, 1:
   6; 3:4; of the former and the latter rain, 5: 7; of the vine and the
   fig-tree, 3:12; of the scorching wind, 1:11; and of salt and bitter
   springs, 3:11, 12.

   4. The Epistle is written in exceptionally good, though Hellenistic
   Greek. The vocabulary of the author is rich and varied, and perfectly
   adequate to the expression of his lofty sentiments. His sentences are
   not characterized by great variation; yet they have none of the utter
   simplicity, bordering on monotony, that marks the writings of John. The
   separate thoughts are very clearly expressed, but in certain instances
   there is some difficulty in tracing their logical sequence. We find
   some examples of Hebrew parallelism especially in the fourth chapter;
   downright Hebraisms, however are very few, cf. the adjectival genitive
   in 1: 25, and the instrumental en in 3:9.

  AUTHORSHIP

   According to external testimony James, the brother of the Lord, is the
   author of this Epistle. Origen is the first one to quote it by name,
   and it is only in Rufinus Latin translation of his works that the
   author is described as, "James, the brother of the Lord." Eusebius
   mentions James, the brother of Christ, as the reputed author,
   remarking, however, that the letter was considered spurious. Jerome,
   acknowledging its authenticity, says: "James, called the Lord's
   brother, surnamed the Just, wrote but one Epistle, which is among the
   seven catholic ones.

   The author simply names himself, "James a servant of God and of the
   Lord Jesus Christ," 1: 1, thus leaving the question of his identity
   still a matter of conjecture, since there were other persons of that
   name in the apostolic Church. It is generally admitted, however, that
   there is but one James that meets the requirements, viz, the brother of
   the Lord, for: (1) The writer was evidently a man of great authority
   and recognized as such not only by the Jews in Palestine but also by
   those of the diaspora. There is only one James of whom this can be
   said. While James, the brother of John, and James the son of Alphaeus
   soon disappear from view in the Acts of the Apostles, this James stands
   out prominently as the head of the Jerusalem church. During the Lords
   public ministry he did not yet believe in Christ, John 7: 5. Probably
   his conversion was connected with the special appearance of the Lord to
   him after the resurrection, I Cor. 15: 7. In the Acts we soon meet him
   as a man of authority. When Peter had escaped out of prison, after
   James the brother of John had been killed, he says to the brethren:
   "Go, show these things to James," Acts 12:17. Paul says that he, on his
   return from Arabia, went to Jerusalem and saw only Peter and James, the
   Lords brother, Gal. 1: 18, 19. On the following visit James, Cephas and
   John, who seemed to be pillars, gave Paul and Barnabas the right hand
   of fellowship, Gal. 2: 9. Still later certain emissaries came from
   James to Antioch and apparently had considerable influence, Gal. 2:12.
   The leading part in the council of Jerusalem is taken by this James,
   Acts 15:13 if. And when, at the end of his third missionary journey,
   Paul comes to Jerusalem, he first greeted the brethren informally, and
   on the following day "went unto James, and all the elders were
   present," Acts 21:18. (2) The authorship of this James is also favored
   by a comparison of the letter, Acts 15 : 23-29, yery likely written
   under the inspiring influence of James, together with his speech at the
   council of Jerusalem, and certain parts of our Epistle, which reveals
   striking similarities. The salutation chairein Acts 15: 23, Jas. 1:1
   occurs elsewhere in the New Testament only in Acts 23:26. The words to
   kalon onoma to epiklethen eph humas, 2:7, can only be paralleled in the
   New Testament in Acts 15:17. Both the speech of James and the Epistle
   are characterized by pointed allusions to the Old Testament. The
   affectionate term adelphos, of frequent occurrence in the Epistle (cf.
   1:2,9, 16, 19; 2:5, 15; 3:1; 4:11; 5:7,9, 10, 12, 19), is also found in
   Acts 15: 13, 23; compare especially Jas. 2: 5 and Acts 15:13. Besides
   these there are other verbal coincidences, as episkeptesthai, Jas.
   1:27; Acts 15:14; terein and diaterein, Jas. 1:27, Acts 15:29;
   episkeptesthai, Jas. 5 :19, 20; Acts 15 :19; agapetos, Jas. 1:16, 19;
   2:5; Acts 15:25. (3) The words of the address are perfectly applicable
   to this particular James. He does not claim that he is an apostle, as
   do Paul and Peter in their Epistles. It might be objected, however,
   that if he was the brother of the Lord, he would have laid stress on
   that relation to enhance his authority. But does it not seem far more
   likely, in view of the fact that Christ definitely pointed out the
   comparative insignificance of this earthly relationship, Matt. 12:
   46-50, that James would be careful not to make it the basis of any
   special claim, and therefore simply speaks of himself as a servant of
   God and of the Lord Jesus Christ?

   Now the question comes up, whether this James cannot be identified with
   James, the son of Alphaeus, one of the Lord's apostles, Mt. 10:3; Mk.
   3:18; Lk. 6:15; Acts 1:13. This identification would imply that the
   so-called brethren of the Lord were in reality his cousin's, a theory
   that was broached by Jerome about A. D. 383, and which, together with
   the view of Epiphanius (that these brethren were sons of Joseph by a
   former marriage) was urged especially in the interest of the perpetual
   virginity. But this theory is not borne out by the data of Scripture,
   for: (1) The brethren of the Lord are distinguished from his disciples
   in John 2:12, and from the twelve after their calling in Mt. 12:46ff.
   ;Mk 3:31 ff. ; Lk. 8:19 ff. ; and John 7:3. It is stated that they did
   not belong to the circle of his disciples, indirectly in Mt. 13:55; Mk.
   6:3, and directly in John 7:5. (2) Although it is true that cousins are
   sometimes called brethren in Scripture, cf. Gen. 14 16; 29:12, 15, we
   need not assume that this is the case also in the instance before us.
   Moreover it is doubtful whether James the son of Alphaeus was a cousin
   of Jesus. According to some this relationship is clearly implied in
   John 19: 25; but it is by no means certain that in that passage, "Mary
   the wife of Clopas" stands in apposition with, "his mother's sister."
   If we do accept that interpretation, we must be ready to believe that
   there were two sisters bearing the same name. It is more plausible to
   think that John speaks of four rather than of three women, especially
   in view of the fact that the gospels speak of at least five in
   connection with Jesus death and resurrection, cf. Mt. 27: 56; Mk. 16:
   1; Lk. 24:10. But even if we suppose that he speaks of but three, how
   are we going to prove the identity of Alphaeus and Clopas? And in case
   we could demonstrate this, how must we account for the fact that only
   two sons are named of Mary, the wife of Clopas, viz. James and Joses,
   Mt. 27: 56; Mk. 15: 40; Lk. 24:10, comp. John 19: 25, while there are
   four brethren of the Lord, Mt. 13:55; Mk. 6: 3, viz. James, Joses,
   Judas and Simon? It has been argued that Judas is indicated as a
   brother of James the less in Lk. 6:16; Acts 1: 13, where we read of a
   Ioudas Iakobou. But it is contrary to analogy to supply the word
   brother in such cases. (3) We repeatedly find the brethren of the Lord
   in the company of Mary, the mother of Jesus, just as we would expect to
   find children with their mother. Moreover in passages like Mt. 12:46;
   Mk. 3: 31, 32; and Lk. 8:19 it is an exegetical mistake to take the
   word mother in its literal sense, and then to put a different
   interpretation on the word brother. We conclude, therefore, that James,
   the brother of the Lord and the author of this Epistle, was not an
   apostle. There are two passages that seem to point in a different
   direction, viz. Gal. 1: 19 and I Cor. 15:7; but in the former passage
   ei me may be adversative rather than exceptive, as in Lk. 4: 26, 27,
   cf. Thayer in loco; and the name apostle was not limited to the twelve.
   The considerations of Lange in favor of identifying the author with
   James, the son of Alphaeus, are rather subjective.

   James seems to have been a man of good common sense, with a well
   balanced judgment, who piloted the little vessel of the Jerusalem
   church through the Judaeistic breakers with a skillful hand, gradually
   weaning her from ceremonial observances without giving offense and
   recognizing the greater freedom of the Gentile churches. He was highly
   respected by the whole Church for his great piety and whole-hearted
   devotion to the saints. The account of Hegesippus with respect to his
   paramount holiness and ascetic habits is in all probability greatly
   overdrawn. Cf. Eusebius II 23.

   The authorship of James has been called in question by many scholars
   during the last century, such as DeWette, Schleiermacher, Baur,
   Hilgenfeld, Holtzmann, Harnack, Spitta, Baljon e. a. The main reasons
   for regarding the Epistle as spurious, are the following: (1) The
   condition of the church reflected in it reminds one of the church at
   Rome in the time of Hermas, when the glowing love of the first time had
   lost its fervency. (2) The Greek in which the Epistle is written is far
   better than one could reasonably expect of James, who always resided in
   Palestine.

   (3) The writer does not mention the law of Moses, nor refer to any of
   its precepts, but simply urges the readers to keep the perfect law that
   requires love, charity, peacefulness, etc., just as a second century
   writer would do; while James believed in the permanent validity of the
   Mosaic law, at least for the Jews. (4) The Epistle bears traces of
   dependence on some of the Epistles of Paul, especially Romans and
   Galatians, on the Epistle to the Hebrews and on I Peter; and clearly
   contradicts the Pauline doctrine of justification by faith.

   But these arguments need not shake our conviction as to the authorship
   of James. The condition implied in this letter may very well and, at
   least in part, is known to have existed about the middle of the first
   century. Jos. Ant. XX 8.8; 9.2 Cf. especially Salmon, Introd, p. 501 f.
   With respect to the second argument Mayor remarks that, accepting the
   view that Jesus and his brethren usually spoke Aramaeic, "we are not
   bound to suppose that, with towns like Sepphoris and Tiberius in their
   immediate vicinity, with Ptolomais, Scythopolis and Gadara at no great
   distance, they remained ignorant of Greek." Hastings D. B. Art. James,
   the General Epistle of. The idea that James was a fanatic Judaeist and
   therefore could not but insist on keeping the Mosaic law, is not borne
   out by Scripture. He was a Jewish Christian and reveals himself as such
   f. i. in Acts 15:14-29; 21:20-25 and in his Epistle, cf.2:5 if.;
   3:2;4:7, 14. His insistence on the spirit of the law, not at all
   Judaeistic, is in perfect harmony with the teaching of the Lord. The
   literary dependence to which reference has been made may, in so far as
   any really exists, just as well be reversed, and the contradiction
   between James and Paul is only apparent. Cf. the larger Introductions
   and the Commentaries.

  DESTINATION

   The Epistle is addressed to "the twelve tribes which are in the
   dispersion," 1: 1. Who are indicated by these words? The adverbial
   phrase, "in the dispersion" excludes the idea that the writer refers to
   all the Jewish Christians, including even those in Palestine (Hofmann,
   Thiersch) ; and the contents of the letter forbid us to think that he
   addresses Jews and Jewish Christians jointly (Thiele, Guericke, Weiss).
   There are, however, two interpretations that are admissible. The
   expression may designate the Jewish Christians that lived outside of
   Palestine (the great majority of scholars); but it may also be a
   description of all the believers in Jesus Christ that were scattered
   among the Gentiles, after the analogy of I Pet. 1: 1 and Gal. 6:16
   (Koster, Hilgenfeld, Hengstenberg, Von Soden). Zahn is rather uncertain
   in his interpretation. He finds that the twelve tribes mentioned here
   form an antithesis to the twelve tribes that were in Palestine, and
   refer either to Christianity as a whole, or to the totality of Jewish
   Christians; and reminds us of the fact that there was a time, when the
   two were identical. Einl. I p. 55. We prefer to think of the Jewish
   Christians of the diaspora in Syria and neighboring lands, which were
   probably called "the twelve tribes" as representing the true Israel,
   because (1) the Epistle does not contain a single reference to Gentile
   Christians; (2) James was pre-eminently the leader of the Jewish
   Church; (3) the entire complexion of the Epistle points to Jewish
   readers.

   The Epistle being of an encyclical character, naturally does not have
   reference to the situation of any particular local church, but to
   generally prevailing conditions at that time. The Jewish Christians to
   whom the Epistle is addressed were subject to persecutions and
   temptations, and the poor were oppressed by the rich that, possibly,
   did not belong to their circle. They did not bear these temptations
   with the necessary patience, but were swayed by doubt. They even looked
   with envy at the glitter of the world and favored the rich at the
   expense of the poor. In daily life they did not follow the guidance of
   their Christian principles, so that their faith was barren. There may
   have been dead works, but the fruits of righteousness were not
   apparent.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. The occasion for writing this Epistle is found
   in the condition of the readers which we just described. James, the
   head of the Jerusalem church, would naturally be informed of this,
   probably in part by his own emissaries to the various churches of the
   diaspora, Acts 15:22; II Cor. 3:1; Gal. 2:12, and in part by those
   Jewish Christians that came from different lands to join in the great
   festivals at Jerusalem.

   The object of the Epistle was ethical rather than didactic; it was to
   comfort, to reprove and to exhort. Since the readers were persecuted to
   the trial of their faith, and were tempted in various ways, the writer
   comes to them with words of consolation. Feeling that they did not bear
   their trials with patience, but were inclined to ascribe to God the
   temptations that endangered them as a result of their own lust and
   worldliness, he reproves them for the error of their way. And with a
   view to the blots on their Christian life, to their worldliness, their
   respect of persons, their vainglory and their envy and strife, he
   exhorts them to obey the royal law, that they may be perfect men.

   2. Time and Place. The place of composition was undoubtedly Jerusalem,
   where James evidently had his continual abode. It is not so easy to
   determine when the letter was written. We have a terminus ad quem in
   the death of James about the year 62, and a terminus a quo in the
   persecution that followed the death of Stephen about A. D. 35, and that
   was instrumental in scattering the Jewish church. Internal evidence
   favors the idea that it was written during this period, for (1) There
   is no reference in the Epistle to the destruction of Jerusalem either
   as past or imminent; but the expectation of the speedy second coming of
   Christ, that was characteristic of the first generation of Christians,
   was still prevalent, 5: 7-9. (2) The picture of the unbelieving rich
   oppressing the poor Christians and drawing them before tribunals, is in
   perfect harmony with the description Josephus gives of the time
   immediately after Christ, when the rich Sadducees tyrannized over the
   poor to such a degree that some starved. Ant. XX 8.8; 9.2. This
   condition terminated with the destruction of Jerusalem. (3) The
   indistinctness of the line of separation between the converted and the
   unconverted Jews also favors the supposition that the letter was
   composed during this period, for until nearly the end of that time
   these two classes freely intermingled both at the temple worship and in
   the synagogues. In course of time, however, and even before the
   destruction of Jerusalem, this condition was gradually changed.

   But the question remains, whether we can give a nearer definition of
   the time of composition. In view of the fact that the Christian Jews
   addressed in this letter must have had time to spread and to settle in
   the dispersion so that they already had their own places of worship, we
   cannot date the Epistle in the very beginning of the period named.
   Neither does it seem likely that it was written after the year 50, when
   the council of Jerusalem was held, for (1) the Epistle does not contain
   a single allusion to the existence in the church of Gentile Christians;
   and (2) it makes no reference whatever to the great controversy
   respecting the observance of the Mosaic law, on which the council
   passed a decision. Hence we are inclined to date the Epistle between A.
   D. 45 and 50.

   Some have objected to this early date that the Epistle is evidently
   dependent on Romans, Galatians, Hebrews and I Peter; but this objection
   is an unproved assumption. It is also said that the presbuteroi
   mentioned in 5:14 imply a later date. We should remember, however, that
   the Church, especially among the Jews, first developed out of the
   synagogue, in which presbyters were a matter of course. Moreover some
   urge that the Christian knowledge assumed in the readers, as in 1: 3;
   3:1, does not comport with such an early date. It appears to us that
   this objection is puerile.

   Of those who deny the authorship of James some would date the Epistle
   after the destruction of Jerusalem, Reuss, Von Soden, and Hilgenfeld in
   the time of Domitian (81-96); Blom in A. D. 80; Bruckner and Baljon in
   the time of Hadrian (117-138).

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   There was considerable doubt as to the canonicity of this Epistle in
   the early church. Some allusions to it have been pointed out in Clement
   of Rome, Hermas and Irenaeus, but they are very uncertain indeed. We
   cannot point to a single quotation in Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria
   and Tertullian, though some are inclined to believe on the strength of
   a statement made by Eusebius, Ch. Hist. VI 14 that Clement commented on
   this Epistle, just as he did on the other general Epistles. There are
   reasons, however, to doubt the correctness of this statement, cf.
   Westcott, on the Canon p. 357. The letter is omitted from the
   Muratorian Fragment, but is contained in the Peshito. Eusebius classes
   it with the Antilegomena, though he seems uncertain as to its
   canonicity. Origen was apparently the first to quote it as Scripture.
   Cyril of Jerusalem, Athanasius and Gregory of Nazianze recognized it,
   and it was finally ratified by the third council of Carthage in A. D.
   397. During the Middle Ages the canonicity of the Epistle was not
   doubted, but Luther for dogmatical reasons called it "a right strawy
   Epistle." Notwithstanding the doubts expressed in the course of time,
   the Church continued to honor it as a canonical writing ever since the
   end of the fourth century.

   The great permanent value of this Epistle is found in the stress it
   lays on the necessity of having a vital faith, that issues in fruits of
   righteousness. The profession of Christ without a corresponding
   Christian life is worthless and does not save man. Christians should
   look into the perfect law, and should regulate their lives in harmony
   with its deep spiritual meaning. They should withstand temptations, be
   patient under trials, dwell together in peace without envying or
   strife, do justice, exercise charity, remember each other in prayer,
   and in all their difficulties be mindful of the fact that the coming of
   the Lord is at hand.
     __________________________________________________________________

The First General Epistle of Peter

  CONTENTS

   The contents of the Epistle can be divided into four parts:

   I. Introduction, 1:1-12. After the greeting, 1, 2, the apostle praises
   God for the blessings of salvation, which should raise the readers
   above all temporal sufferings, since they are so great that the
   prophets searched them, and the angels were desirous to understand
   their mystery, 3-12.

   II. General Exhortations to a worthy Christian Conversation, 1:
   13--2:10. The writer exhorts the readers to become ever more firmly
   grounded in their Christian hope. To that end the holiness of God
   should be the standard of their life, 1:13-16; they must fear God, and
   as regenerated persons, love the brethren and seek to increase in
   spiritual life, 1:17--2:3. This growth should not only be individual,
   however, but also communal, a developing into a spiritual unity, 4-10.

   III. Particular Directions for the special Relations of Life, 2:11--4:
   6. The author urges the readers to be dutiful to the authorities, 2:
   11-17; more particularly he exhorts the servants among them to follow
   the example of Christ in self-denying service, 18-25; the wives to
   submit themselves to their husbands, and the husbands to love their
   wives and to treat then with consideration, 3:1-7. Then he admonishes
   them all to do good and to refrain from evil, that in their sufferings
   they may be like their Master, whom they should also follow in their
   Christian conversation, 3: 8--4: 6.

   IV. Closing Instructions for the present Needs of the Readers, 4:
   7--5:14. The apostle exhorts the readers to prayer, brotherly love,
   hospitality, and conscientiousness in the exercise of their official
   duties, 4: 7-11. He warns them not to be discouraged by persecutions,
   but to regard these as necessary to the imitation of Christ, 12-19.
   Further he exhorts the elders to rule the flock of Christ wisely, the
   younger ones to submit to the elder; and all to humble themselves and
   to place their trust in God, 5:1-9; and ends the letter with good
   wishes and a salutation, 10-14.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. Though there are some doctrinal statements in the Epistle, its chief
   interest is not theoretical but practical, not doctrinal but ethical.
   It has been said that, while Paul represents faith and John love, Peter
   is the apostle of hope. This distinction, which may easily be
   misconstrued, nevertheless contains an element of truth. The basic idea
   of the Epistle is that the readers are begotten again unto a lively
   hope, the hope of an incorruptable, undefiled and unfading inheritance.
   This glorious expectation must be an incentive for them to strive after
   holiness in all the relations of life, and to bear patiently the
   reproach of Christ, mindful of the fact that He is their great
   prototype, and that suffering is the pre-requisite of everlasting
   glory.

   2. The Epistle has a characteristic impress of Old Testament modes of
   thought and expression. Not only does it, comparatively speaking,
   contain more quotations from and references to the Old Testament than
   any other New Testament writing, cf. 1: 16, 24, 25; 2: 3, 4, 6, 7, 9,
   10, 22-24; 3:10-12, 13, 14; 4:8, 17, 18; 5:5, 7; but the entire
   complexion of the letter shows that the author lived and moved in Old
   Testament conceptions to such an extent, that he preferably expresses
   his thoughts in Old Testament language.

   3. On the other hand, there is great similarity between this Epistle
   and some of the New Testament writings, notably the Epistles of Paul to
   the Romans and to the Ephesians, and the Epistle of James. And this
   likeness is of such a character as to suggest dependence of the one on
   the other. Nearly all the thoughts of Rom. 12 and 13 are also found in
   this letter; compare 2: 5 with Rom. 12: 1 ;--1:14 with Rom. 12:2
   ;--4:10 with Rom. 12: 3-8 ;--1 :22 with Rom. 12: 9 ;--2:17 with Rom.
   12:10, etc. The relationship between it and the Epistle to the
   Ephesians is evident not only from single passages, but also from the
   structure of the letter. There is a certain similarity in the general
   and special exhortations, which is probably due to the fact that both
   Epistles are of a general character. Compare also the passages 1:3 and
   Eph. 1:3;--1:5 and Eph. 1:19;--1:14 and Eph. 2:3;--1:18 and Eph.
   4:17;--2: 4, 5 and Eph. 2: 20-22. There are also points of resemblance
   between this Epistle and that of James, and though not so numerous, yet
   they indicate a relation of dependence; compare 1: 6, 7 with Jas. 1:2,
   3;--2:1 with Jas. 1:21;--5:5-9 with Jas. 4:6, 7, 10.

   4. The Greek in which this letter is written is some of the best that
   is found in the New Testament. Though the language is simple and
   direct, it is not devoid of artistic quality. Simcox, comparing it with
   the language of James, says: "St. Peters language is stronger where St.
   James is weak, and weaker where he is strong--it is more varied, more
   classical, but less eloquent and of less literary power." The Writers
   of the New Testament p. 66. The authors vocabulary is very full and
   rich, and his sentences flow on with great regularity, sometimes rising
   to grandeur. It is noticeable, however, that the writer, though having
   a good knowledge of Greek in general, was particularly saturated with
   the language of the Septuagint.

  AUTHORSHIP

   The external authentication of this Epistle is very strong. Irenaeus,
   Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen and Cyprian all quote it by
   name and without expressing the slightest doubt as to its canonicity.
   And Eusebius says: "One Epistle of Peter called his first is
   universally received." Salmon suggests that, in view of what Westcott
   says, its omission from the Muratorian Canon may be due to the error of
   a scribe, who left out a sentence. Cf. Westcott, The canon of the N.
   T., Appendix C.

   Aside from the fact that the letter is self-attested there is very
   little internal evidence that can help us to determine who the author
   was. There is nothing that points definitely to Peter, which is in part
   due to the fact that we have no generally recognized standard of
   comparison. The speeches in Acts may not have been recorded literally
   by Luke; and II Peter is one of the most doubted Epistles of the New
   Testament, partly because it is so dissimilar to our letter. If we
   leave the first verse out of consideration, we can only say on the
   strength of internal evidence that the writer was evidently an
   eyewitness of the sufferings of Christ, 3:1; that the central contents
   of his teaching is, like that of Peter in the Acts of the Apostles, the
   death and the resurrection of Christ; and that his attitude toward the
   Christians of the Gentiles is in perfect harmony with that of the
   apostle of the circumcision. Moreover the persons mentioned in 5:12, 13
   are known to have been acquaintances of Peter, cf. Acts 12:12; 15:22.

   The apostle Peter, originally called Simon, was a native of Bethsaida,
   John 1: 42, 44. When the Lord entered on his public ministry, Peter was
   married and dwelt at Capernaum, Lk. 4:31, 38. He was the son of Jonas,
   Mt. 16:17 and was, with his father and his brother, by occupation a
   fisherman, Mk. 1: 16. We find him among the first that were called to
   follow the Lord, Mt. 4:18, 19, and he soon received a certain
   prominence among the disciples of Jesus. This was in harmony with the
   new name, Pe,troj, which the Lord gave him, John 1: 42. With John and
   James he formed the inner circle of the disciples; together they were
   the most intimate followers of the Saviour and as such enjoyed special
   privileges. They only entered with the Lord into the house of Jairus,
   Lk. 8: 51; none but they witnessed his glory on the Mount of
   Transfiguration, Mt. 17: 1; and they alone beheld him in his hour of
   great grief in the garden of Gethsemane, Mt. 26: 37. The trial of Jesus
   was also the hour of Peters deepest fall, for on that occasion he
   thrice denied his Master, Mt. 26:69-75. He truly repented of his deed,
   however, and was restored to his former position by the Lord, John
   21:15-17. After the ascension he is found at the head of the disciples
   at Jerusalem, guiding them in the choice of an apostle in the place of
   Judas, Acts 1: 15-26, and preaching the Pentecostal sermon, Acts
   2:14-36. Laboring at first in connection with John, he healed the lame
   man, repeatedly addressed the people in the temple, executed judgment
   on Ananias and Sapphira, and once and again defended the cause of
   Christ before the Sanhedrin, Acts 3-5. During the time of persecution
   that followed the death of Stephen, they together went to Samaria to
   establish the work of Philip, Acts 8:14 ff. In Lydda he healed Aeneas,
   Acts 9:22 f. and raised up Tabitha in Joppa, Acts 9: 36 f. By means of
   a vision he was taught that the Gentiles too were to be admitted to the
   Church, and was prepared to go and preach Christ to the household of
   Cornelius, Acts 10:1-48. After James, the brother of John was killed,
   Peter was cast in prison, but, being delivered by an angel, he left
   Jerusalem, Acts 12:1-17. Later he returned thither and was present at
   the council of Jerusalem, Acts 15. Nothing certain is known of his
   movements after this time. From I Cor. 9: 5 we infer that he labored at
   various places. On one occasion Paul rebuked him for his dissimulation,
   Gal. 2: 11 ff. From all the traditions regarding his later life we can
   gather only one piece of reliable information, to the effect that
   towards the end of his life he came to Rome, where he labored for the
   propagation of the Gospel and suffered martyrdom under Nero.

   Peter was a man of action rather than of deep thought. He was always
   eager and impulsive, but, as is often the case with such persons, was
   wanting in the necessary stability of character. Burning with love
   towards the Saviour, he was always ready to defend his cause, Mt.
   17:24, 25; 16:22; Lk. 22: 33; John 18:10, and to confess his name, John
   6: 68 f.; Mt. 16:16. But his action was often characterized by undue
   haste, as f. i. when he rebuked Christ, Mt. 16:22, smote the servant of
   the high priest, John 18:10, and refused to let the Saviour wash his
   feet, John 13:6; and by too much reliance on his own strength, as when
   he went out upon the sea, Mt. 14:28-31, and declared himself ready to
   die with the Lord, Mt. 26: 35. It was this rashness and great
   self-confidence that led to his fall. By that painful experience Peter
   had to be taught his own weakness before he could really develop into
   the Rock among the apostles. After his restoration we see him as a firm
   confessor, ready, if need be, to lay down his life for the Saviour.

   Until the previous century the Epistle was generally regarded as the
   work of Peter, and even now the great majority of New Testament
   scholars have reached no other conclusion. Still there are several,
   especially since the time of Baur, that deny its authenticity, as
   Hilgenfeld, Pfleiderer, Weizsacker, Hausrath, Keim, Schurer, Von Soden
   e. a. The most important objections urged against the traditional view,
   are the following: (1) The Epistle is clearly dependent on Pauline
   letters, while it contains very few traces of the Lords teaching. This
   is not what one would expect of Peter, who had been so intimate with
   the Lord and had taken a different stand than Paul, Gal. 2: 11ff.
   Harnack regards this argument as decisive, for he says: "Were it not
   for the dependence (of I Peter) on the Pauline Epistles, I might
   perhaps allow myself to maintain its genuineness; that dependence,
   however, is not accidental, but is of the essence of the Epistle."
   Quoted by Chase, Hastings D. B. Art. I Peter. (2) It is written in far
   better Greek than one can reasonably expect of a Galilean fisherman
   like Peter, of whom we know that on his missionary journeys he needed
   Mark as an interpreter. Davidson regards it as probable that he never
   was able to write Greek. (3) The Epistle reflects conditions that did
   not exist in the lifetime of Peter. The Christians of Asia Minor were
   evidently persecuted, simply because they were Christians, persecuted
   for the Name, and this, it is said, did not take place until the time
   of Trajan, A. D. 98-117. (4) It is very unlikely that Peter would write
   a letter to churches founded by Paul, while the latter was still
   living.

   As to the first argument, we need not deny with Weiss and his pupil
   Kuhl that Peter is dependent on some of the writings of Paul,
   especially on Romans and Ephesians. In all probability he read both of
   these Epistles, or if he did not see Ephesians, Paul may have spoken to
   him a good deal about its contents. And being the receptive character
   that he was, it was but natural that he should incorporate some of
   Paul's thoughts in his Epistle. There was no such antagonism between
   him and Paul as to make him averse to the teachings of his
   fellow-apostle. The idea of an evident hostility between the two is
   exploded, and the theory of Baur that this letter is a Unionsschrift,
   is destitute of all historical basis and is burdened with a great many,
   improbabilities. Moreover it need not cause surprise that the teaching
   of this Epistle resembles the teaching of Paul more than it does that
   of Christ, because the emphasis had shifted with the resurrection of
   the Lord, which now, in connection with his death, became the central
   element in the teaching of the apostles. Compare the sermons of Peter
   in the Acts of the Apostles.

   With respect to the objection that Peter could not write. such Greek as
   we find in this Epistle, we refer to what Mayor says regarding James,
   cf. p. 286 above. The fact that Mark is said to have been the
   interpreter of Peter does not imply that the latter did not know Greek,
   cf. p. 80 above. It is also possible, however, that the Greek of this
   Epistle is not that of the apostle. Zahn argues with great plausibility
   from 5 :12, Dia. Silouanou/, that Silvanus took an active part in the
   composition of the letter, and in all probability wrote it under the
   immediate direction rather than at the verbal dictation of Peter, Einl.
   II p. 10 f. Cf. also Brown on I Peter in loco,, and J. H. A. Hart, Exp.
   Gk. Test. IV p. 13 f. Against this, however, cf. Chase, Hastings D. B.
   Art. I Peter. It is possible that Silvanus was both the amanuensis of
   Peter and the bearer of the Epistle.

   The third argument is open to two objections. On the one hand it rests
   on a faulty interpretation of the passages that speak of the sufferings
   endured by the Christians of Asia Minor, as 1:6; 3: 9-17; 4:4 f., and
   especially 4:12-19; 5: 8-12. And on the other hand it is based on a
   misunderstanding of the correspondence between Pliny and Trajan A. D.
   112. The passages referred to do not imply and do not even favor the
   idea that the Christians were persecuted by the state, though they do
   point to an ever increasing severity of their sufferings. There is no
   hint of judicial trials, of the confiscation of property, of
   imprisonments or of bloody deaths. The import of the Epistle is that
   the readers were placed under the necessity of bearing the reproach of
   Christ in a different form. As Christians they were subject to
   ridicule, to slander, to ill treatment, and to social ostracism; they
   were the outcasts of the world, 4:14. And this, of course, brought with
   it manifold temptations, 1: 6. At the same time the correspondence of
   Pliny and Trajan does not imply that Rome did not persecute Christians
   as such until about A. D. 112. Ramsay says that this state of affairs
   may have arisen as early as the year 80; and Mommsen, the greatest
   authority on Roman history, is of the opinion that it may have existed
   as early as the time of Nero.

   The last objection is of a rather subjective character. Peter was
   undoubtedly greatly interested in the work among the Christians of Asia
   Minor; and it is possible that he himself had labored there for some
   time among the Jews and thus became acquainted with the churches of
   that region. And does it not seem likely that he, being informed of
   their present sufferings, and knowing of the antagonism of the Jews,
   who had occasionally used his name to undermine the authority and to
   subvert the doctrine of Paul, would consider it expedient to send them
   a letter of exhortation, urging them to abide in the truth in which
   they stood, and thus indirectly strengthening their confidence in his
   fellow-apostle?

  DESTINATION

   The letter is addressed to "the elect who are sojourners of the
   dispersion in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia," 1:1. The
   use of the strictly Jewish term diaspora, is apt to create the
   impression that the letter was sent to Jewish Christians. Origen said,
   presumably on the strength of this suPerscription, that Peter seems to
   have preached to the Jews in the dispersion. And Eusebius felt sure
   that this letter was sent to Hebrews or to Jewish Christians. The great
   majority of the church fathers agreed with them. Among recent scholars
   Weiss and Kuhl defend the position that the letter was addressed to
   Jewish congregations founded in Asia Minor by Peter. But the idea that
   the original readers of this Epistle were Christians of Jewish
   extraction is not favored by internal evidence. Notice especially (1)
   the passages that point to the past moral condition of the readers, as
   1:14 (comp. Gal. 4: 8; Eph. 4:18); 1:18 (comp. Eph. 1:17); 4:2-4 (comp.
   I Thess. 4: 5; Eph. 2: 11); and (2) the emphatic use of "you" as
   distinguished from the "us" found in the context, to mark the readers
   as persons that were destined to receive the blessings of the gospel
   and to whom these at last came. Moreover this is in perfect agreement
   with what we know of the churches of Asia Minor; they certainly
   consisted primarily of Gentile Christians. But the question is
   naturally asked, whether this view is not contradicted by the address.
   And to that question we answer that it certainly is, if the word
   diasporas must be taken literally; but this will also bear, and, in
   harmony with the contents of the Epistle, is now generally given a
   figurative interpretation. The word diasporas is a Genitivus
   appostitivus (for which cf. Blass, Grammatik p. 101) with parepidemois)
   Taken by itself the address is a figurative description of all
   believers, whether they be Jewish or Gentile Christians, as sojourners
   on earth, who have here no abiding dwellingplace, but look for a
   heavenly city; and who constitute a dispersion, because they are
   separated from that eternal home of which the earthly Jerusalem was but
   a symbol. In agreement with this the apostle elsewhere addresses the
   readers as "pilgrims and strangers," 2:11, and exhorts them "to pass
   the time of their sojourning here in fear," 1: 17. Cf. the Comm. of
   Huther, Brown, and Hart (Exp. Gk. Test.), and the Introductions of
   Zahn, Holtzmann, Davidson and Barth. Salmon admits the possibility of
   this interpretation, but is yet inclined to take the word diaspora/j
   literally, and to believe that Peter wrote his letter to members of the
   Roman church that were scattered through Asia Minor as a result of
   Neros persecution. Introd. p. 485.

   As to the condition of the readers, the one outstanding fact is that
   they were subject to hardships and persecutions because of their
   allegiance to Christ, 1: 17; 2:12-19. There is no sufficient evidence
   that they were persecuted by the state; they suffered at the hands of
   their associates in daily life. The Gentiles round about them spoke
   evil of them, because they did not take part in their revelry and
   idolatry, 4: 2-4. This constituted the trial of their faith, and it
   seems that some were in danger of becoming identified with the heathen
   way of living, 2: 11, 12, 16. They were in need of encouragement and of
   a firm hand to guide their feeble steps.

  COMPOSITION

   1.Occasion and Purpose. In a general way we can say that the condition
   just described led Peter to write this Epistle. He may have received
   information regarding the state of affairs from Mark or Silvanus, who
   is undoubtedly to be indentified with Paul's companion of that name,
   and was therefore well acquainted with the churches of Asia Minor.
   Probably the direct occasion for Peter's writing must be found in a
   prospective journey of Silvanus to those churches.

   The writers purpose was not doctrinal but practical. He did not intend
   to give an exposition of the truth, but to emphasize its bearings on
   life, especially in the condition in which the Christians of Asia Minor
   were placed. The Tubingen critics are mistaken, however, when they hold
   that the unknown writer, impersonating Peter, desired to make it appear
   as if there was really no conflict between the apostle of the
   circumcision and the apostle of the Gentiles, and to unite the
   discordant factions in the Church; for (1) such antagonistic parties
   did not exist in the second century, and (2) the Epistle does not
   reveal a single trace of such a tendency. The writer incidentally and
   in a general way states his aim, when he says in 5:12, "By Silvanus I
   have written briefly, exhorting and testifying that this is the true
   grace of God wherein ye stand." The main purpose of the author was
   evidently to exhort the readers to suffer, not as evil-doers, but as
   well-doers, to see to it that they should suffer for the sake of Christ
   only; to suffer patiently, remaining steadfast in spite of all
   temptations; and to bear their sufferings with a joyful hope, since
   they would issue in a glory that never fades away. And because these
   sufferings might lead them to doubt and discouragement, the writer
   makes it a point to testify that the grace in which they stand, and
   with which the sufferings of this present time are inseparably
   connected, is yet the true grace of God, thus confirming the work of
   Paul.

   2.Time and Place. There are especially three theories regarding the
   place of composition, viz. (1) that the Epistle was sent from Babylon
   on the Euphrates; (2) that it was composed at Rome; and (3) that it was
   written from Babylon near Cairo in Egypt. The last hypothesis found no
   support and need not be considered. The answer to the question
   respecting the place of composition depends on the interpretation of
   5:13, where we read: "She (the church) that is in Babylon, elect
   together with you, saluteth you." The prima facie impression made by
   these words is that the writer was at ancient Babylon, the well known
   city on the Euphrates. Many of the early church fathers, however,
   (Papias, Clement of Alexandria, Hippolytus, Eusebius, Jerome) and
   several later commentators and writers on Introduction (Bigg, Hart,
   Salmon, Holtzmann, Zahn, Chase) regard the name Babylon as a figurative
   designation of Rome, just as it is in the Apocalypse, 17: 5; 18: 2, 10.
   In favor of the literal interpretation it is argued, (1) that it's
   figurative use is very unlikely in a matter-of-fact statement; and (2)
   that in 1: 1 the order in which the provinces of Asia Minor are named
   is from the East to the West, thus indicating the location of the
   writer. Aside from the fact, however, that the last argument needs some
   qualification, these considerations seem to be more than off-set by the
   following facts: (1) An old and reliable tradition, that can be traced
   to the second century, informs us that Peter was at Rome towards the
   end of his life, and finally died there as a martyr. This must be
   distinguished from that fourth century tradition to the effect that he
   resided at Rome for a period of twenty-five years as its first bishop.
   On the other hand there is not the slightest record of his having been
   at Babylon. Not until the Middle Ages was it inferred from 5:13 that he
   had visited the city on the Euphrates. (2) In the Revelation of John
   Rome is called Babylon, a terminology that was likely to come into
   general use, as soon as Rome showed herself the true counterpart of
   ancient Babylon, the representative of the world as over against the
   Church of God. The Neronian persecution certainly began to reveal her
   character as such. (3) The symbolical sense is in perfect harmony with
   the figurative interpretation of the address, and with the designation
   of the readers as "pilgrims and strangers in the earth." (4) In view of
   what Josephus says in Ant. XVIII 9. it is doubtful, whether Babylon
   would offer the apostle a field for missionary labors at the time, when
   this Epistle was composed. We regard it as very likely that the writer
   refers to Rome in 5:13.

   With respect to the time when this Epistle was written, the greatest
   uncertainty prevails. Dates have been suggested all the way from 54 to
   147 A. D. Of those who deny the authorship of Peter the great majority
   refer the letter to the time of Trajan after A. D. 112, the date of
   Trajan's rescript, for reasons which we already discussed. Thus Baur,
   Keim, Lipsius, Pfleiderer, Hausrath, Weizsacker, Hilgenfeld, Davidson
   e. a. In determining the time of writing we must be guided by the
   following data: (1) The Epistle cannot have been written later than A.
   D. 67 or 68, the traditional date of Peter's death, which some, however
   place in the year 64. Cf. Zahn Einl. II p. 19. (2) Peter had evidently
   read the Epistles of Paul to the Romans (58) and that to the Ephesians
   (62), and therefore cannot have written his letter before A. D. 62. (3)
   The letter makes no mention whatever of Paul, so that presumably it was
   written at a time when this apostle was not at Rome. (4) The fact that
   Peter writes to Pauline churches favors the idea that Paul had
   temporarily withdrawn from his field of labor. We are inclined to think
   that he composed the Epistle, when Paul was on his jojurney to Spain,
   about A. D. 64 or 65.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The canonicity of the letter has never been subject to doubt in the
   opening centuries of our era. It is referred to in II Peter 3:1. Papias
   evidently used it and there are clear traces of its language in Clement
   of Rome, Hermas and Polycarp. The old Latin and Syriac Versions contain
   it, while it is quoted in the Epistle of the churches of Vienne and
   Lyons, Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian all quote it by
   name, and Eusebius classes it with the Homologoumena.

   Some scholars objected to this Epistle that it was characterized by a
   want of distinctive character. But the objection is not well founded,
   since the letter certainly has a unique significance among the writings
   of the New Testament. It emphasizes the great importance which the hope
   of a blessed and eternal inheritance has in the life of God's children.
   Viewed in the light of their future glory, the present life of
   believers, with all its trials and sufferings, recedes into the
   background, and they realize that they are strangers and pilgrims in
   the earth. From that point of view they understand the significance of
   the sufferings of Christ as opening up the way to God, and they also
   learn to value their own hardships as these minister to the development
   of faith and to their everlasting glory. And then, living in
   expectation of the speedy return of their Lord, they realize that their
   sufferings are of short duration, and therefore bear them joyfully. In
   the midst of all her struggles the Church of God should never forget to
   look forward to her future glory,--the object of her living hope.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Second General Epistle of Peter

  CONTENTS

   The contents of the Epistle can be divided into two parts:

   I. The Importance of Christian Knowledge, 1:1-21. After the greeting,
   1, 2, the author reminds the readers of the great blessings they
   received through the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and urges them to live
   worthy of that knowledge and thus to make sure their calling and
   election, 3-11. He says that he deemed it expedient to put them in mind
   of what they knew, and that he would see to it that they had a
   remembrance of these things after his decease, 12-15. This knowledge is
   of the greatest value, because it rests on a sure foundation, 16-21.

   II. Warning against False Teachers, 2:1--3:18. The apostle announces
   the coming of false prophets, who shall deny the truth and mislead
   many, 2:1-3. Then he proves the certainty of their punishment by means
   of historical examples, 4-9, and gives a minute description of their
   sensual character, 10-22. Stating that he wrote the letter to remind
   them of the knowledge they had received, he informs them that the
   scoffers that will come in the last days, will deny the advent of
   Christ, 3:1-4. He refutes their arguments, assuring the readers that
   the Lord will come, and exhorting them to a holy conversation, 5-13.
   Referring to his agreement with Paul in this teaching, he ends his
   letter with an exhortation to grow in grace and in the knowledge of
   Jesus Christ, 14-18.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. Like the first Epistle this second one is also a letter of practical
   warning, exhortation and encouragement. But while in the former the
   dominant note is that of Christian hope, the controlling idea in the
   latter is that of Christian knowledge. It is the epignosis chpistou'
   which consists essentially in the acknowledgment of the dunamis kai
   parousia of Christ. Advancement in this epignosis' as the ground and
   aim of the exercise of all Christian virtues, is the prominent feature
   of every exhortation." Huther, Comm. p. 344. This knowledge, resting on
   a sure foundation, must be the mainstay of the readers, when false
   doctrines are propagated in their midst, and must be their incentive to
   holiness in spite of the seducing influences round about them.

   2. This Epistle has great affinity with that of Jude, cf. 2:1-18;3:1-3.
   The similarity is of such a character that it cannot be regarded as
   accidental, but clearly points to dependence of the one on the other.
   Though it cannot be said that the question is absolutely settled, the
   great majority of scholars, among whom there are some who deny the
   authorship of Peter (Holtzmann, Julicher, Chase, Strachan, Barth
   e. a.), and others who defend the authenticity of the Epistle
   (Wiesinger, Bruckner, Weiss, Alford, Salmon), maintain the priority of
   Jude. The main reasons that lead them to this conclusion, are the
   following: (1) The phraseology of Jude is simpler than that of Peter in
   the related passages. The language of the latter is more laborious and
   looks like an elaboration of what the former wrote. (2) Several
   passages in Peter can be fully understood on1y in the light of what
   Jude says, compare 2: 4 with Jude 6; 2:11with Jude 9; 3:2 with fade 17.
   (3) Though the similar passages are adapted to the subject-matter of
   both Epistles, they seem more natural in the context of Jude than in
   Peter; The course of thought is more regular in the Epistle of
   Jude.--The priority of Jude is quite well established, though
   especially Zahn, Spitta (who defends the second Epistle of Peter at the
   cost of the first) and Bigg put up an able defense for the priority of
   Peter.

   3. The language of II Peter has some resemblance to that of the first
   Epistle cf Weiss, Introd.~~p. 166, but the difference between the two
   is greater than the similarity. We need not call special attention to
   the a[pax lego,mena found in this letter, since it contains but 48,
   while I Peter has 58. But there are other points that deserve our
   attention. Bigg says: "The vocabulary of I Peter is dignified; that of
   II Peter inclines to the grandiose." Comm. p. 225. And according to
   Simcox, "we see in this Epistle, as compared with the first, at once
   less instinctive familiarity with Greek idiom and more conscious effort
   at elegant Greek composition." Writers of the N. T. p. 69.

   There are 361 words in I Peter that are not found in this Epistle, and
   231 in II Peter that are absent from the first letter. There is a
   certain fondness for the repetition of words, cf. Holtzmann, Einl. p.
   322, which Bigg, however, finds equally noticeable in I Peter. The
   connecting particles, hina, hoti, oun, men, found frequently in I
   Peter, are rare in this Epistle, where instead we find sentences
   introduced with touto or tautachph` 1:8, 10; 3:11, 14. And while in the
   first Epistle there is a free interchange of prepositions, we often
   find a repetition of the same preposition in the second, ph` i dia, is
   found three times in 1 :3-5 and en seven times in 1: 5-7. Different
   words are often used to express the same ideas; compare apokalupsis, I
   Pt. 1 :7, 13; 4:13 with parousia, II Pt. 1 :16; 3 :4;--rhantismos, I
   Pt. 1 :2 with katharismos, II Pt. 1 :9 ;--kleronomia, I Pt. 1 :4 with
   aionok basileia, II Pt. 1:11.

  AUTHORSHIP

   This Epistle is the most weakly attested of all the New Testament
   writings. Besides that of Jerome we do not find a single statement in
   the fathers of the first four centuries explicitly and positively
   ascribing this work to Peter. Yet there are some evidences of its
   canonical use, which indirectly testify to a belief in its genuineness.
   There are some phrases in Clement of Rome, Hermas, the Clementine
   Recognitions and Theophilus that recall II Peter, but the coincidences
   may be accidental. Supposed traces of this Epistle are found in
   Irenaeus, though they may all be accounted for in another way, cf.
   Salmon, Introd. p. 324 f. Eusebius and Photius say that Clement of
   Alexandria commented on our Epistle, and their contention may be
   correct, notwithstanding the doubt cast on it by Cassiodorus, cf.
   Davidson, Introd. II p. 533 f. Origen attests that the book was known
   in his time, but that its genuineness was disputed. He himself quotes
   it several times without any expression of doubt. It is pointed out,
   however, that these quotations are found in those parts of his work
   that we know only in the Latin translation of Rufinus, which is not
   always reliable; though, according to Salmon, the presumption is that
   Rufifius did not invent them, Introd. p. 533 f. Eusebius classes this
   letter with the Antilegomena and Jerome says: "Simon Peter wrote two
   Epistles, which are called catholic; the second of which most persons
   deny to be his, on account of its disagreement in style with the
   first." This difference he elsewhere explains by assuming that Peter
   employed a different interpreter. From that time the Epistle was
   received by Rufinus, Augustine, Basil, Gregory, Palladius, Hilary,
   Ambrose e. a. During the Middle Ages it was generally accepted, but at
   the time of the Reformation Erasmus and Calvin, though accepting the
   letter as canonical doubted the direct authorship of Peter. Yet Calvin
   believed that in some sense the Petrine authorship had to be
   maintained, and surmised that a disciple wrote it at the command of
   Peter.

   The Epistle itself definitely points to Peter as its author. In the
   opening verse the writer calls himself, "Simon Peter, a servant and an
   apostle of Jesus Christ," which clearly excludes the idea of Grotius,
   that Symeon, the successor of James at Jerusalem, wrote the letter.
   From 1: 16-18 we learn that the author was a witness of the
   transfiguration of Christ; and in 3: 1 we find a reference to his first
   Epistle. As far as style and expression are concerned there is even
   greater similarity between this letter and the speeches of Peter in the
   Acts of the Apostles than between the first Epistle and those
   addresses. Moreover Weiss concludes that from a biblical and
   theological point of view, no New Testament writing is more like I
   Peter than this Epistle, Introd. II p. 165. Besides the whole spirit of
   the Epistle is against the idea that it is a forgery. Calvin maintained
   its canonicity, "because the majesty of the Spirit of Christ exhibited
   itself in every part of the Epistle."

   Notwithstanding this, however, the authenticity of the letter is
   subject to serious doubt in modern times, such scholars as Mayerhoff,
   Credner, Hilgenfeld, Von Soden, Hausrath, Mangold, Davidson, Volkmar,
   Holtzmann, Julicher, Harnack, Chase, Strachan e. a. denying that Peter
   wrote it. But the Epistle is not without defenders; its authenticity is
   maintained among others by Luthardt, Wiesinger, Guericke, Windischmann,
   Bruckner, Hofmann, Salmon, Alford, Zahn, Spitta, and Warfield, while
   Huther, Weiss, and Kuhl conclude their investigations with a non
   liquet.

   The principle objections to the genuineness of II Peter are the
   following: (1)The Language of the Epistle is so different from that of
   I Peter as to preclude the possibility of their proceeding from the
   same author. (2) The dependence of the writer on Jude is inconsistent
   with the idea that he was Peter, not only because Jude was written long
   after the lifetime of Peter, but also since it is unworthy of an
   apostle to rely to such a degree on one who did not have that
   distinction. (3) It appears that the author is over-anxious to identify
   himself with the appost1e Peter: there is a threefold allusion to his
   death, 1:13-15; he wants the readers to understand that he was present
   at the transfiguration, 1: 16-18; and he identifies himself with the
   author of the first Epistle, 3 :1. (4) In 3 :2 where the reading humon
   is better attested than hemon, the writer by using the expression, tes
   ton apostolon humon entoles, seems to place himself outside of the
   apostolic circle. Deriving the expression from Jude, the writer forgot
   that he wanted to pass for an apostle and therefore could not use it
   with equal propriety. Cf. Holtzmann, Einl. p. 321. (5) The writer
   speaks of some of Paul's Epistles as Scripture in 3:16, implying the
   existence of a New Testament canon, and thus betrays his second cen
   dpoint. (6) The Epistle also refers to doubts regarding the second
   coming of Christ, 3:4 ff., which points beyond the lifetime of Peter,
   because such doubts could not be entertained before the destruction of
   Jerusalem. (7) According to Dr. Abbott (in the Expositor) the author of
   II Peter is greatly indebted to the Antiquities of Josephus, a work
   that was published about A. D. 93.

   We cannot deny that there is force in some of these arguments, but do
   not believe that they compel us to give up the authorship of Peter. The
   argument from style is undoubtedly the most important one; but if we
   accept the theory that Silvanus wrote the first Epistle under the
   direction of Peter, while the apostle composed the second, either with
   his own hand or by means of another amanuensis, the difficulty
   vanishes.--As far as the literary dependence of Peter on Jude is
   concerned, it is well to bear in mind that this is not absolutely
   proved. However, assuming it to be established, there is nothing
   derogatory in it for Peter, since Jude was also an inspired man, and
   because in those early days unacknowledged borrowing was looked at in a
   far different light than it is today.--That the author is extremely
   solicitous to show that he is the appostle Peter is, even if it can be
   proved, no argument against the genuineness of this letter. In view of
   the errorists against which he warns the readers, it was certainly
   important that they should bear in mind his official position. But it
   cannot be maintained that he insists on this over-much. The references
   to his death, his experience on the Mount of Transfiguration, and his
   first Epistle are introduced in a perfectly natural way. Moreover this
   argument is neutralized by some of the others brought forward by the
   negative critics. If the writer really was so over-anxious, why does he
   speak of himself as Simon Peter, cf. I Pt. 1: 1; why does he seemingly
   exclude himself from the apostolic circle, 3 : 2; and why did he not
   more closely imitate the language of I Peter ?--The difficulty created
   by 3:2 is not as great as it seems to some. If that passage really
   disproves the authorship of Peter, it certainly was a clumsy piece of
   work of a very clever forger, to let it stand. But the writer, speaking
   of the prophets as a class, places alongside of them another class,
   viz, that of the apostles, who had more especially ministered to the
   New Testament churches, and could therefore as a class be called, "your
   apostles," i. e. the apostles who preached to you. The writer evidently
   did not desire to single himself out, probably, if for no other
   reasons, because other apostles had labored more among the readers than
   he had.--The reference to the Epistles of Paul does not necessarily
   imply the existence of a New Testament canon and it is a gratuitous
   assumption that they were not regarded as Scripture in the first
   century, so that the burden of proof rests on those who make it.--The
   same may be said of the assertion that no doubt could be entertain
   asthe second coming of Christ before the destruction of Jerusalem.
   Moreover the author does not say that these were already expressed, but
   that they would be uttered by scoffers that would come in the last
   days.--The attempt to prove the dependence of II Peter on Josephus, has
   been proved fallacious, especially by Salmon and by Dr. Warfield. The
   former says in conclusion: "Dr. Abbot has completely failed to
   establish his theory; but I must add that it was a theory never
   rational to try to establish." Introd. p. 536.

  DESTINATION

   The readers are simply addressed as those "that have obtained like
   precious faith with us through the righteousness of God and our Saviour
   Jesus Christ," 1:1. From 3: 1 we gather, however, that they are
   identical with the readers of the first Epistle and from 3:15, that
   they were also the recipients of some Pauline Epistle(s). It is vain to
   guess what Epistle(s) the writer may have had in view here. Zahn argues
   at length that our Epistle was written to Jewish Christians in and
   round about Palestine, who had been led to Christ by Peter and by
   others of the twelve apostles. He bases his conclusion on the general
   difference of circumstances presupposed in the two letters of Peter,
   and on such passages as 1: 1-4, 16-18; 3: 2. But it seems to us that
   the Epistle does not contain a single hint regarding the Jewish
   character of its readers, while passages like 1: 4 and 3:15 rather
   imply their Gentile origin. Moreover, in order to maintain his theory,
   Zahn must assume that both 3: 1 and 3:15 refer to lost letters, cf.
   Einl. II p. 43 ff.

   The condition of the readers presupposed in this letter is indeed
   different from that reflected in the first Epistle. No mention is made
   of persecution; instead of the affliction from without, internal
   dangers are now coming in view. The readers were in need of being
   firmly grounded in the truth, since they would soon have to contend
   with heretical teachers, who theoretically would deny the Lordship of
   Jesus Christ, 2:1, and his second coming, 3: 4; and practically would
   disgrace their lives by licentiousness, ch. 2. These heretics have been
   described as Sadducees, as Gnostics, and as Nicolaitans, but it is
   rather doubtful, whether we can identify them with any particular sect.
   They certainly were practical Antinomians, leading careless, wanton and
   sinful lives, just because they did not believe in the resurrection and
   in a future judgment. Their doctrine was, in all probability, an
   incipient Gnosticism.

   Since the author employs both the future and the present tense in
   describing them, the question arises, whether they were already present
   or were yet to come. The most natural explanation is that the author
   already knew such false teachers to be at work in some places (cf.
   especially I Corinthians and the Epistles to the Thessalonians), so
   that he could consequently give a vivid description of them; and that
   he expected them to extend their pernicious influence also to the
   churches of Asia Minor.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. The occasion that led to the composition of
   this Epistle must be found in the dangerous heresies that were at work
   in some of the churches, and that also threatened the readers.

   In determining the object of the writer the Tubingen school emphasized
   3:15, and found it in the promotion of harmony and peace between the
   Petrine and Pauline parties (Baur, Schwegler, Hausrath). With this end
   in view, they say, the writer personating Peter, the representative of
   Jewish Christendom, acknowledges Paul, who represents the more liberal
   tendency of the Church. But it is unwarranted to lay such stress on
   that particular passage. Others regarded the Epistle as primarily a
   polemic against Gnosticism, against the false teachers depicted in the
   letter. Now it cannot be denied that the Epistle is in part
   controversial, but it is only its secondary character. The main object
   of the letter, as indicated in 1: 16 and 3: 1,2 was to put the readers
   in mind of the truth which they had learned in order that they might
   not be led astray by the theoretical and practical libertines that
   would soon make their influence felt, and especially to strengthen
   their faith in the promised parousia of Jesus Christ.

   2. Time and Place. The Epistle contains no certain data as to the time
   of its composition. We can only infer from 3: 1 that it was written
   after I Peter, though Zahn, who is not bound by that passage, places it
   before the first Epistle, about A. D. 60-63. The fact that the
   condition of the churches, which is indicated in this letter, is quite
   different from that reflected in the earlier writing, presupposes the
   lapse of some time, though it does not require many years to account
   for the change. A short time would suffice for the springing up of the
   enemies to which the Epistle refers. Can we not say, in view of the
   tendencies apparent at Corinth that their doctrines had already been
   germinating for some time? Moreover, according to 1: 14 the writer felt
   that his end was near. Hence we prefer to date the letter about the
   year 66 or 67.

   They who deny the authenticity of the Epistle generally place it
   somewhere between the years 90 and 175, for such reasons as its
   dependence on Jude and on the Apocalypse of Peter, its reference to
   Gnosticism, and its implication respecting the existence of a New
   Testament canon.

   Since a trustworthy tradition informs us that Peter spent the last part
   of his life at Rome, the Epistle was in all probability composed in the
   imperial city. Zahn points to Antioch, and Julicher suggests Egypt as
   the place of composition.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   For the reception of this Epistle in the early church, we refer to what
   has been said above.

   Like all the canonical writings this one too has abiding significance.
   Its importance is found in the fact that it emp1i~sizes the great value
   of true Christian knowledge, especially in view of the dangers that
   arise for believers from all kinds of false teachings, and from the
   resultant example of a loose, a licentious, an immoral life. It teaches
   us that a Christianity that is not well founded in the truth as it is
   in Christ, is like a ship without a rudder on the turbulent sea of
   life. A Christianity without dogma cannot maintain itself against the
   errors of the day, but will go down before the triumphant forces of
   darkness; it will not succeed in cultivating a pure, noble spiritual
   life, but will be conformed to the life of the world. In particular
   does the Epistle remind us of the fact that faith in the return of
   Christ should inspire us to a holy conversation.
     __________________________________________________________________

The First General Epistle of John

  CONTENTS

   It is impossible to give a satisfactory schematic representation of the
   contents of this letter. After the introduction, 1: 1-4, in which the
   apostle declares that the purpose of his ministry is to manifest the
   life-giving divine Word, in order that the readers may have fellowship
   with him and the other apostles, and through them with God and Christ,
   he defines the character of this fellowship and points out that, since
   God is light, believers also should be and walk in the light, 5-10, i.
   e. they should guard against sin and keep Gods commandments, 2: 1-6. He
   reminds the readers of the great commandment, which is at once old and
   new, that they should love the brethren, 7-14; and in connection with
   this warns them not to love the world, and to beware of the false
   teachers that deny the truth, 15-27.

   The representation of God as light now passes over into that of God as
   righteous, and the writer insists that only he that is righteous can be
   a child of God, 2: 28--3: 6. He reminds the readers of the fact that to
   be righteous is to do righteousness, which in turn is identical with
   love to the brethren, 7-17. Once more he warns the readers against the
   love of the world, and points out that the commandment of God includes
   two things, viz, belief in Christ and love to the brethren, 18-24.

   In view of the false teachers he next reminds the readers that the test
   of having the Spirit of God, is to be found in the true confession of
   Christ, in adherence to the teaching of the apostles, and in that faith
   in Jesus that is the condition of love and of true spiritual life,
   4:1--5:12. Finally he states the object of the Epistle once more, and
   gives a brief summary of what he has written, 13-21.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. The literary form of this Epistle is different from that of all the
   other New Testament letters, the Epistle to the Hebrews and that of
   James resembling it most in this respect. Like the Epistle to the
   Hebrews it does not name its author nor its original readers, and
   contains no apostolic blessing at the beginning; and in agreement with
   that of James it has no formal conclusion, no greetings and salutations
   at the end. This feature led some to deny its epistolary character;
   yet, taking everything into consideration, the conclusion is inevitable
   that it is an Epistle in the proper sense of the word, and not a
   didactic treatise. "The freedom of the style, the use of such direct
   terms as, I write unto you, I wrote unto you, and the footing on which
   writer and readers stand to each other all through its contents, show
   it to be no formal composition." (Salmond) Moreover it reveals no such
   plan as would be expected in a treatise. The order found in it is
   determined by association rather than by logic, the thoughts being
   grouped about certain clearly related, ruling ideas.

   2. The great affinity of this Epistle with the Gospel of John naturally
   attracts attention. The two are very similar in the general conception
   of the truth, in the specific way of representing things, and in style
   and expression. Besides there are several passages in both that are
   mutually explanatory, as f. i.:

   1:1,2
          John 1:1,2,4,14
                              3:11,16
                                     John 15:12,13
   2:1
          John 14:16
                              4:6
                                     John 8:47
   2:2
          John 11:51,52
                              5:6
                                     John 19:34,35
   2:8
          John 13:34;15:10,12
                              5:9
                                     John 5:32,34,36, 8:17,18
   2:10
          John 11:9,10;12:35
                              5:12
                                     John 3:36
   2:23
          John 15:23,24
                              5:13
                                     John 20:31
   2:27
          John 14:26;16:13
                              5:14
                                     John 14:13,14;16:23
   3:8,15 John 8:44
                              5:20
                                     John 17:3

   Hence many scholars assume a very intimate connection of the Epistle
   with the Gospel, regarding it as a kind of introduction (Lightfoot), a
   sort of dedicatory writing (Hausrath, Hofmann), or a practical
   companion (Michaelis, Storr, Eichhorn), destined to accompany the
   Gospel. At the same time there are differences of such a kind between
   the two writings, as make it seem more likely that the Epistle is an
   independent composition. Cf. Holtzmann, Einl. p. 478; Salmond, Hastings
   D. B. Art. I John, 5.

   3. The truth is represented in this Epistle ideally rather than
   historically. This important fact is stated by Salmond concisely as
   follows: "The characteristic ideas of the Epistle are few and simple,
   they are of large significance, and they are presented in new aspects
   and relations as often as they occur. They belong to the region of
   primary principles, realities of the intuition, certainties of the
   experience, absolute truths. And they are given in their absoluteness.
   (Italics are ours). The regenerate man is one who cannot sin; Christian
   faith is presented in its ideal character and completeness; the
   revelation of life is exhibited in its finality, not in the stages of
   its historical realization." Cf. especially Weiss, Biblical Theology of
   the N. T. .11 p. 311 if. Stevens, Johannine Theology, p. 1 if.

   4. The style of the Epistle is very similar to that of the Gospel.
   Fundamental words and phrases are often repeated such as "truth,"
   "love," "light," "In the light," "being born of God," "abiding in God,"
   etc.; and the construction is characterized by utter simplicity, the
   sentences being coordinated rather than subordinated, and involved
   sentences being avoided by the repetition of part of a previous
   sentence. There is a remarkable paucity pf connecting particles, f. i.
   gar occurs only three times; de but nine times; men te and oun are not
   found at all (while the last is of frequent occurrence in the Gospel).
   On the other hand hoti is often used, and kai is the regular
   connective. In many cases sentences and clauses follow one another
   without connecting particles, e. g. 2: 22-24; 4:4-6, 7-10, 11-13.

  AUTHORSHIP

   The authorship of John is clearly attested by external testimony
   Eusebius says that Papias employed this Epistle, and also that Irenaeus
   often quoted from it. The last assertion is borne out by the work
   against heresies, in which Irenaeus repeatedly quotes the letter and
   ascribes it to John. Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Cyprian and
   Origen all quote it by name; it is contained in the Muratorian Fragment
   and in the old Latin and Syriac Versions; and Eusebius classes it with
   the writings universally received by the churches. This testimony may
   be regarded as very strong, especially in view of the fact that the
   author is not named in the Epistle.

   That conviction of the early church is corroborated by what internal
   evidence we have. All the proofs adduced for the Johannine authorship
   of the fourth Gospel also apply in the case of this Epistle, cf. LINK
   TO JOHN AUTHORSHIP above. The two writings are so similar that they
   evidently were composed by the same hand. It is true, there are some
   points of difference, but these divergencies are of such a kind that
   they altogether preclude the idea that the Epistle is the product of a
   forger trying to imitate John. The almost general verdict is that he
   who wrote the one, also wrote the other. From 1: 1-3 it is evident that
   the author has known Christ in the flesh; and the whole Epistle reveals
   the character of John as we know it from the Gospel and from tradition.

   But the authenticity of the letter did not go unchallenged. In the
   second century the Alogi and Marcion rejected it but only for
   dogmatical reasons. The truth presented in it did not fit their circle
   of ideas. The next attack on it followed in the sixteenth century, when
   Joseph Scaliger declared that none of the three Epistles that bear the
   name of John, were written by him; and S. G. Lange pronounced our
   letter unworthy of an apostle. It was not until 1820, however, that an
   important critical assault was made on the Epistle by Bretschneider. He
   was followed by the critics of the Tubingen school who, however they
   may differ in the details of their arguments, concur in denying the
   Johannine authorship and in regarding the Epistle as a second century
   production. Some of them, such as Kostlin, Georgii, and Hilgenfeld
   maintain that this Epistle and the fourth Gospel were composed by the
   same hand, while others, as Volkmar, Zeller, Davidson, Scholten e. a.
   regard them as the fruit of two congenial spirits.

   The main arguments against the Johannine authorship are the following:
   (1) The Epistle is evidently directed against second century
   Gnosticism, which separated in a dualistic manner knowledge and
   conduct, the divine Christ and the human Jesus, cf. 2: 4, 9, 11; 5 : 6,
   etc. (2) The letter also seems to be a polemic against Docetism another
   second century heresy, cf. 4: 2, 3. (3) There are references to
   Montanism in the Epistle, as f. i. where the writer speaks of the moral
   perfection of believers, 3 : 6, 9, and distinguishes between sins unto
   death and sins not unto death, 3:16, 17, a distinction which,
   Tertullian says, was made by the Montanists. (4) The difference between
   this Epistle and the Apocalypse is so great that it is impossible that
   one man should have written both.

   We need not deny that the Epistle is partly an indirect polemic against
   Gnosticism, but we maintain that this was an incipient Gnosticism that
   made it's appearance before the end of the first century in the heresy
   of Cerinthus, so that this does not argue against the authorship of
   John.--The supposed references to Docetism are very uncertain indeed;
   but even if they could be proved they would not point beyond the first
   century, for most of the Gnostics were also Docetae, and the Cerinthian
   heresy may be called a species of Docetism.--The representations of
   John have nothing in common with those of the Montanists. When he
   speaks of the perfection of believers, he speaks ideally and not of a
   perfection actually realized in this life. Moreover the "sin unto
   death" to which he refers, is evidently a complete falling away from
   Christ, and is not to be identified with the sins to which Tertullian
   refers, viz. "murder, idolatry, fraud, denial of Christ, blasphemy, and
   assuredly also adultery and fornication."--With reference to the last
   argument we refer to what we have said above p. 111, and to the
   explanation given of the difference between the Apocalypse and the
   other Johannine writings below p. 321.

  DESTINATION

   There is very little in the letter that can help us to determine the
   location of the original readers. Because there is no local coloring
   whatever, it is not likely that the Epistle was sent to some individual
   church, as Ephesus (Hug) or Corinth (Lightfoot); and since the letter
   favors the idea that it was written to Gentile, rather than to Jewish
   Christians, it is very improbable that it was destined for the
   Christians of Palestine (Benson). There is not a single Old Testament
   quotation in the Epistle, nor any reference to the Jewish nationality
   or the Jewish tenets of the readers. The statement of Augustine that
   this is John's letter "ad Parthos" is very obscure. Some, as f. i.
   Grotius, inferred from it that the Epistle was written for Christians
   beyond the Euphrates; but most generally it is regarded as a mistaken
   reading for some other expression, the reading pros parthenous, finding
   most favor, which, Gieseler suggests, may in turn be a corruption of
   the title thou parthenou, which was commonly given to John in early
   times.

   In all probability the correct opinion respecting the destination of
   this Epistle is that held by the majority of scholars, as Bleek,
   Huther, Davidson, Plummer, Westcott, Weiss, Zahn, Alford e. a., that it
   was sent to the Christians of Asia Minor generally, for (1) that was
   John's special field of labor during the latter part of his life ; (2)
   the heresies referred to and combated were rife in that country; and
   (3) the Gospel was evidently written for the Christians of that region,
   and the Epistle presupposes similar circumstances.

   We have no definite information retarding the condition of the original
   readers. They had evidently left behind the Church's early struggles
   for existence and now constituted a recognized koinonia of believers, a
   community that placed its light over against the darkness of the world,
   and that distinguished itself from the unrighteous by keeping the
   commandments of God. They only needed to be reminded of their true
   character, which would naturally induce them to a life worthy of their
   fellowship with Christ. There are dangerous heresies abroad, however,
   against which they must be warned. The pernicious doctrine of
   Cerinthus, that Jesus was not the Christ, the Son of God, threatened
   the peace of their souls; and the subtle error, that one could be
   righteous without doing righteousness, endangered the fruitfulness of
   their Christian life.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. Although the Epistle is not primarily and
   directly polemical, yet it was most likely occasioned by the dangers to
   which we already referred.

   As to the object of the letter the author himself says: "that which we
   have seen and heard declare we unto you also, that ye also may have
   fellowship with us; yea, and our fellowship is with the Father and with
   his Son Jesus Christ," 1: 3; and again in 5:13: "These things have I
   written unto you, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, even unto
   you that believe in the Name of the Son of God." The direct purpose of
   the author is to give his readers authentic instruction regarding the
   truth and reality of the things which they, especially as believers in
   Jesus Christ, accepted by faith; and to help them to see the natural
   issues of the fellowship to which they had been introduced, in order
   that they might have a full measure of peace and joy and life. The
   purpose of the writer is therefore at once theoretical and practical.

   2. Time and Place. What we said above, pp. 113, 114, respecting the
   date of the fourth Gospel and the place of its composition, also favors
   the idea that this Epistle was written between the years 80-98, and at
   Ephesus. It is impossible to narrow down these time-limits any more.
   The only remaining question is, whether the Epistle was written prior
   to the Gospel, (Bleek, Huther, Reuss, Weiss), or the Gospel prior to
   the Epistle (DeWette, Ewald, Guericke, Alford, Plummer). It appears to
   us that the grounds adduced for the priority of the Epistle, as f. i.
   that a writing of momentary design naturally precedes one of permanent
   design; a letter of warning to particular churches, a writing like the
   Gospel addressed to all Christendom,--are very weak. And the arguments
   for the other side are almost equally inconclusive, although there is
   some force in the reasoning that the Epistle in several places
   presupposes a knowledge of the Gospel, cf. the points of resemblance
   referred to on p. 311 above. But even this does not carry conviction,
   for Reuss correctly says: "For us, the Epistle needs the Gospel as a
   commentary; but inasmuch as at the first it had one in the oral
   instruction of the author, it is not thereby proved that it is the
   later." History of the N. T. I p. 237. Salmond and Zahn wisely conclude
   their discussion of this point with a non liquet.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The canonicity of this letter was never doutbed by the Church. Polycarp
   and Papias, both disciples of John, used it, and Irenaeus, a disciple
   of Polycarp, directly ascribes it to John. Clement of Alexandria,
   Tertullian, Cyprian, Origen and Dionysius of Alexandria all quote it by
   name, as a writing of the apostle John. It is referred to as John's in
   the Muratorian Fragment, and is contained in the old Latin and Syriac
   Versions.

   The abiding significance of this important Epistle is, that it pictures
   us ideally the community of believers, as a community of life in
   fellowship with Christ, mediated by the word of the apostles, which is
   the Word of life. It describes that community as the sphere of life and
   light, of holiness and righteousness, of love to God and to the
   brethren; and as the absolute antithesis to the world with its darkness
   and death, its pollution and unrighteousness, its hatred and deception.
   All those who are introduced into that sphere should of necessity be
   holy and righteous and filled with love, and should avoid the world and
   its lusts. They should test the spirits, whether they be of God, and
   shun all anti-Christian error. Thus the Epistle describes for the
   Church of all ages the nature and criteria of heavenly fellowship, and
   warns believers to keep themselves unspotted from the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Second and Third General Epistles of John

  CONTENTS

   The Second Epistle. After the address and the apostolic blessing, 1-3,
   the writer expresses his joy at finding that some of the children of
   the addressee walk in the truth, and reiterates the great commandment
   of brotherly love, 4-6. He urges the readers to exercise this love and
   informs them that there are many errorists, who deny that Jesus Christ
   is come in the flesh, admonishing them not to receive these, lest they
   should become partakers of their evil deeds, 7-11. Expressing his
   intention to come to them, he ends his Epistle with a greeting, 12, 13.

   The Third Epistle. The writer, addressing Gajus, sincerely wishes that
   he may prosper, as his soul prospereth, 1-3. He commends him for
   receiving the itinerant preachers, though they were strangers to him,
   5-8. He also informs the brother that he has written to the church, but
   that Diotrephes resists his authority, not receiving the brethren
   himself and seeking to prevent others from doing it, 9, 10. Warning
   Gajus against that evil example, he commends Demetrius, mentions an
   intended visit, and closes the Epistle with greetings, 11-14.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. These two Epistles have rightly been called twin epistles, since
   they reveal several points of similarity. The author in both styles
   himself the elder; they are of about equal length; each one of them, as
   distinguished from the first Epistle, begins with an address and ends
   with greetings; both contain an expression of joy; and both refer to
   itinerant preachers and to an intended visit of the writer.

   2. The letters show close affinity to I John. What little they contain
   of doctrinal matter is closely related to the contents of the first
   Epistle, where we can easily find statements corresponding to those in
   II John 4-9 and III John 11. Several concepts and expressions clearly
   remind us of I John, as f. i. "love," "truth," "commandments," "a new
   commandment," one "which you had from the beginning," "loving truth,"
   "walking in the truth," "abiding in" one, "a joy that may be
   fulfilled," etc. Moreover the aim of these letters is in general the
   same as that of the first Epistle, viz. to strengthen the readers in
   the truth and in love; and to warn them against an incipient
   Gnosticism.

  AUTHORSHIP

   Considering the brevity of these Epistles, their authorship is very
   well attested. Clement of Alexandria speaks of the second Epistle and,
   according to Eusebius, also commented on the third. Irenaeus quotes the
   second Epistle by name, ascribing it to "John the Lord's disciple."
   Tertullian and Cyprian contain no quotations from them, but Dionysius
   of Alexandria, Athanasius and Didymus received them as the work of the
   apostle. The Muratorian Canon in a rather obscure passage mentions two
   Epistles of John besides the first one. The Peshito does not contain
   them; and Eusebius, without clearly giving his own opinion, reckons
   them with the Antilegomena. After his time they were generally received
   and as such recognized by the, councils of Laodicea (363), Hippo (393)
   and Carthage (397).

   Internal evidence may be said to favor the authorship of John. One can
   scarcely read these letters without feeling that they proceeded from
   the same hand that composed I John. The second Epistle especially is
   very similar to the first, a similarity that can hardly be explained,
   as Baljon suggests, from an acquaintance of the author with I John, ml.
   p. 237, 239. And the third Epistle is inseparably linked to the second.
   The use of a few Pauline terms, propemtein, eudousthai and hugiainein,
   and of a few peculiar words, as phluarein, philoproteuein
   hupolambanein, prove nothing to the contrary.

   The great stumbling block, that prevents several scholars from
   accepting the apostolic authorship of these Epistles, is found in in
   the fact that the author simply styles himself ho presbuteros. This
   appelation led some, as Erasmus, Grotius, Beck, Bretschneider, Hase,
   Renan, Reuss, Wieseler e. a., to ascribe them to a certain well-known
   presbyter John, distinct from the apostle. This opinion is based on a
   passage of Papias, as it is interpreted by Eusebius, The passage runs
   thus: "If I met anywhere with anyone who had been a follower of the
   elders, I used to inquire what were the declarations of the elders;
   what was said by Andrew, by Peter, by Philip, what by Thomas or James,
   what by John or Matthew, or any other of the disciples of our Lord; and
   the things which Aristion and the presbyter John, the disciples of the
   Lord say; for I did not expect to derive so much benefit from the
   contents of books as from the utterances of a living and abiding
   voice." From this statement Eusebius infers that among the informants
   of Papias there was besides the apostle John also a John the presbyter,
   Church Hist. III 39. But the correctness of this inference is subject
   to doubt. Notice (1) that Papias first names those whose words he
   received through others and then mentions two of whom he had also
   received personal instruction, cf. the difference in tense, eipen and
   legousin; (2) that it seems very strange that for Papias, who was
   himself a disciple of the apostle John, anyone but the apostle would be
   ho presbuteros; (3) that Eusebius was the first to discover this second
   John in the passage of Papias: (4) that history knows nothing of such a
   John the presbyter; he is a shadowy person indeed; and (5) that the
   Church historian was not unbiased in his opinion; being averse to the
   supposed Chiliasm of the Apocalypse, he was only too glad to find
   another John to whom he could ascribe it.

   But even if the inference of Eusebius were correct, it would not prove
   that this presbyter was the author of our Epistles. The same passage of
   Papias clearly establishes the fact that the apostles were also called
   elders in the early Church. And does not the appellation, ho
   presbuteros, admirably fit the last of the apostles, who for many years
   was the overseer of the churches in Asia Minor? He stood preeminent
   above all others; and by using this name designated at once his
   official position and his venerable age.

  DESTINATION

   The second Epistle is addressed to eklekte kuria? and her children,
   whom I love in truth, and not only I, but all those that know the
   truth," 1:1. There is a great deal of uncertain{y about the
   interpretation of this address. On the assumption that the letter was
   addressed to an individual, the following renderings have been
   proposed: (1) to an elect lady; (2) to the elect lady; (3) to the elect
   Kuria; (4) to the Lady Electa; (5) to Electa Kuria.

   The first of these is certainly the simplest and the most natural one,
   but considered as the address of an Epistle, it is too indefinite. To
   our mind the second, which seems to be grammatically permissible, is
   the best of all the suggested interpretations. As to the third, it is
   true that the word kuria does occur as a proper name, cf. Zahn, Einl.
   II p. 584; but on the supposition that this is the case here also, it
   would be predicated of a single individual, which in Scripture is
   elsewhere done only in Rom. 16:13, a case that is not altogether
   parallel; and the more natural construction would be kuria? te eklekte.
   Cf. III John 1 :1; the case in I Pet. 1 :1 does not offer a parallel,
   because parepidemois is not a proper noun. The fourth must be ruled
   out, since eklekta is not known to occur as a nomen proprium; and if
   this were the name of the addressee, her sister, vs. 13, would
   strangely bear the same name. The last rendering is the least likely,
   burdening the lady, as it does, with two strange names. If the letter
   was addressed to an individual, which is favored by the analogy of the
   third Epistle, and also by the fact that the sisters children are
   spoken of in vs. 13, while she herself is not mentioned, then in all
   probability the addressee was a lady well known and highly esteemed in
   the early church, but not named in the letter. Thus Salmond (Hastings
   D. B.), while Alford and D. Smith regard Kuria as the name of the lady.

   In view of the contents of the Epistle, however, many from the time of
   Jerome on have regarded the title as a designation of the Church in
   general (Jerome, Hilgenfeld, Lunemann, Schmiedel), or of some
   particular church (Huther, Holtzmann, Weiss, Westcott, Salmon, Zahn,
   Baljon). The former of these two seems to be excluded by vs. 13, since
   the Church in general can hardly be represented as having a sister. But
   as over against the view that the Epistle was addressed to an
   individual, the latter is favored by (1) the fact that everything of a
   personal nature is absent from the Epistle; (2) the plurals which the
   apostle constantly uses, cf. 6, 8, 10, 12; (3) the way in which he
   speaks to the addressee in vss. 5, 8; (4) the expression, "and not I
   only, but also all they that have known the truth," 1, which is more
   applicable to a church than to a single individual; and (5) the
   greeting, 13, which is most naturally understood as the greeting of one
   church to another. If this view of the Epistle is correct, and we are
   inclined to think it is, kuria is probably used as the feminine of
   kurios, in harmony with the Biblical representation that the Church is
   the bride of the Lamb. It is useless to guess, however, what particular
   church is meant. Since the church of Ephesus is in all probability the
   sister, it is likely that one of the other churches of Asia Minor is
   addressed.

   The third Epistle is addressed to a certain Gajus, of whom we have no
   knowledge beyond that gained from the Epistle, where he is spoken of as
   a beloved friend of the apostle, and as a large-hearted hospitable man,
   who with a willing heart served the cause of Christ. There have been
   some attempts to identify him with a Gajus who is mentioned in the
   Apostolic Constitutions as having been appointed bishop of Pergamum by
   John, or with some of the other persons of the same name in Scripture,
   Acts 19: 29; 20:4, especially with Pauls host at Corinth, Rom. 16:23; I
   Cor. 1: 14; but these efforts have not been crowned with success.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose: In all probability the false agitators to whom
   the apostle refers in the Second Epistle, 7-12, gave him occasion to
   write this letter. His aim is to express his joy on account of the
   obedience of some of the members of the church, to exhort all that they
   love one another, to warn them against deceivers who would pervert the
   truth, and to announce his coming.

   The third Epistle seems to have been occasioned by the reports of
   certain brethren who traveled about from place to place and were
   probably engaged in preaching the Gospel. They reported to the apostle
   that they had enjoyed the hospitality of Gajus, but had met with a
   rebuff at the hands of Diotrephes, an ambitious fellow (probably, as
   some have thought, an elder or a deacon in the church), who resisted
   the authority of the apostle and refused to receive the brethren. The
   authors purpose is to express his satisfaction with the course pursued
   by Gajus, to condemn the attitude of Diotrephes, to command Demetrius
   as a worthy brother, and to announce an intended visit.

   2. Time and Place. The assumption seems perfectly warranted that John
   wrote these Epistles from Ephesus, where he spent perhaps the last
   twenty-five years of his life. We have no means for determining the
   time when they were composed. It may safely be said, however, that it
   was after the composition of I John. And if the surmise of Zahn and
   Salmon is correct, that the letter referred to in III John 9 is our
   second Epistle, they were probably written at the same time. This idea
   is favored somewhat by the fact that the expression, "I wrote somewhat
   (epsrapsa ti) to the church," seems to refer to a short letter; and by
   the mention of an intended visit at the end of each letter. But from
   the context it would appear that this letter must have treated of the
   reception or the support of the missionary brethren, which is not the
   case with our second Epistle.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   There was some doubt at first as to the canonicity of these Epistles.
   The Alexandrian church generally accepted them, Clement, Dionysius and
   Alexander of Alexandria all recognizing them as canonical, though
   Origen had doubts. Irenaeus cites a passage from the second Epistle as
   John's. Since neither Tertullian nor Cyprian quote them, it is
   uncertain, whether they were accepted by the North African church. The
   Muratorian Fragment mentions two letters of John in a rather obscure
   way. In the Syrian church they were not received, since they were not
   in the Peshito, but in the fourth century Ephrem quotes both by name.
   Eusebius classed them with the Antilegomena, but soon after his time
   they were universally accepted as canonical.

   The ermanent significance of the second Epistle is that it emphasizes
   the necessity of abiding in the truth and thus exhibiting one's love to
   Christ. To abide in the doctrine of Christ and to obey his
   commandments, is the test of sonship. Hence believers should not
   receive those who deny the true doctrine, and especially the
   incarnation of Christ, lest they become partakers of their evil deeds.

   The third Epistle also has it's permanent lesson in that it commends
   the generous love that reveals itself in the hospitality of Gajus,
   shown to those who labor in the cause of Christ, and denounce the
   self-centered activity of Diotrephes; for these two classes of men are
   always found in the Church.
     __________________________________________________________________

The General Epistle of Jude

  CONTENTS

   The writer begins his Epistle with the regular address and apostolic
   blessing, 1, 2. He informs his readers that he felt it incumbent on him
   to warn them against certain intruders, who deny Christ, lead
   lascivious lives and will certainly be punished like the people
   delivered from Egypt, the fallen angels and the cities of the plain,
   3-7. These intruders are further described as defilers of the flesh and
   as despisers and blasphemers of heavenly dignities, and the woe is
   pronounced on them, 8-11. After giving a further description of their
   debauchery, the author exhorts the readers to be mindful of the words
   of the apostles, who had spoken of the appearance of such mockers,
   12-19. Admonishing them to increase in faith and to keep themselves in
   the love of God, and giving them directions as to the correct behaviour
   towards others, he concludes his Epistle with a doxology, 20-25.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. This Epistle is characterized by its very close resemblence to parts
   of II Peter. Since we have already discussed the relation in which the
   two stand to each other (II Peter), we now simply refer to that
   discussion.

   2. The letter is peculiar also in that it contains quotations from the
   apocryphal books. The story in verse 9 is taken from the Assumption of
   Moses, according to which Michael was commissioned to bury Moses, but
   Satan claimed the body, in the first place because he was the lord of
   matter, and in the second place since Moses had committed murder in
   Egypt. The falsity of the first ground is brought out by Michael, when
   he says: "The Lord rebuke thee, for it was God's Spirit which created
   the word and all mankind." He does not reflect on the second. The
   prophecy in verses 14, 15 is taken from the Book of Enoch a book that
   was highly esteemed by the early church. According to some the
   statement regarding the fallen angels, verse 6, is also derived from
   it. The latest editor of these writings, R. H. Charles, regards the
   first as a composite work, made up of two distinct books, viz, the
   Testament and the Assumption of Moses, of which the former, and
   possibly also the latter was written in Hebrew between 7 and 29 A. D.
   With respect to the Book of Enoch he holds, "that the larger part of
   the book was written not later than 160 B. C., and that no part of it
   is more recent than the Christian era." Quoted by Mayor, Exp. Gk. Test.
   V p. 234.

   3. The language of Jude may best be likened to that of his brother
   James. He speaks in a tone of unquestioned authority and writes a
   vigorous style. His Greek, though it has a Jewish complexion, is fairly
   correct; and his descriptions are often just as picturesque as those of
   James, f. i. when he compares the intruders to "spots (R. V. hidden
   rocks) in the feasts of charity;""clouds without water, carried along
   by winds," "autumn trees without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the
   roots," "wild waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame ;" etc.,
   12, 13. Like James also he employs some words that are otherwise
   exclusively Pauline, as ai'dios, churiotes, oicheterio, prographein.
   Moreover the letter contains a few hapax legomena.

  AUTHORSHIP

   Tbe Muratorian Canon accepts Jude, but indicates that it was doubted by
   some. Clement of Alexandria commented on it, and Tertullian quotes it
   by name. Origen acknowledges that there were doubts as to the
   canonicity of Jude, but does not seem to have shared them. Didymus of
   Alexandria defends the Epistle against those who questioned its
   authority on account of the use made in it of apocryphal books.
   Eusebius reckoned it with the Antilegomena; but it was accepted as
   canonical by the third council of Carthage in 397 A. D.

   The author designates himself as "Jude the servant of Jesus Christ, and
   brother of James." There are several persons of that name mentioned in
   the New Testament, of which only two can come in consideration here,
   however, viz. Jude, the brother of the Lord, Mt. 13:55; Mk. 6:3, and
   Jude the apostle, Lk. 6:16; Acts 1: 13, also called Lebbeus, Mt. 10: 3,
   and Thaddeus, Mk. 3:18. It appears to us that the author was Jude, the
   brother of the Lord, because: (1) He seeks to give a clear indication
   of his identity by calling himself, "the brother of James." This James
   must have been so well known, therefore, as to need no further
   description; and there was but one James at that time of whom this
   could be said, viz. James the brother of the Lord. (2) It is
   inconceivable that an apostle, rather than name his official position,
   should make himself known by indicating his relationship to another
   person, whoever that person might be. (3) Though it is possible that
   the writer, even if he were an apostle, should speak as he does in the
   17th verse, that passage seems to imply that he stood outside of the
   apostolic circle. - In favor of the view that the author was the
   apostle Jude, some have appealed to Lk. 6:16; Acts 1 :13, where the
   apostle is called Ioudas Iachobou but it is contrary to established
   usage to supply the word brother in such a case.

   Very little is known of this Jude. If the order in which the brethren
   of the Lord are named in Scripture is any indication of their age, he
   was the youngest or the youngest but one of the group; compare Mt.
   13:55 with Mk. 6: 3. With his brothers he was not a believer in Jesus
   during the Lord's public ministry, John 7:5, but evidently embraced him
   by faith after the resurrection, Acts 1:14. For the rest we can only
   gather from I Cor. 9:5 respecting the brethren of the Lord in general,
   undoubtedly with the exception of James, who resided at Jerusalem, that
   they traveled about with their wives, willing workers for the Kingdom
   of God, and were even known at Corinth.

   The authenticity of the Epistle has been doubted, because: (1)The
   author speaks of faith in the objective sense, Ths a fides quae
   creditur, 3, 20, a usage that points to the post-apostolic period; (2)
   He mentions the apostles as persons who lived in the distant past, 17;
   and (3) he evidently combats the second century heresy of the
   Carpocratians. But these grounds are very questionable indeed. The word
   faith is employed in the objective sense elsewhere in the New
   Testament, most certainly in the Pastorals, and probably also in Rom.
   10:8; Gal. 1:23; Phil. 1:27. And there is nothing impossible in the
   assumption that that meaning should have become current in the time of
   the apostles. The manner in which Jude mentions the apostles does not
   necessarily imply that they had all passed away before this letter was
   composed. At most the death of a few is implied. But we agree with Dr.
   Chase, when he judges that the supposition that the apostles were
   dispersed in such a way that their voice could not at the time reach
   the persons to whom this letter is addressed, meets all the
   requirements of the case. Hastings D. B. Art. Jude. The assumption that
   the heretics referred to were second century Carpocratians, is entirely
   gratuitous; it rests on a mistaken interpretation of three passages,
   viz, the verses 4b, 8, 19.

  DESTINATION

   Jude addresses his Epistle to "those that are sanctified by God the
   Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called." On account of the
   very general character of this designation some, as Ewald, regard the
   Epistle as a circular letter; but the contents of the Epistle are
   against this assumption. Yet we are left entirely to conjecture as to
   the particular locality in which the readers dwelt. Some scholare, e.
   g. Alford and Zahn, believe that the Epistle was written to Jewish
   readers, but we are inclined to think with Weiss, Chase, Bigg, Baljon
   e. a. that the recipients of the letter were Gentile Christians, (1)
   because the letter is so closely related to II Peter, which was sent to
   the Christians of Asia Minor; and (2) since the heresies to which it
   refers are known to have arisen in Gentile churches. Cf. especially I
   Corinthians and the letters to the seven churches in the Apocalypse.

   Many expositors are inclined to look for the first readers in Asia
   Minor on account of the resemblance of the heresies mentioned in the
   Epistle to those referred to in II Peter. But possibly it is better to
   hold with Chase that the letter was sent to Syrian Antioch and the
   surrounding district, since they had evidently received oral
   instruction from the apostles generally, and were therefore most likely
   in the vicinity of Palestine. Moreover Jude may have felt some special
   responsibility for the church in that vicinity since the death of his
   brother James.

   In the condition of the readers there was cause for alarm. The danger
   that Peter saw as a cloud on the distant horizon, Jude espied as a
   leaven that was already working in the ranks of his readers. False
   brethren had crept into the church who were, it would seem, practical
   libertines, enemies of the cross of Christ, who abused their Christian
   liberty (Alford, Salmon, Weiss, Chase), and not at the same time
   heretical teachers (Zahn, Baljon). Perhaps they were no teachers at
   all. Their life was characterized by lasciviousness, 4, especially
   fornication, 7, 8, 11, mockery, 10, ungodliness, 15, murmuring,
   complaining, pride and greed, 16. Their fundamental error seems to have
   been that they despised and spoke evil of the authorities that were
   placed over them. They were Antinomians and certainly had a great deal
   in common with the Nicolaitans of the Apocalypse.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. The danger to which these Christians were thus
   exposed, led to the composition of this Epistle. Apparently Jude
   intended to write to them of the common salvation, when he suddenly
   heard of the grave situation and found it necessary to pen a word of
   warning, 3. In the verse from which we draw this conclusion, the author
   also clearly states his aim, when he says that he deemed it imperative
   to write to them that they should earnestly contend for the faith which
   was once delivered to the saints. In order to do this, he pictures to
   them the disobedient and immoral character of the ungodly persons that
   had unawares crept into the fold and endangered their Christian faith
   and life; reminds them of the fact that God would certainly punish
   those wanton libertines, just as He had punished sinners in the past;
   and exhorts them to stand in faith and to strive after holiness.

   2. Time and Place. We have absolutely no indication of the place where
   this Epistle was written; it is not unlikely, however, that it was at
   Jerusalem.

   With respect to the time of its composition we have a terminus ad quem
   in the date of II Peter, about A. D. 67, since that Epistle is
   evidently dependent on Jude. On the other hand it does not seem likely
   that Jude would write such a letter, while his brother James was still
   living, so that we have a terminus a quo in A. D. 62. A date later than
   62 is also favored by the Pauline words employed in this letter, in
   some of which we seem to have an echo of Ephesians and Colossians.
   Moreover the great similarity between the conditions pictured in this
   letter and those described in II Peter is best explained, if we date
   them in close proximity to each other. We shall not go far wrong in
   dating the Epistle about the year 65.

   The older critics of the Tubingen school dated the Epistle late in the
   second century, while more recent critics, as Pfleiderer, Holtzmann,
   Julicher, Harnack, Baljon, think it originated about the middle or in
   the first half of the second century. They draw this conclusion from,
   (1) the way in which the writer speaks of faith, 3, 20; (2) the manner
   in which he refers to the apostles, 17; (3) the use of the apocryphal
   books; and (4) the supposed references to the doctrines of the
   Carpocratians. But these arguments can all be met by counter-arguments,
   cf. above.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   In the early Church there was considerable doubt as to the canonicity
   of this epistle especially because it was not written by an apostle and
   contained passage from apocryphal books. There are allusions more or
   less clear to the Epistle in II Peter, Polycarp, Athenagoras and
   Theophilus of Antioch. The Muratorian Canon mentions it, but in a
   manner which implies that it was doubted by some. It is found in the
   old Latin Version, but not in the Peshito. Clement of Alexandria,
   Tertullian and Origen recognized it, though Origen intimates that there
   were doubts regarding its canonicity. Eusebius doubted its canonical
   authority, but the council of Carthage (397) accepted it.

   In the Epistle of Jude we have the Christian war-cry, resounding
   through the ages: Contend earnestly for the faith that was once
   delivered unto the saints! This letter, the last of the New Testament,
   teaches with great emphasis that apostacy from the true creed with its
   central truths of the atonement of Christ and the permanent validity of
   the law as the rule of life, is assured perdition; and clearly reveals
   for all generations the inseparable connection between a correct belief
   and a right mode of living.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Revelation of John

  CONTENTS

   After the introduction and the apostolic blessing, 1:1-8, the book
   contains seven visions or series of visions, extending from 1:9-22:7,
   followed by a conclusion, 22:8-21.

   I. The first Vision, 1: 9-3:22, is that of the glorified Christ in the
   midst of the Church, directing John to write letters of reproof, of
   warning, of exhortation and of consolation to seven representative
   churches of proconsular Asia, viz. to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus,
   Thyatire, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea.

   II. The second Vision, 4:1-8:1, reveals God as ruling the world's
   destiny, and the Lamb as taking the book of the divine decrees and
   breaking the seven seals of which each one represents a part of God's
   purpose, the first four referring to the terrestrial, and the last
   three to the celestial sphere. Between the sixth and seventh seals an
   episode is introduced to show the safety of the people of God amid the
   judgments that are inflicted on the world.

   III. The third Vision, 8:2-11:19, shows us seven angels, each one
   having a trumpet. After an angel has offered up the prayers of the
   saints to God, the seven angels blow their trumpets, and each trumpet
   is followed by a vision of destruction on the sinful world, the
   destruction of the last three being more severe than that of the first
   four. Between the sixth and seventh trumpets there is again an episode
   describing the preservation of the Church.

   IV. The fourth Vision, 12:1-14: 20, describes the conflict of the world
   with the Church of God. The Church is represented as a woman bringing
   forth the Christ, against whom the dragon representing satan wages war.
   In successive visions we behold the beasts which satan will employ as
   his agents, the militant Church, and the advancing stages of Christ's
   conquest.

   V. The fifth Vision, 15:1-16:21, once more reveals seven angels, now
   having seven vials or bowls containing the last plagues or judgments of
   God. First we have a description of the Church that triumphed over the
   beast, glorifying God; and this is followed by a picture of the
   sevenfold judgment of God on the world, represented by the seven vials.

   VI. The sixth Vision, 17:1-20:15, reveals the harlot city Babylon, the
   representative of the world, and the victory of Christ over her and
   over the enemies that are in league with her, the great conflict ending
   in the last judgment.

   VII. The seventh Vision, 21:1-22: 7, discloses to the eye the ideal
   Church, the new Jerusalem, and pictures in glowing colors her
   surpassing beauty and the everlasting, transcendent bliss of her
   inhabitants.

   The book closes with an epilogue in which the seer describes its
   significance and urges the readers to keep the things that are written
   on its pages, 22:7-21.

  CHARACTERISTICS

   1. The Revelation of John is the only prophetic book in the New
   Testament. It is called a prophecy in 1:3, 22: 7, 10,18, 19. A nearer
   description of the book is given, however, in the name Apocalypse, for
   there is a difference between the prophetic books of the Bible in
   general and that part of them that may be said to belong to the
   Apocalyptic literature. Naturally the two have some eicments in common:
   they both contain communications, mediated by the Holy Spirit, of the
   character, will and purposes of God; and the one as well as the other
   looks to the future of the Kingdom of God. But there are also points of
   difference. Prophecy, while it certainly has reference also to the
   future of God's Kingdom, is mainly concerned with a divine
   interpretation of the past and the present, while the chief interest of
   Apocalyptic lies in the future. Prophecy again, where it does reveal
   the future, shows this in its organic relation with principles and
   forces that are already working in the present, while Apocalyptic
   pictures the images of the future, not as they develop out of existing
   conditions, but as they are shown directly from heaven and to a great
   extent in supernatural forms.

   2. A characteristic feature of the book is that its thought is largely
   clothed in symbolic language derived from some of the prophetic books
   of the Old Testament. Hence its correct understaiding is greatly
   facilitated by studying the writer's Old Testament sources. Yet we must
   constantly bear in mind that he does not always employ the language so
   derived in its original significance. Compare ch. 18 with Is. 13, 14;
   Jer. 50, 51; 21:1-22:5 with various parts of Is. 40-66; Ezek. 40-48 ;
   1:12-20 with Dan. 7, 10 ; ch. 4 with Is. 6; Ezek. 1, 10. But however
   dependent the author may be on the prophets, he does not slavishly
   follow them, but uses their language with great freedom. The symbolic
   numbers 3, 4, 7, 10, 12 and their multiples also play an important part
   in the book.

   3. The language of the Apocalypse differs from that of all the rest of
   the New Testament. It, is very decidedly Hebraistic Greek. According to
   Simcox its vocabulary is far less eccentric than its style and grammar.
   This author in his, Writers of the New Testament pp. 80-89 classifies
   the most important peculiarities of the language of Revelation under
   several heads: (1) As in Hebrew the copula is generally ommited cf.
   4^1,3, 5^2, 6^8, 9^7,10,16, 17, 10^1, 11^8, 19^1,12, 21^8,13,19. (2)
   Apparently the writer, at least in several instances, does not use the
   Greek tenses in their purely temporal sense, but more like the Hebrew
   perfect and imperfect, cf. 2^5,22,24, 4^10, 10^7, 12^4. (3) The use of
   a redundant pronoun or pronominal adverb is very frequent, cf. 3^8,
   7^2,9, 12^6,14, 13^12, 17^9, 20^8. (4) When two nouns are in
   opposition, the second is usually put in the nominative, whatever be
   the case of the first, cf. 1^5, 2^13,20, 3^12, 7^4, 8^9, 9^14, 14^12,
   17^3, 20^2. (5) There are some irregularities which, considered
   abstractly are perfectly legitimate, but are contrary to established
   Greek usage, as f. i. the use of the dative instead of the double
   accusative in 2:14; and the use of the plural of verbs with a subject
   in the neuter nominative as in 3^4, 4^5, 11^13. (6) False concords in
   get der, constructions ad sensum are also frequently found, 4^7,8,
   7^4,8 9^5,6 etc.

  AUTHORSHIP

   The external testimony for the authorship of the apostle John is quite
   strong. Justin Martyr clearly testifies that the book was written by
   "John one of the apostles of the Lord." Irenaeus whose teacher was
   Polycarp, the disciple of John, gives very decisive and repeated
   testimony for the authorship of the apostle. The Muratorian Canon
   mentions John as the author of the book, and the context shows that the
   son of Zebedee is meant. Hippolytus quotes the Apocalypse several times
   as a work of John; and that the John which he has in mind is the
   apostle, is clear from a passage in which he speaks of him as "an
   apostle and disciple of the Lord." Clement of Alexandria names the
   apostle as the author of the book, as do also Victorinus, Ephrem the
   Syrian, Epiphanius e. a. In the West Ambrose and Augustine repeatedly
   quote the Apocalypse as written by John the apostle, and Jerome speaks
   of the apostle John as also being a prophet.

   This strong external testimony is corroborated by internal evidence:
   (1) The author repeatedly calls himself John, 1^1,4,9, 22^8, and there
   is but one person who could use the name thus absolutely to designate
   himself without fear of being misunderstood, viz. John the apostle. (2)
   The writer evidently stood in some special relation to the churches. of
   proconsular Asia (i. e. Mysia, Lydia, Caria and a part of Phrygia),
   which is in perfect harmony with the fact that John spent the later
   years of his life at Ephesus. (3) The author was evidently banished to
   the island called Patmos in the Aegean sea, one of the Sporades to the
   South of Samos. Now a quite consistent tradition, which is, however,
   discredited by some scholars, says that this happened to the apostle
   John; and there are some features that seem to mark this as an
   independent tradition. (4) There are also notes of identity between the
   writer and the author of the fourth Gospel and of I John. Like in John
   1:1 ff. and I John 1:1, so also in Rev. 19:13 the name ho logos is
   given to our Lord. He is called arnion twenty-nine times in this book,
   a word that is used elsewhere only in John 21:15, as a designation of
   the disciples of the Lord. It is remarkable also that the only place,
   where Christ is called a Lamb outsid of this book, is in John 1:29, the
   word amnos being used. The term alethinos, found but once in Luke, once
   in Paul and three times in Hebrews, is employed nine times in the
   gospel of John, four times in the first Epistle, and ten times in the
   Apocalypse, though not always in exactly the same sense. Compare also
   with the repeated expression ho nichon, 2^7,11,17, etc.; John 16^33; I
   John 2^13,14; 4^4, 5^4,5.

   Still there have been dissentient voices from the beginning. The Alogi
   for dogmatical reasons impugned the authorship of John and ascribed the
   book to Cerinthus. Dionysius of Alexandria for more critical reasons,
   but also laboring with a strong anti-chiliastic bias, referred it to
   another John of Ephesus. Eusebius wavered in his opinion, but, led by
   considerations like those of Dionysius, was inclined to regard that
   shadowy person, John the presbyter, as the author. And Luther had a
   strong dislike for the book, because, as he said, Christ was neither
   taught nor recognized in it; and because the apostles did not deal in
   visions, but spoke in clear words, he declared that it was neither
   apostolic nor prophetic.

   The Tubingen school accepted the Johannine authorship of the
   Apocalypse, while it denied that the apostle had written any of the
   other books that are generally ascribed to him. A great and increasing
   number of critical scholars, however, do not believe that the apostle
   John composed the Apocalypse. Some of them, as Hitzig, Weiss and
   Spitta, suggest John Mark as the author, while many others, such as
   Bleek, Credner, Dusterdieck, Keim, Ewald, Weizsacker e. a., regard it
   as the work of John the presbyter. The principal objectipns urged
   against the authorship of the apostle are the following: (1) While the
   apostle in the gospel and in the first Epistle does not mention his
   name, the writer of this book names himself both in the first and in
   the third person. (2) The genius of the two writers is quite different:
   the one is speculative and introspective, the other, imaginative,
   looking especially to the external course of events; the one is
   characterized by mildness and love, the other is stern and revengeful;
   the views of the one are spiritual and mystic, those of the other are
   sensuous and plastic. (3) The type of doctrine found in the Apocalypse
   has a Jewish stamp and is very unlike that of the gospel of John, which
   is idealizing and breaks away from the Mosaic basis. In this book we
   find the Old Testament conception of God as a fearful Judge, of angels
   and demons, and of the Church as the new Jerusalem. There are
   twenty-four elders round about the throne, twelve thousand of each
   tribe that are sealed, and the names of the apostles are engraved on
   the foundation stones of the heavenly city. Moreover the necessity of
   good works is strongly emphasized, cf. chs. 2, 3 and also 14:13. (4)
   The style of the book is of a very distinct Hebraic type, different
   from anything that is found in the other writings of John. Instead of
   the regular and comparatively faultless construction of the Gospel, we
   here find a language full of irregularities.

   But we do not believe that these considerations necessitate the
   assumption that the author of the book cannot be identified with the
   writer of the fourth gospel. It is in perfect harmony with the usage of
   the historical and the prophetical writers of the Bible throughout that
   the writer conceals his name in the Gospel and mentions it in the
   Apocalypse. The different light in which we see him in his various
   books is the natural result of the vastly different character of these
   writings. We should also remember that a prophetic book naturally
   reflects far less of the personal character of its author than
   epistolary writings do. The alleged Judaeistic type of the teachings
   found in the Apocalypse does not militate against the authorship of
   John. In a symbolic description of the future condition of the Church
   it is perfectly natural and indeed very fitting that the author should
   derive his symbolism from Old Testament sources, since the Old
   Testament is symbolically and typically related to the New. It cannot
   be maintained that the Christological and Soteriological teaching of
   the Apocalypse is essentially Jewish. The Jews that oppose Jesus are
   denounced, 3:9; the Church is composed of people out of every nation,
   7:9; salvation is the free gift of grace, 21:6; 22:17; and though the
   necessity of good works is emphasized, those are not regarded as
   meritorious, but as the fruits of righteousness, and are even called
   the works of Jesus, 2:26. The strongest argument against the authorship
   of John is undoubtedly that derived from the style and language of the
   book. There has been an attempt on the part of some scholars, as
   Olshausen and Guericke, to explain the linguistic differences between
   the Apocalypse and the Gospel of John by assuming that the former
   preceded the latter by about 20 or 25 years, in which time the authors
   knowledge of Greek gradually matured. But the differences are of such a
   kind that it may be doubted, whether the lapse of a few years can
   account for them. The language of the fourth Gospel is not that of the
   Apocalypse in a more developed form. While it is questionable, whether
   an altogether satisfactory explanation can be given with the data at
   hand, it seems certain that the solution must be found, at least in
   part, in the transcendent nature of the subject-matter and in the
   symbolic character of the book. The fact that the author so often
   violates the rules of Greek grammar, does not necessarily mean that he
   did not know them, but may also indicate that under the stress of the
   lofty ideas that he wished to express, he naturally resorted to Aramaic
   usage, which was easier for him. The facts in the case do not prove
   that the Greek of the Gospel is superior to that of the Apocalypse. In
   the former writing the author does not attempt so much as in the
   latter; the language of the one is far simpler than that of the other.

  DESTINATION

   The apostle addresses the Apocalypse to "the seven churches which are
   in Asia," 1:4. Undoubtedly this number is not exhaustive but
   representative of the Church in general, the number seven, which is the
   number of completeness, forming a very important element in the texture
   of this prophetic writing. These churches are types that are constantly
   repeated in history. There are always some churches that are
   predominantly good and pure like those of Smyrna and Philadelphia, and
   therefore need no reproof but only words of encouragement; but there
   are also constantly others like Sardis and Laodicea in which evil
   preponderates, and that deserve severe censure and an earnest call to
   repentance. Probably the greater number of churches, however, will
   always resemble those of Ephesus, Pergamus and Thyatire in that good
   and evil are about equally balanced in their circle, so that they call
   for both commendation and censure, promise and threatening. But while
   there is a great difference both in the outward circumstances and in
   the internal condition of these churches, they all form a part of the
   militant Church that has a severe struggle on earth in which it must
   strive to overcome by faith (notice the constantly repeated ho nichon)
   and that may expect the coming of the Lord to reward her according to
   her works.

  COMPOSITION

   1. Occasion and Purpose. The historical condition that led to the
   composition of the Apocalypse was one of increasing hardships for the
   Church and of an imminent life and death struggle with the hostile
   world, represented by the Roman empire. The demand for the deification
   of the emperor became ever more insistent and was extended to the
   provinces. Domitian was one of the emperors who delighted to be styled
   dominus et deus. To refuse this homage was disloyalty and treason; and
   since the Christians as a body were bound to ignore this demand from
   the nature of their religion, they stood condemned as constituting a
   danger to the empire. Persecution was the inevitable result and had
   already been suffered by the churches, when this book was written,
   while still greater persecution was in store for them. Hence they
   needed consolation and the Lord directed John to address the Apocalypse
   to them. Cf. especially Ramsay, The Church in the Roman Empire pp.
   252-319.

   It is but natural therefore that the contents of the book are mainly
   consolatory. It aims at revealing to the servants of Christ, i. e. to
   Christians in general the things that must shortIy (not quickly, but
   before long) come to pass. This note of time is to be considered as a
   prophetic formula, in connection with the fact that one day is with the
   Lord as a thousand years and thousand years as one day. The central
   theme of the book is, "I come quickly," and in the elaboration of this
   theme Christ is pictured as coming in terrible judgments on the world,
   and in the great final struggle in which He is conqueror, and after
   which the ecclesia militans is transformed into the ecclesia
   triumphans.

   2. Time and Place. There are especially two opinions as to the
   composition of the Apocalypse, viz. (1) that it was written toward the
   end of Domitians reign, about A. D. 95 or 96; and (2) that it was
   composed between the death of Nero in the year 68 and the destruction
   of Jerusalem.

   (1). The late date was formerly the generally accepted time of
   composition (Hengstenberg, Lange, Alford, Godet e. a.) and, although
   for a time the earlier date was looked upon with great favor, there is
   now a noticeable return to the old position (Holtzmann, Warfield,
   Ramsay, Porter (Hastings D. B.), Moffat (Exp. Gk. Test.) e. a.). This
   view is favored by the following considerations: (a) The testimony of
   antiquity. While there are few witnesses that refer the book to an
   earlier date, the majority, and among them Irenaeus whose testimony
   should not lightly be set aside, point to the time of Domitian. (b) The
   antithesis of the Roman empire to the Church presupposed in the
   Apocalypse. The persecution of Nero was a purely local and somewhat
   private affair. The Church did not stand opposed to the empire as
   representing the world until the first century was approaching its
   close; and the Apocalypse already looks back on a period of
   persecution. Moreover we know that banishment was a common punishment
   in the time of Domitian. (c) The existence and condition of the seven
   churches in Asia. The utter silence of Acts and of the Epistles
   regarding the churches of Smyrna, Philadelphia, Sardis, Pergamus and
   Thyatira favors the supposition that they were founded after the death
   of Paul. And the condition of these churches presupposes a longer
   period of existence than the earlier date will allow. Ephesus has
   already left her first love; in Sardis and Laodicea spiritual life has
   almost become extinct; the Nicolaitans, who are not mentioned elsewhere
   in the New Testament, have already made their pernicious influence felt
   in the churches of Ephesus and Pergamus, while similar mischief was
   done in Thyatira by the woman Jesebel. Moreover Laodicea, which was
   destroyed by an earthquake in the 6th (Tactitus) or in the 10th
   (Eusebius) year of Nero, is here described as boasting of her wealth
   and self-sufficiency.

   (2). Against this and in favor of the earlier date defended by
   Dusterdieck, Weiss, Guericke, Schaff, are urged: (a) The late testimony
   of the Syrian Apocalypse that John was banished in the time of Nero,
   and the obscure and self-contradictory passage in Epiphanius that
   places the banishment in the time of Claudius. Cf. Alford, Prolegamena
   Section II. 14, where the weakness of this testimony is pointed out.
   (b) The supposed references in the Apocalypse to the destruction of the
   Holy City as still future in 11^1,2,13. But it is quite evident that
   these passages must be understood symbolically. Regarded as historical
   predictions of the destruction of Jerusalem they did not come true, for
   according to 11: 2 only the outer court would be abolished, and
   according to vs. 13 merely the tenth part of the city would be
   destroyed, and that not by Rome but by an earthquake. (c) The supposed
   indications of the reigning emperor in 13:1 ff., especially in
   connection with the symbolical interpretation of the number 666 as
   being equal to the Hebrew form of Nero Ceasar. But the great diversity
   of opinion as to the correct interpretation of these passages, even
   among the advocates of the early date, proves that their support is
   very questionable. (d) The difference between the language of this book
   and that of the Gospel of John is thought to favor an early date, but,
   as we have already pointed out, this is not necessarily the case.

   It is impossible to tell, whether John wrote the Apocalypse while he
   was still on the island of Patmos, or after his return from there. The
   statement in 10: 4 does not prove the former theory, nor the past
   tenses in 1:2, 9, the latter.

   3. Method. Of late several theories have been broached to explain the
   origin the Apocalypse in such a manner as to account satisfactorily for
   the literary and psychological features of the book. (1) The
   Incorporation theory holds to the unity of the Apocalypse, but believes
   that several older fragments of Jewish or Christian origin are
   incorporated in it (Weizsacker, Sabatier, Bousset, McGiffert, Moffat,
   Baljon). (2) The Revision-hypothesis assumes that the book has been
   subject to one or more revisions, (Erbes, Briggs, Barth). The last
   named author is of the opinion that John himself in the time of
   Domitian revised an Apocalypse which he had written under Nero. (3) The
   Compilation-hypothesis teaches that two or more sources fairly complete
   in themselves have been pieced together by a redactor or redactors,
   (Weyland, Spitta, Volter at least in part). (4) The Jewish and
   Christian hypothesis maintains that the groundwork of the Apocalypse
   was a Jewish writing in the Aramaic language, written about 65-70, that
   was later translated and edited by a Christian (Vischer, Harnack,
   Martineau). In connection with these we can only say that to us these
   theories seem unnecessary and in the majority of cases very arbitrary.
   There is every reason to maintain the unity of the Apocalypse. The use
   of written sources in its composition is an unproved assumption; but
   the author was evidently impregnated with Old Testament ideas and modes
   of expression, and drew largely on the storehouse of his memory in the
   symbolic description of the supernatural scenes that were presented to
   his vision.

  INTERPRETATION

   Various principles of interpretation have been adopted with reference
   to this book in the course of time:

   1. The older expositors and the majority of orthodox Protestant
   commentators adopted the Continuist (kirchengeschichtliche)
   interpretation, which proceeds on the assumption that the book contains
   a prophetic compendium of Church history from the first Christian
   century until the return of Christ, so that some of its prophecies have
   now been realized and others still await fulfilment. This theory
   disregards the contemporaneous character of the seven series of visions
   and has often led to all sorts of vain speculations and calculations as
   to the historical facts in which particular prophecies are fulfilled.

   2. In course of time the Futurist (endgeschichtliche) interpretation
   found favor with some, according to which all or nearly all the events
   described in the Apocalypse must be referred to the period immediately
   preceding the return of Christ (Zahn, Kliefoth). Some of the Futurists
   are so extreme that they deny even the past existence of the seven
   Asiatic churches and declare that we may yet expect them to arise in
   the last days. As a matter of course this interpretation fails to do
   justice to the historical element in the book.

   3. Present day critical scholars are generally inclined to adopt the
   Praeterist (zeitgeschichtliche) interpretation, which holds that the
   view of the Seer was limited to matters within his own historical
   horizon, and that the book refers principally to the triumph of
   Christianity over Judaeism and Paganism, signalized in the downfall of
   Jerusalem and Rome. On this view all or almost all the prophecies
   contained in the book have already been fulfilled (Bleek, Duisterdieck,
   Davidson, F. C. Porter e. a.). But this theory does not do justice to
   the prophetic element in the Apocalypse.

   Though all these views must be regarded as one-sided, each one contains
   an element of truth that must be taken in consideration in the
   interpretation of the book. The descriptions in it certainly had a
   point of contact in the historical present of the Seer, but they go far
   beyond that present; they certainly pertain to historical conditions of
   the Church of God, and conditions that will exist in all ages, but
   instead of arising successively in the order in which they are
   described in the Apocalypse, they make their appearance in every age
   contemporaneously; and finally they will certainly issue in a terrific
   struggle immediately preceding the parousia of Christ and in the
   transcendent glory of the bride of the Lamb.

  INSPIRATION

   The particular form of inspiration in which the writer shared was the
   prophetic, as is perfectly evident from the book itself. The author,
   while in the Spirit, was the recipient of divine revelations, 1^1,10,
   and received his intelligence by means of visions, in part at least
   mediated and interpreted by angels, 1^10,19, 4^1,2, 5^1, 6^1, 17^7-18,
   21^9. He received the command to write and to prophecy from God
   himself, 1^19, 10^4,11, 14^13. And the "I" speaking in the book is
   sometimes that of the Lord himself and sometimes that of the prophet,
   which is also a characteristic mark of the prophetic inspiration. In
   chapters 2 and 3 f. i. the Lord speaks in the first person, and again
   in 16:15 and 22:7.

  CANONICAL SIGNIFICANCE

   The canonical authority of the apocalypse has never been seriously
   doubted by the Church. Hermas, Papias and Melito recognized its
   canonicity, and according to Eusebius Theophilus cited passages from
   it. The three great witnesses of the end of the second century all
   quote it by name and thus recognize its authority. Hippolytus and
   Origen also regarded it as canonical. Similarly Victorinus, Ambrose,
   Jerome and Augustine. Gradually, however, the fact that Millenarians
   found their chief support in the book, made it obnoxious to some of the
   Church fathers, who deemed it inexpedient to read it in the churches.
   This explains, why it is absent from some MSS. and from some of the
   catalogues of the ancient councils.

   The book is primarily a book of consolation for the militant Church in
   its struggles with the hostile world and with the powers of darkness.
   It directs the glance of the struggling, suffering, sorrowing and often
   persecuted Church toward its glorious future. Its central teaching is,
   "I come quickly!" And while it reveals the future history of the Church
   as one of continual struggle, it unfolds in majestic visions the coming
   of the Lord, which issues in the destruction of the wicked and of the
   evil One, and in the everlasting bliss of the faithful witnesses of
   Jesus Christ. Hence the book comes to the enemies of God's Kingdom with
   words of solemn warning and with threatenings of future punishment,
   while it encourages the followers of the Lord to ever greater
   faithfulness, and opens up to them bright visions of the future, thus
   inspiring the Church's constant prayer: "Even so, come, Lord Jesus!"
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]14

   1 Kings

   [2]21

   2 Kings

   [3]5:5-7

   1 Chronicles

   [4]5

   Isaiah

   [5]6   [6]13   [7]14   [8]40

   Jeremiah

   [9]29:1   [10]50   [11]51

   Ezekiel

   [12]1   [13]10   [14]40

   Daniel

   [15]7   [16]10   [17]11   [18]11:1

   Matthew

   [19]3   [20]4:18-19   [21]5   [22]5   [23]5:7   [24]5:12   [25]7:7
   [26]7:24   [27]9   [28]10   [29]10:2-4   [30]10:3   [31]10:19-20
   [32]12   [33]12:46   [34]12:46   [35]13:55   [36]13:55   [37]13:55
   [38]13:55   [39]14   [40]14:22   [41]14:28-31   [42]16:16   [43]16:17
   [44]16:18   [45]16:22   [46]17   [47]17   [48]17:24-25   [49]20
   [50]23:12   [51]24   [52]24   [53]26   [54]26   [55]26:69-75   [56]27
   [57]27   [58]27   [59]27   [60]27   [61]56

   Mark

   [62]1   [63]1   [64]1:20   [65]2:14-15   [66]3   [67]3   [68]3:17
   [69]3:18   [70]3:18   [71]3:31   [72]6   [73]6   [74]6   [75]6:3
   [76]6:3   [77]9   [78]10   [79]11:23   [80]12:31   [81]15   [82]16
   [83]16:1   [84]40

   Luke

   [85]3:1   [86]4   [87]4:31   [88]4:38   [89]5   [90]6:14   [91]6:15
   [92]6:16   [93]6:16   [94]6:16   [95]8   [96]8:19   [97]8:19   [98]9
   [99]9   [100]9:49   [101]10   [102]10   [103]10:19   [104]17:20-37
   [105]21:20   [106]22   [107]22:8   [108]24:10   [109]24:10   [110]67

   John

   [111]1   [112]1   [113]1   [114]1:1   [115]1:1-2   [116]1:4
   [117]1:14   [118]1:29   [119]2:12   [120]3   [121]3:36   [122]5:8
   [123]5:32   [124]5:34   [125]5:36   [126]6   [127]7   [128]7:3
   [129]7:5   [130]7:5   [131]8:44   [132]8:47   [133]11:9-10
   [134]11:51-52   [135]13:6   [136]13:34   [137]14   [138]14:12
   [139]14:13-14   [140]14:16   [141]14:26   [142]14:26   [143]14:26
   [144]15:12-13   [145]15:23-24   [146]16   [147]16:12   [148]16:13-14
   [149]16:25   [150]17   [151]17:3   [152]18:10   [153]18:10   [154]19
   [155]19   [156]19:34-35   [157]20   [158]20:31   [159]21:15
   [160]21:15-17

   Acts

   [161]1   [162]1   [163]1   [164]1   [165]1:1   [166]1:13   [167]1:14
   [168]2   [169]2:4   [170]2:10   [171]2:14-36   [172]3   [173]4
   [174]4   [175]6   [176]7   [177]8:14   [178]8:26   [179]9   [180]9
   [181]9   [182]9:22   [183]9:26   [184]10:1-48   [185]11   [186]11
   [187]12:1-17   [188]12:12   [189]12:12   [190]12:12   [191]12:17
   [192]12:17   [193]13   [194]13   [195]13   [196]13   [197]13:1
   [198]14   [199]15   [200]15   [201]15   [202]15   [203]15   [204]15
   [205]15   [206]15   [207]15   [208]15:13   [209]15:13   [210]15:14
   [211]15:14-29   [212]15:17   [213]15:22   [214]15:25   [215]15:29
   [216]16   [217]16   [218]16   [219]16   [220]16   [221]16   [222]16:1
   [223]16:10   [224]16:12   [225]17:4   [226]17:5-9   [227]17:6
   [228]17:8   [229]17:14   [230]18   [231]18   [232]18   [233]18
   [234]18   [235]18   [236]18   [237]18   [238]18:1   [239]18:1-8
   [240]18:8   [241]18:12-17   [242]18:18   [243]18:19   [244]19
   [245]19   [246]19   [247]19   [248]19   [249]19:10   [250]20
   [251]20   [252]20   [253]20   [254]20   [255]20   [256]20   [257]20
   [258]20   [259]20:4   [260]21:18   [261]23:26   [262]24   [263]24:23
   [264]26:4   [265]28   [266]28   [267]28:16   [268]28:25

   Romans

   [269]2:16   [270]3   [271]4   [272]6:6-8   [273]6:17   [274]7
   [275]8:14-17   [276]8:19-22   [277]9   [278]10:8   [279]11   [280]12
   [281]12   [282]12   [283]12   [284]12   [285]12:2   [286]12:10
   [287]13   [288]15   [289]15   [290]16   [291]16   [292]16   [293]16
   [294]16   [295]16:13   [296]16:13   [297]16:22   [298]16:23

   1 Corinthians

   [299]1   [300]1   [301]1   [302]1:12   [303]2   [304]2:4   [305]2:10
   [306]2:11-13   [307]2:13   [308]4   [309]4:17   [310]4:17   [311]4:17
   [312]5   [313]5   [314]5   [315]5   [316]5:9   [317]8:6   [318]9
   [319]9   [320]9:5   [321]11   [322]11:1   [323]11:21-22   [324]12
   [325]14   [326]15   [327]15   [328]15   [329]15   [330]15   [331]15
   [332]15   [333]15   [334]15   [335]15:7   [336]15:10   [337]15:10
   [338]16   [339]16   [340]16   [341]16   [342]16   [343]16
   [344]16:10   [345]16:10   [346]16:14   [347]16:19   [348]16:19

   2 Corinthians

   [349]1   [350]1:1   [351]1:1   [352]1:15-18   [353]1:15-24   [354]2
   [355]2   [356]2:4   [357]2:9   [358]2:12-13   [359]2:13   [360]2:17
   [361]3:1   [362]4:4   [363]7   [364]7   [365]7   [366]8   [367]8
   [368]8:1   [369]8:1   [370]8:1   [371]8:16   [372]8:16   [373]10
   [374]10   [375]10   [376]10:10   [377]11   [378]11:1-4   [379]11:9
   [380]12:18   [381]13   [382]13

   Galatians

   [383]1   [384]1   [385]1   [386]1   [387]1   [388]1   [389]1
   [390]1:12   [391]1:23   [392]2   [393]2   [394]2   [395]2   [396]2
   [397]2   [398]2:1   [399]2:3   [400]2:12   [401]2:12   [402]3
   [403]3:6   [404]4   [405]4   [406]4:5-7   [407]4:13   [408]4:13
   [409]5:16-17   [410]6   [411]6:16

   Ephesians

   [412]1:3   [413]1:17   [414]1:19   [415]2   [416]2   [417]2:3
   [418]3   [419]4:11   [420]4:17   [421]4:18   [422]6   [423]6
   [424]6:19-20   [425]78

   Philippians

   [426]1   [427]1   [428]1   [429]1   [430]1   [431]1   [432]1:14
   [433]1:27   [434]2   [435]2   [436]4   [437]4:16   [438]4:22

   Colossians

   [439]1:1   [440]2   [441]4   [442]4   [443]4   [444]4   [445]4
   [446]4:10   [447]4:10   [448]4:10-14   [449]4:11   [450]4:14
   [451]4:14   [452]4:14   [453]4:16   [454]4:16   [455]4:17

   1 Thessalonians

   [456]1:9   [457]2   [458]2:13   [459]3   [460]3   [461]3   [462]4
   [463]4:13-18

   2 Thessalonians

   [464]2:1-12   [465]2:15   [466]3   [467]3   [468]3:17

   1 Timothy

   [469]1   [470]1   [471]1   [472]1   [473]1   [474]1   [475]1   [476]1
   [477]1   [478]1   [479]1:10   [480]1:15   [481]3   [482]3:1
   [483]3:14   [484]4:6   [485]4:12   [486]4:12   [487]4:14   [488]5
   [489]5   [490]5:18   [491]5:18   [492]6   [493]6:11   [494]6:11
   [495]6:20   [496]6:20

   2 Timothy

   [497]1   [498]1   [499]1   [500]1   [501]1   [502]1   [503]1
   [504]1:3   [505]1:6   [506]1:12   [507]1:14   [508]1:15-18   [509]2
   [510]2:16   [511]2:18   [512]2:22   [513]3   [514]3:5   [515]3:10
   [516]3:12   [517]4   [518]4   [519]4   [520]4   [521]4   [522]4
   [523]4   [524]4:8   [525]4:10-12   [526]4:11   [527]4:11   [528]4:11
   [529]4:11   [530]4:13   [531]4:14   [532]4:16-17   [533]4:19

   Titus

   [534]1   [535]1   [536]1   [537]1   [538]1   [539]1   [540]1
   [541]1:1   [542]2   [543]2:12   [544]2:15   [545]3   [546]3
   [547]3:12   [548]3:12-13   [549]3:12-15

   Philemon

   [550]1:1   [551]1:9   [552]1:13   [553]1:19   [554]1:22   [555]1:22
   [556]1:22   [557]1:22   [558]1:24   [559]1:24   [560]1:24

   Hebrews

   [561]5:12

   James

   [562]1:1   [563]1:2-3   [564]1:16   [565]1:19   [566]1:21   [567]1:27
   [568]1:27   [569]2   [570]4:6-7   [571]4:10   [572]5

   1 Peter

   [573]1   [574]1   [575]1   [576]1:1   [577]4:11   [578]5:13
   [579]5:13

   2 Peter

   [580]1   [581]3:1   [582]3:15-16

   1 John

   [583]1   [584]1:1   [585]1:1-3   [586]2   [587]4

   2 John

   [588]1:4-9

   3 John

   [589]1:1   [590]1:9   [591]1:11

   Jude

   [592]1:6   [593]1:9

   Revelation

   [594]19:13

   2 Esdras

   [595]5:42
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Matthew

   [596]0-0

   Mark

   [597]0-0

   Luke

   [598]0-0

   John

   [599]0-0

   Acts

   [600]0-0

   Romans

   [601]0-0

   1 Corinthians

   [602]0-0

   2 Corinthians

   [603]0-0

   Galatians

   [604]0-0

   Ephesians

   [605]0-0

   Philippians

   [606]0-0

   Colossians

   [607]0-0

   1 Thessalonians

   [608]0-0

   2 Thessalonians

   [609]0-0

   1 Timothy

   [610]0-0

   2 Timothy

   [611]0-0

   Titus

   [612]0-0

   Philemon

   [613]1

   Hebrews

   [614]0-0

   James

   [615]0-0

   1 Peter

   [616]1

   2 Peter

   [617]1

   1 John

   [618]0-0

   2 John

   [619]1

   3 John

   [620]1

   Jude

   [621]1

   Revelation

   [622]0-0
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.13
   2. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=0#x-p2.1
   3. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=5&scrV=5#x-p2.2
   4. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv-p64.3
   5. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.6
   6. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.1
   7. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.1
   8. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.3
   9. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=1#x-p2.3
  10. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=50&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.2
  11. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.2
  12. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.7
  13. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=10&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.7
  14. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=40&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.4
  15. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.5
  16. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=0#xxxiii-p11.5
  17. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=0#xx-p13.1
  18. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=1#xx-p12.1
  19. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vi-p10.1
  20. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=18#xxviii-p12.5
  21. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vii-p14.6
  22. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xxvii-p4.2
  23. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xxvii-p4.7
  24. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xxvii-p4.1
  25. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#xxvii-p4.3
  26. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=24#xxvii-p4.5
  27. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v-p14.1
  28. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=0#xxxii-p6.5
  29. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=2#v-p10.1
  30. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=3#xxvii-p8.1
  31. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iv-p54.1
  32. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.33
  33. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=46#xxvii-p8.6
  34. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=46#xxvii-p8.28
  35. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=55#xxvii-p8.10
  36. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=55#xxvii-p8.22
  37. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=55#xxxii-p6.1
  38. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=55#xxxii-p7.1
  39. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=0#vi-p18.2
  40. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=22#iv-p12.1
  41. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#xxviii-p13.9
  42. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=16#xxviii-p13.5
  43. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#xxviii-p12.3
  44. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#vi-p18.5
  45. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=22#xxviii-p13.6
  46. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=0#vi-p18.3
  47. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.8
  48. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=24#xxviii-p13.1
  49. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=0#viii-p19.5
  50. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=12#xxvii-p4.8
  51. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#vi-p23.1
  52. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#xx-p12.2
  53. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.9
  54. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=0#xxviii-p13.10
  55. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=69#xxviii-p12.10
  56. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=0#vi-p20.2
  57. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=0#viii-p18.1
  58. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=0#viii-p18.3
  59. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.15
  60. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.18
  61. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=56&scrV=0#iv-p17.9
  62. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=0#viii-p17.2
  63. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.4
  64. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=20#viii-p18.2
  65. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v-p14.2
  66. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p10.2
  67. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.29
  68. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=17#viii-p19.1
  69. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xxvii-p8.2
  70. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xxxii-p6.6
  71. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=31#xxvii-p8.7
  72. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv-p12.2
  73. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.23
  74. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xxxii-p7.2
  75. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xxvii-p8.11
  76. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xxxii-p6.2
  77. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=0#viii-p19.2
  78. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=0#viii-p19.6
  79. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=23#xxvii-p4.4
  80. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=31#xxvii-p4.6
  81. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.19
  82. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.16
  83. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=1#viii-p18.4
  84. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=40&scrV=0#iv-p17.12
  85. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi-p20.3
  86. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.36
  87. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=31#xxviii-p12.2
  88. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=38#xxviii-p12.2
  89. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v-p14.3
  90. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v-p10.3
  91. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=15#xxvii-p8.3
  92. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xxvii-p8.24
  93. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xxxii-p6.3
  94. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xxxii-p6.7
  95. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.7
  96. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=19#xxvii-p8.8
  97. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=19#xxvii-p8.30
  98. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv-p12.3
  99. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=0#viii-p19.4
 100. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=49#viii-p19.3
 101. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iv-p64.16
 102. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=0#ix-p26.2
 103. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=19#vi-p30.1
 104. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=20#xx-p12.3
 105. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=20#ix-p23.2
 106. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=0#xxviii-p13.2
 107. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=8#vi-p18.7
 108. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=10#xxvii-p8.17
 109. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=10#xxvii-p8.20
 110. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=67&scrV=0#iv-p17.15
 111. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#viii-p17.3
 112. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.1
 113. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.6
 114. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxxiii-p14.1
 115. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxx-p5.10
 116. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xxx-p5.10
 117. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xxx-p5.10
 118. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#xxxiii-p14.7
 119. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xxvii-p8.5
 120. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#viii-p3.2
 121. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#xxx-p5.68
 122. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xxx-p5.55
 123. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=32#xxx-p5.55
 124. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=34#xxx-p5.55
 125. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=36#xxx-p5.55
 126. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xxviii-p13.4
 127. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.1
 128. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=3#xxvii-p8.9
 129. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=5#xxvii-p8.12
 130. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=5#xxxii-p7.3
 131. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#xxx-p5.100
 132. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=47#xxx-p5.29
 133. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=9#xxx-p5.62
 134. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=51#xxx-p5.36
 135. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=6#xxviii-p13.8
 136. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#xxx-p5.49
 137. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=0#x-p5.5
 138. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=12#iv-p68.3
 139. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=13#xxx-p5.94
 140. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#xxx-p5.23
 141. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#iv-p54.2
 142. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#iv-p58.2
 143. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#xxx-p5.88
 144. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=12#xxx-p5.16
 145. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=23#xxx-p5.75
 146. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xxxiii-p14.11
 147. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iv-p68.2
 148. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iv-p54.3
 149. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=25#iv-p68.1
 150. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv-p63.1
 151. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#xxx-p5.106
 152. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=10#xxviii-p13.3
 153. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=10#xxviii-p13.7
 154. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.14
 155. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.21
 156. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=34#xxx-p5.42
 157. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iv-p8.3
 158. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=31#xxx-p5.81
 159. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#xxxiii-p14.6
 160. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#xxviii-p12.11
 161. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.25
 162. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.12
 163. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxxii-p6.4
 164. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxxii-p6.8
 165. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii-p19.2
 166. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xxvii-p8.4
 167. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xxxii-p7.4
 168. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxiv-p11.2
 169. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv-p54.4
 170. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xii-p11.1
 171. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xxviii-p12.13
 172. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.14
 173. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii-p84.3
 174. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vi-p14.3
 175. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xxi-p8.2
 176. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v-p22.3
 177. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=14#xxviii-p12.15
 178. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=26#ix-p23.3
 179. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#xi-p7.4
 180. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#xv-p9.1
 181. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.17
 182. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=22#xxviii-p12.16
 183. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=26#xv-p9.2
 184. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=1#xxviii-p12.18
 185. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=0#xi-p7.6
 186. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=0#xii-p12.1
 187. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xxviii-p12.19
 188. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vi-p13.1
 189. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vi-p14.1
 190. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=12#xxviii-p11.1
 191. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=17#xii-p10.1
 192. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=17#xxvii-p7.3
 193. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vii-p16.2
 194. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#xv-p16.5
 195. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#xv-p17.1
 196. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#xv-p17.2
 197. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=1#xii-p12.2
 198. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=0#xxi-p8.3
 199. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#ix-p15.2
 200. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xi-p6.5
 201. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xi-p6.6
 202. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xi-p7.2
 203. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.9
 204. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.11
 205. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.17
 206. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.29
 207. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.20
 208. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=13#xxvii-p7.7
 209. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=13#xxvii-p7.19
 210. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=14#xxvii-p7.22
 211. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=14#xxvii-p12.6
 212. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=17#xxvii-p7.15
 213. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=22#xxvii-p15.2
 214. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=25#xxvii-p7.32
 215. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=29#xxvii-p7.26
 216. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xi-p6.4
 217. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xii-p10.2
 218. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xv-p15.5
 219. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xv-p16.6
 220. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xviii-p14.2
 221. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xxii-p10.3
 222. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=1#xxii-p10.1
 223. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=10#vii-p16.3
 224. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=12#xvii-p16.1
 225. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=4#xix-p16.1
 226. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=5#xix-p16.3
 227. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=6#xix-p15.2
 228. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=8#xix-p15.2
 229. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=14#xxii-p10.4
 230. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=0#xiii-p14.2
 231. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=0#xiii-p14.5
 232. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=0#xv-p15.7
 233. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=0#xv-p16.7
 234. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=0#xix-p19.2
 235. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=0#xxii-p16.1
 236. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=0#xxiv-p7.1
 237. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=0#xxiv-p13.1
 238. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=1#xiii-p22.1
 239. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=1#xiii-p13.1
 240. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=8#xiii-p14.3
 241. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=12#xx-p17.3
 242. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=18#xiii-p13.2
 243. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=19#xii-p28.1
 244. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#xiii-p26.2
 245. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#xxii-p10.7
 246. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#xxii-p10.8
 247. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#xxii-p16.2
 248. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#xxxi-p12.2
 249. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=10#xviii-p14.4
 250. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#vii-p16.4
 251. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xi-p6.2
 252. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xi-p6.3
 253. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xiii-p22.2
 254. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xv-p16.13
 255. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xvi-p19.4
 256. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xix-p16.4
 257. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xxi-p5.6
 258. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xxii-p10.12
 259. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=4#xii-p22.3
 260. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=18#xxvii-p7.8
 261. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=26#xxvii-p7.13
 262. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=0#xi-p6.1
 263. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=23#xvi-p19.2
 264. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=4#iv-p64.8
 265. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=0#xii-p12.4
 266. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=0#xxi-p5.1
 267. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=16#xvi-p19.3
 268. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=25#xii-p12.3
 269. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iv-p3.5
 270. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p22.4
 271. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xv-p5.1
 272. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=6#xv-p5.6
 273. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=17#xxi-p7.6
 274. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#xvii-p14.2
 275. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#xv-p5.4
 276. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=19#xviii-p13.1
 277. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=0#xix-p11.1
 278. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#xxxii-p8.2
 279. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#xviii-p13.4
 280. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#xxi-p7.8
 281. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#xxviii-p8.1
 282. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#xxviii-p8.2
 283. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#xxviii-p8.4
 284. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#xxviii-p8.5
 285. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#xxviii-p8.3
 286. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xxviii-p8.6
 287. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=0#xv-p5.8
 288. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xv-p16.12
 289. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxi-p6.3
 290. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xiii-p14.7
 291. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xxi-p6.14
 292. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xxi-p8.8
 293. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xxii-p10.11
 294. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xxii-p12.7
 295. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=13#vi-p20.4
 296. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=13#xxxi-p10.3
 297. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=22#x-p32.4
 298. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=23#xxxi-p12.3
 299. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xii-p22.2
 300. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xiii-p14.6
 301. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxxi-p12.4
 302. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xiii-p14.4
 303. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xix-p11.2
 304. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xix-p11.5
 305. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#x-p7.1
 306. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv-p54.5
 307. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=13#x-p7.1
 308. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xiv-p9.7
 309. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xxii-p10.9
 310. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xxii-p12.12
 311. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xxii-p16.3
 312. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xiii-p23.1
 313. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xiii-p26.4
 314. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xiv-p9.3
 315. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xiv-p17.1
 316. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=9#x-p31.1
 317. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=6#xviii-p13.2
 318. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=0#xv-p16.16
 319. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.21
 320. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=5#xxxii-p7.5
 321. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vii-p17.2
 322. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=1#xix-p11.4
 323. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=21#xiii-p14.8
 324. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=0#xiii-p20.3
 325. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=0#x-p7.2
 326. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xi-p4.1
 327. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xiii-p20.2
 328. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xiv-p19.2
 329. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xvii-p14.1
 330. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xvii-p15.1
 331. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xviii-p13.5
 332. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxvi-p11.2
 333. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxvi-p11.3
 334. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.2
 335. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=7#xxvii-p8.34
 336. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#xi-p4.4
 337. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#xi-p4.6
 338. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xiii-p26.3
 339. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xiv-p9.1
 340. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xv-p16.9
 341. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xv-p16.10
 342. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xv-p16.14
 343. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xxii-p10.13
 344. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=10#xxii-p12.3
 345. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=10#xxiv-p9.3
 346. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=14#xiv-p9.5
 347. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=19#xii-p28.2
 348. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=19#xv-p16.1
 349. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xiii-p23.2
 350. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xv-p16.3
 351. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxii-p10.10
 352. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xiii-p23.3
 353. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xiv-p9.2
 354. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xiii-p22.3
 355. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xiv-p9.4
 356. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xiv-p12.2
 357. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xiv-p12.2
 358. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xiv-p13.1
 359. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xxiv-p8.5
 360. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=17#xix-p11.6
 361. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xxvii-p15.3
 362. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#xviii-p13.3
 363. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=0#x-p31.2
 364. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=0#xiii-p23.4
 365. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=0#xiv-p11.2
 366. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=0#xiv-p9.6
 367. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=0#xix-p16.5
 368. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#xiv-p19.3
 369. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#xv-p16.2
 370. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#xv-p16.11
 371. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=16#xxiv-p8.6
 372. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=16#xxiv-p9.4
 373. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#xiii-p20.1
 374. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#xiv-p9.8
 375. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#xiv-p14.1
 376. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=10#xi-p3.1
 377. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=0#xi-p4.5
 378. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=1#xvii-p14.3
 379. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=9#xvii-p19.2
 380. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=18#xxiv-p10.1
 381. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv-p54.6
 382. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#x-p7.3
 383. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xi-p7.3
 384. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xi-p7.5
 385. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xvii-p14.4
 386. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xvii-p15.2
 387. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p7.9
 388. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.4
 389. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.33
 390. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xxvi-p11.5
 391. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=23#xxxii-p8.3
 392. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#ix-p15.3
 393. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xi-p7.1
 394. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxiv-p8.3
 395. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.5
 396. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxviii-p12.22
 397. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxviii-p14.1
 398. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxiv-p8.1
 399. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xxiv-p8.1
 400. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xxvii-p7.6
 401. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xxvii-p15.4
 402. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xii-p13.2
 403. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#xv-p5.2
 404. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xv-p20.7
 405. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxviii-p19.3
 406. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#xv-p5.5
 407. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=13#xv-p16.15
 408. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=13#xv-p20.4
 409. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=16#xv-p5.9
 410. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=0#x-p32.3
 411. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xxvii-p13.5
 412. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#xxviii-p8.7
 413. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=17#xxviii-p19.5
 414. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=19#xxviii-p8.8
 415. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxviii-p8.11
 416. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxviii-p19.7
 417. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xxviii-p8.9
 418. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xi-p4.2
 419. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#xxi-p8.4
 420. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xxviii-p8.10
 421. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=18#xxviii-p19.4
 422. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xvi-p17.2
 423. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xvi-p18.3
 424. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=19#xvi-p19.1
 425. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=78&scrV=0#xviii-p6.1
 426. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p5.2
 427. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p5.9
 428. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p6.1
 429. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p7.10
 430. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxii-p10.14
 431. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxii-p12.9
 432. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xvi-p19.5
 433. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=27#xxxii-p8.4
 434. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xvi-p17.6
 435. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xvii-p24.1
 436. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xvi-p19.6
 437. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xix-p14.2
 438. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=22#xii-p28.4
 439. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxii-p10.15
 440. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xviii-p14.3
 441. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xvi-p13.6
 442. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xvi-p14.2
 443. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xvi-p16.2
 444. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xvi-p17.3
 445. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxv-p10.1
 446. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi-p14.4
 447. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi-p23.3
 448. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=10#xxiii-p9.3
 449. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii-p16.1
 450. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii-p16.1
 451. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii-p16.5
 452. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=14#ix-p11.3
 453. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=16#x-p31.3
 454. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xvi-p20.1
 455. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xxv-p10.2
 456. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xix-p16.2
 457. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxii-p11.5
 458. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#x-p7.4
 459. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xix-p15.4
 460. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xxii-p10.6
 461. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xxii-p12.8
 462. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxviii-p19.6
 463. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#xx-p11.1
 464. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxi-p8.1
 465. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=15#xx-p17.2
 466. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xix-p14.1
 467. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xix-p16.6
 468. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=17#x-p32.1
 469. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xi-p4.3
 470. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p4.3
 471. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p4.11
 472. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p4.27
 473. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p6.4
 474. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p6.6
 475. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p9.1
 476. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxii-p10.17
 477. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxii-p11.3
 478. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxii-p12.10
 479. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xxi-p4.12
 480. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xxi-p7.4
 481. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xxi-p4.23
 482. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xxi-p4.19
 483. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xxi-p6.8
 484. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xxi-p4.37
 485. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=12#xxii-p12.4
 486. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=12#xxiv-p9.1
 487. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#xxii-p11.1
 488. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xxi-p4.21
 489. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xxi-p4.22
 490. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv-p64.15
 491. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=18#ix-p26.1
 492. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xxi-p4.26
 493. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=11#xxi-p4.31
 494. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=11#xxi-p4.43
 495. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=20#xxi-p4.34
 496. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=20#xxi-p4.40
 497. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p6.5
 498. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p6.17
 499. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxii-p10.2
 500. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxii-p12.1
 501. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxii-p12.6
 502. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxii-p12.11
 503. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxvi-p11.1
 504. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#xxi-p4.4
 505. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xxii-p11.2
 506. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xxi-p4.35
 507. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xxi-p4.35
 508. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xxi-p3.1
 509. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxii-p12.5
 510. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=16#xxi-p4.41
 511. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=18#xxii-p13.2
 512. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=22#xxi-p4.32
 513. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xxi-p4.44
 514. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=5#xxi-p4.5
 515. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=10#xxi-p4.38
 516. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xxi-p4.6
 517. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxi-p2.1
 518. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxi-p4.14
 519. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxi-p5.4
 520. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxi-p6.11
 521. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxi-p6.13
 522. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxi-p6.15
 523. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xxii-p11.4
 524. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#xxi-p7.5
 525. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#xxiii-p9.4
 526. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vi-p14.6
 527. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vi-p14.8
 528. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii-p16.7
 529. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=11#ix-p11.5
 530. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=13#xxi-p6.12
 531. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#xxi-p6.9
 532. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xxi-p6.18
 533. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=19#xii-p28.3
 534. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p4.15
 535. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p4.20
 536. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p4.24
 537. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p6.7
 538. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxi-p8.7
 539. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxiv-p8.2
 540. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxiv-p8.7
 541. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxi-p4.7
 542. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxii-p9.1
 543. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xxi-p4.8
 544. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=15#xxiv-p9.2
 545. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xxi-p2.2
 546. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xxi-p9.3
 547. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xxi-p6.16
 548. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xxi-p3.2
 549. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xxi-p6.10
 550. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxii-p10.16
 551. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xxi-p7.3
 552. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xvi-p16.3
 553. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=19#x-p32.2
 554. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=22#xvi-p17.4
 555. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=22#xvi-p18.4
 556. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=22#xxi-p5.3
 557. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=22#xxi-p6.2
 558. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vi-p14.5
 559. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii-p16.6
 560. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=24#ix-p11.4
 561. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#v-p22.5
 562. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxvii-p7.12
 563. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xxviii-p8.12
 564. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=16#xxvii-p7.31
 565. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=19#xxvii-p7.31
 566. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xxviii-p8.13
 567. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=27#xxvii-p7.21
 568. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=27#xxvii-p7.25
 569. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.18
 570. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xxviii-p8.14
 571. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=10#xxviii-p8.14
 572. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xxvii-p7.28
 573. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#x-p7.5
 574. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxvii-p13.4
 575. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxxi-p10.6
 576. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xv-p16.4
 577. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v-p22.6
 578. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vi-p14.2
 579. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vi-p14.7
 580. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi-p23.4
 581. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xxviii-p25.1
 582. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv-p64.17
 583. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv-p63.2
 584. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxxiii-p14.2
 585. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#viii-p16.2
 586. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xxxiii-p14.12
 587. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#x-p7.6
 588. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xxxi-p4.1
 589. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xxxi-p10.5
 590. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xxxi-p15.2
 591. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xxxi-p4.2
 592. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xxix-p5.1
 593. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xxix-p5.2
 594. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=13#xxxiii-p14.3
 595. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Esd&scrCh=5&scrV=42#xix-p6.1
 596. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=0&scrV=0#v-p0.1
 597. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=0&scrV=0#vi-p0.1
 598. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=0&scrV=0#vii-p0.1
 599. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=0&scrV=0#viii-p0.1
 600. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=0&scrV=0#ix-p0.1
 601. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xii-p0.1
 602. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xiii-p0.1
 603. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xiv-p0.1
 604. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xv-p0.1
 605. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xvi-p0.1
 606. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xvii-p0.1
 607. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xviii-p0.1
 608. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xix-p0.1
 609. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xx-p0.1
 610. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xxii-p0.1
 611. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xxiii-p0.1
 612. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xxiv-p0.1
 613. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxv-p0.1
 614. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xxvi-p0.1
 615. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xxvii-p0.1
 616. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxviii-p0.2
 617. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxix-p0.2
 618. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xxx-p0.1
 619. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxxi-p0.1
 620. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxxi-p0.2
 621. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xxxii-p0.1
 622. file:///ccel/b/berkhof/newtestament/cache/newtestament.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=0&scrV=0#xxxiii-p0.1
