     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Christian Nurture.
      Creator(s): Bushnell, Horace (1802-1876)
     Print Basis: Scribner, Armstrong, & Co. 1876
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

                               CHRISTIAN NURTURE.

  BY HORACE BUSHNELL.

   " And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be
   the peace of thy children."

   Isaiah, liv. 18.

  NEW YORK:

SCRIBNER, ARMSTRONG & CO.,

  1876.

   Copyright, 1876,
   BY
   MARY A. BUSHNELL.&gt;/p&gt;

   JOHN F. TROW & SON,
   PRINTERS AND BOOKBINDERS,
   205-213 East 12th St.,
   NEW YORK.
     __________________________________________________________________

Prefatory Material
     __________________________________________________________________

PUBLISHERS' PREFACE.

   There has hitherto been no uniform edition of Dr. Bushnell's works.
   Appearing at wide distances of time, they have taken such shape as
   suited the occasion; and it has for some time seemed very desirable
   that they should be brought together in a more permanent and
   serviceable form. It was Dr. Bushnell's own wish that this should be
   done; and he has largely revised his books in preparation for this end.
   It is only to be regretted that it was not reached during his lifetime
   and under his supervision; but his failing health compelled him to
   relinquish the task, which his death has left to other hands to
   complete.

   In the present volume we offer to his readers the first of the proposed
   uniform edition, in which most of his works will be included. The other
   volumes will follow this as rapidly as possible, not in the original
   order of their publication, but rather in that cf their relative
   importance to the public; and it is hoped that the edition, when
   finished, may prove so compact and attractive in form, as to fulfill
   the design so long entertained, and satisfy the expectation that has
   awaited it.
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE.

   THE subject of this volume is one of the highest, in the order of
   consequence, both as respects the welfare of religion and of human
   society. No apology therefore is needed, for the giving to the public
   of any thing concerning it, which is honestly meant, and thoughtfully
   prepared.

   I should have preferred, on some accounts, to write a proper treatise
   on the subject--which this volume is not. The shape it has taken will
   be sufficiently explained, by the facts and considerations, that have
   been determining causes, in the process of its construction. Thirteen
   years ago I was drawn, by solicitation from others, into the
   publication of two discourses, the first two of this volume, under the
   title Christian Nurture. Afterwards, these were republished with
   another, the fourth of the present volume, and with other articles
   variously related, under the same title. These publications have been
   out of print for some years; for I have preferred the discontinuance of
   publication, till I might be able to present the subject in a more
   adequate and complete manner. The present volume is the result.

   In preparing it, I could not easily consent to lay aside, or pass into
   oblivion, the two discourses above referred to; for, under the fortune
   that befel them, they had become a little historical. In this fuller
   treatment of the subject therefore, I have allowed them to stand,
   requiring the additions made, to take their shape or type. Thirteen new
   essays, in the form of discourses, though never used as such, but
   written simply for the discussion's sake, are thus added; and the
   volume, which virtually covers the ground of a treatise, takes the form
   of successive topical discussions, or essays, on so many themes
   included in the general subject.

   I need offer no apology for retaining the old title, in a volume that
   is virtually new; or for reasserting, with more emphasis and
   deliberation, after an interval of years, what the years have only
   established and made firm in my Christian convictions.

   H. B.
     __________________________________________________________________

                             PART I.--THE DOCTRINE.
     __________________________________________________________________

I.
WHAT CHRISTIAN NURTURE IS.

   "Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord."--Ephesians,
   vi. 4.

   THERE is then some kind of nurture which is of the Lord, deriving a
   quality and a power from Him, and communicating the same. Being
   instituted By Him, it will of necessity have a method and a character
   peculiar to itself, or rather to Him. It will be the Lord's way of
   education, having aims appropriate to Him, and, if realized in its full
   intent, terminating in results impossible to be reached by any merely
   human method.

   What then is the true idea of Christian or divine nurture, as
   distinguished from that which is not Christian? What is its aim? What
   its method of working? What its powers and instruments? What its
   contemplated results? Few questions have greater moment; and it is one
   of the pleasant signs of the times, that the subject involved is
   beginning to attract new interest, and excite a spirit of inquiry which
   heretofore has not prevailed in our churches.

   In ordinary cases, the better and more instructive way of handling this
   subject, would be to go directly into the practical methods of parental
   discipline, and show by what modes of government and instruction we may
   hope to realize the best results. But unhappily the public mind is
   preoccupied extensively by a view of the whole subject, which I must
   regard as a theoretical mistake, and one which will involve, as long as
   it continues, practical results systematically injurious. This mistaken
   view it is necessary, if possible, to remove. And accordingly what I
   have to say will take the form of an argument on the question thus put
   ill issue; though I design to gather round the subject, as I proceed,
   as much of practical instruction as the mode of the argument will
   suffer. Assuming then the question above stated, What is the true idea
   of Christian education?--I answer in the following proposition, which
   it will be the aim of my argument to establish, viz:

   That the child is to grow up a Christian, and never know himself as
   being otherwise.

   In other words, the aim, effort, and expectation should be, not, as is
   commonly assumed, that the child is to grow up in sin, to be converted
   after he comes to a mature age; but that he is to open on the world as
   one that is spiritually renewed, not remembering the time when he went
   through a technical experience, but seeming rather to have loved what
   is good from his earliest years. I do not affirm that every child may,
   in fact and without exception, be so trained that he certainly will
   grow up a Christian. The qualifications it may be necessary to add will
   be given in another place, where they can be stated more intelligibly.

   This doctrine is not a novelty, now rashly and for the first time
   propounded, as some of you may be tempted to suppose. I shall show you,
   before I have done with the argument, that it is as old as the
   Christian church, and prevails extensively at the present day in other
   parts of the world. Neither let your own experience raise a prejudice
   against it. If you have endeavored to realize the very truth I here
   affirm, but find that your children do not exhibit the character you
   have looked for; if they seem to be intractable to religious
   influences, and sometimes to display an apparent aversion to the very
   subject of religion itself, you are not of course to conclude that the
   doctrine I here maintain is untrue or impracticable. You may be
   unreasonable in your expectations of your children.

   Possibly, there may be seeds of holy principle in them, which you do
   not discover. A child acts out his present feelings, the feelings of
   the moment, without qualification or disguise. And how, many times,
   would all you appear, if you were to do the same? Will you expect of
   them to be better, and more constant and consistent, than yourselves;
   or will you rather expect them to be children, human children still,
   living a mixed life, trying out the good and evil of the world, and
   preparing, as older Christians do, when they have taken a lesson of
   sorrow and emptiness, to turn again to the true good?

   Perhaps they will go through a rough mental struggle, at some future
   day, and seem, to others and to themselves, there to have entered on a
   Christian life. And yet it may be true that there was still some root
   of right principle established in their childhood, which is here only
   quickened and developed, as when Christians of a mature age are revived
   in their piety, after a period of spiritual lethargy; for it is
   conceivable that regenerate character may exist, long before it is
   fully and formally developed.

   But suppose there is really no trace or seed of holy principle in your
   children, has there been no fault of piety and constancy in your
   church? no want of Christian sensibility and love to God? no carnal
   spirit visible to them and to all, and imparting its noxious and
   poisonous quality to the Christian atmosphere in which they have had
   their nurture? For it is not for you alone to realize all that is
   included in the idea of Christian education. It belongs to the church
   of God, according to the degree of its social power over you and in you
   and around your children, to bear a part of the responsibility with
   you.

   Then, again, have you nothing to blame in yourselves? no lack of
   faithfulness? no indiscretion of manner or of temper? no mistake of
   duty, which, with a better and more cultivated piety, you would have
   been able to avoid? Have you been so nearly even with your privilege
   and duty, that you can find no relief but to lay some charge upon God,
   or comfort yourselves in the conviction that he has appointed the
   failure you deplore? When God marks out a plan of education, or sets up
   an aim to direct its efforts, you will see, at once, that he could not
   base it on a want of piety in you, or on any imperfections that flow
   from a want of piety It must be a plan measured by Himself and the
   fullness of his own gracious intentions.

   Besides, you must not assume that we, in this age, are the best
   Christians that have ever lived, or most likely to produce all the
   fruits of piety. An assumption so pleasing to our vanity is more easily
   made than verified, but vanity is the weakest as it is the cheapest of
   all arguments. We have some good points, in which we compare favorably
   with other Christians, and Christians of other times, but our style of
   piety is sadly deficient, in many respects, and that to such a degree
   that we have little cause for self-congratulation. With all our
   activity and boldness of movement, there is a certain hardness and
   rudeness, a want of sensibility to things that do not lie in action,
   which can not be too much deplored, or too soon rectified. We hold a
   piety of conquest rather than of love,--a kind of public piety, that is
   strenuous and fiery on great occasions, but wants the beauty of
   holiness, wants constancy, singleness of aim, loveliness, purity,
   richness, blamelessness, and--if I may add another term not so
   immediately religious, but one that carries, by association, a thousand
   religious qualities--wants domesticity of character; wants them, I
   mean, not as compared with the perfect standard of Christ, but as
   compared with other examples of piety that have been given in former
   times, and others that are given now.

   For some reason, we do not make a Christian atmosphere about us--do not
   produce the conviction that we are living unto God. There is a
   marvelous want of savor in our piety. It is a flower of autumn, colored
   as highly as it need be to the eye, but destitute of fragrance. It is
   too much to hope that, with such an instrument, we can fulfill the true
   idea of Christian education. Any such hope were even presumptuous. At
   the same time, there is no so ready way of removing the deficiencies
   just described, as to recall our churches to their duties in domestic
   life; those humble, daily, hourly duties, where the spirit we breathe
   shall be a perpetual element of power and love, bathing the life of
   childhood.

   Thus much it was necessary to say, for the removal of prejudices that
   are likely to rise up in your minds, and make you inaccessible to the
   arguments I may offer. Let all such prejudices be removed, or, if this
   be too much, let them, at least, be suspended till you have heard what
   I have to advance; for it can not be desired of you to believe any
   thing more than what is shown you by adequate proofs. Which also it is
   right to ask that you will receive, in a spirit of conviction, such as
   becomes our wretched and low attainments, and with a willingness to let
   God be exalted, though at the expense of some abasement in ourselves.
   In pursuing the argument, I shall--

   I. Collect some considerations which occur to us, viewing the subject
   on the human side. and then--

   II. Show how far and by what methods God has justified, on his part,
   the doctrine we maintain.

   There is then, as the subject appears to us--

   1. No absurdity in supposing that children are to grow up in Christ. On
   the other hand, if there is no absurdity, there is a very clear moral
   incongruity in setting up a contrary supposition, to be the aim of a
   system of Christian education. There could not be a worse or more
   baleful implication given to a child, than that he is to reject God and
   all holy principle, till he has come to a mature age. What authority
   have you from the Scriptures to tell your child, or, by any sign, to
   show him, that you do not expect him truly to love and obey God, till
   after he has spent whole years in hatred and wrong? What authority to
   make him feel that he is the most unprivileged of all human beings,
   capable of sin, but incapable of repentance; old enough to resist all
   good, but too young to receive any good whatever? It is reasonable to
   suppose that you have some express authority for a lesson so manifestly
   cruel and hurtful, else you would shudder to give it. I ask you for the
   chapter and verse, out of which it is derived. Meantime, wherein would
   it be less incongruous for you to teach your child that he is to lie
   and steal, and go the whole round of the vices, and then, after he
   comes to mature age, reform his conduct by the rules of virtue? Perhaps
   you do not give your child to expect that he is to grow up in sin; you
   only expect that he will yourself. That is scarcely better: for that
   which is your expectation, will assuredly be his; and what is more, any
   attempt to maintain a discipline at war with your own secret
   expectations, will only make a hollow and worthless figment of that
   which should be an open, earnest reality. You will never practically
   aim at what you practically despair of, and if you do not practically
   aim to unite your child to God, you will aim at something less; that
   is, something unchristian, wrong, sinful.

   But my child is a sinner, you will say; and how can I expect him to
   begin a right life, until God gives him a new heart? This is the common
   way of speaking, and I state the objection in its own phraseology, that
   it may recognize itself. Who then has told you that a child can not
   have the new heart of which you speak? Whence do you learn that if you
   live the life of Christ, before him and with him, the law of the Spirit
   of Life may not be such as to include and quicken him also? And why
   should it be thought incredible that there should be some really good
   principle awakened in the mind of a child? For this is all that is
   implied in a Christian state. The Christian is one who has simply begun
   to love what is good for its own sake, and why should it be thought
   impossible for a child to have this love begotten in him? Take any
   scheme of depravity you please, there is yet nothing in it to forbid
   the possibility that a child should be led, in his first moral act, to
   cleave unto what is good and right, any more than in the first of his
   twentieth year. He is, in that case, only a child converted to good,
   leading a mixed life as all Christians do. The good in him goes into
   combat with the evil, and holds a qualified sovereignty. And why may
   not this internal conflict of goodness cover the whole life from its
   dawn, as well as any part of it? And what more appropriate to the
   doctrine of spiritual influence itself, than to believe that as the
   Spirit of Jehovah fills all the worlds of matter, and holds a presence
   of power and government in all objects, so all human souls, the
   infantile as well as the adult, have a nurture of the Spirit
   appropriate to their age and their wants? What opinion is more
   essentially monstrous, in fact, than that which regards the Holy Spirit
   as having no agency in the immature souls of children who are growing
   up, helpless and unconscious, into the perils of time?

   2. It is to be expected that Christian education will radically differ
   from that which is not Christian. Now, it is the very character and
   mark of all unchristian education, that it brings up the child for
   future conversion. No effort is made, save to form a habit of outward
   virtue, and, if God please to convert the family to something higher
   and better, after they come to the age of maturity, it is well. Is then
   Christian education, or the nurture of the Lord, no way different from
   this? Or is it rather to be supposed that it will have a higher aim and
   a more sacred character?

   And, since it is the distinction of Christian parents, that they are
   themselves in the nurture of the Lord, since Christ and the Divine
   Love, communicated through him, are become the food of their life, what
   will they so naturally seek as to have their children partakers with
   them, heirs together with them, in the grace of life? I am well aware
   of the common impression that Christian education is sufficiently
   distinguished by the endeavor of Christian parents to teach their
   children the lessons of Scripture history, and the doctrines or dogmas
   of Scripture theology. But if they are given to understand, at the same
   time, that these lessons can be expected to produce no fruit till they
   are come to a mature age--that they are to grow up still in the same
   character as other children do, who have no such instruction--what is
   this but to enforce the practical rejection of all the lessons taught
   them? And which, in truth, is better for them, to grow up in sin under
   Scripture light, with a heart hardened by so many religious lessons; or
   to grow up in sin, unvexed and unannoyed by the wearisome drill of
   lectures that only discourage all practical benefit? Which is better,
   to be piously brought up in sin, or to be allowed quietly to vegetate
   in it?

   These are questions that I know not how to decide; but the doubt in
   which they leave us will at least suffice to show that Christian
   education has, in this view, no such eminent advantages over that which
   is unchristian, as to raise any broad and dignified distinction between
   them. We certainly know that much of what is called Christian nurture,
   only serves to make the subject of religion odious, and that, as nearly
   as we can discover, in exact proportion to the amount of religious
   teaching received. And no small share of the difficulty to be overcome
   afterwards, in the struggle of conversion, is created in just this way.

   On the other hand, you will hear, for example, of cases like the
   following: A young man, correctly but not religiously brought up, light
   and gay in his manners, and thoughtless hitherto in regard to any thing
   of a serious nature, happens accidentally one Sunday, while his friends
   are gone to ride, to take down a book on the evidences of Christianity.
   His eye, floating over one of the pages, becomes fixed, and he is
   surprised to find his feelings flowing out strangely into its holy
   truths. He is conscious of no struggle of hostility, but a new joy
   dawns in his being. Henceforth, to the end of a long and useful life,
   he is a Christian man. The love into which he was surprised continues
   to flow, and he is remarkable, in the churches, all his life long, as
   one of the most beautiful, healthful, and dignified examples of
   Christian piety. Now, a very little miseducation, called Christian,
   discouraging the piety it teaches, and making enmity itself a necessary
   ingredient in the struggle of conversion, conversion no reality without
   a struggle, might have sufficed to close the mind of this man against
   every thought of religion to the end of life.

   Such facts (for the case above given is a fact and not a fancy) compel
   us to suspect the value of much that is called Christian education.
   They suggest the possibility also that Christian piety should begin in
   other and milder forms of exercise, than those which commonly
   distinguish the conversion of adults; that Christ himself, by that
   renewing Spirit who can sanctify from the womb, should be practically
   infused into the childish mind; in other words, that the house, having
   a domestic Spirit of grace dwelling in it, should become the church of
   childhood, the table and hearth a holy rite, and life an element of
   saving power. Something is wanted that is better than teaching,
   something that transcends mere effort and will-work--the loveliness of
   a good life, the repose of faith, the confidence of righteous
   expectation, the sacred and cheerful liberty of the Spirit--all glowing
   about the young soul, as a warm and genial nurture, and forming in it,
   by methods that are silent and imperceptible, a spirit of duty and
   religious obedience to God. This only is Christian nurture, the nurture
   of the Lord.

   3. It is a fact that all Christian parents would like to see their
   children grow up in piety; and the better Christians they are, the more
   earnestly they desire it; and, the more lovely and constant the
   Christian spirit they manifest, the more likely it is, in general, that
   their children will early display the Christian character. This is
   current opinion. But why should a Christian parent, the deeper his
   piety and the more closely he is drawn to God, be led to desire, the
   more earnestly, what, in God's view, is even absurd or impossible? And,
   if it be generally seen that the children of such are more likely to
   become Christians early, what forbids the hope that, if they were riper
   still in their piety, living a more single and Christ-like life, and
   more cultivated in their views of family nurture, they might see their
   children grow up always in piety towards God? Or, if they may not
   always see it as clearly as they desire, might they not still be able
   to implant some holy principle, which shall be the seed of a Christian
   character in their children, though not developed fully and visibly
   till a later period in life?

   4. Assuming the corruption of human nature, when should we think it
   wisest to undertake or expect a remedy? When evil is young and pliant
   to good, or when it is confirmed by years of sinful habit? And when, in
   fact, is the human heart found to be so ductile to the motives of
   religion, as in the simple, ingenuous age of childhood? How easy is it
   then, as compared with the stubbornness of adult years, to make all
   wrong seem odious, all good lovely and desirable. If not discouraged by
   some ill-temper which bruises all the gentle sensibilities, or repelled
   by some technical view of religious character which puts it beyond his
   age, how ready is the child to be taken by good, as it were beforehand,
   and yield his ductile nature to the truth and Spirit of God, and to a
   fixed prejudice against all that God forbids.

   He can not understand, of course, in the earliest stage of childhood,
   the philosophy of religion as a renovated experience, and that is not
   the form of the first lessons he is to receive. He is not to be told
   that he must have a new heart and exercise faith in Christ's atonement.
   We are to understand, that a right spirit may be virtually exercised in
   children, when, as yet, it is not intellectually received, or as a form
   of doctrine. Thus, if they are put upon an effort to be good,
   connecting the fact that God desires it and will help them in the
   endeavor, that is all which, in a very early age, they can receive, and
   that includes every thing--repentance, love, duty, dependence, faith.
   Nay, the operative truth necessary to a new life, may possibly be
   communicated through and from the parent, being revealed in his looks,
   manners, and ways of life, before they are of all age to understand the
   teaching of words; for the Christian scheme, the gospel, is really
   wrapped up in the life of every Christian parent, and beams out from
   him as a living epistle, before it escapes from the lips, or is taught
   in words. And the Spirit of truth may as well make this living truth
   effectual, as the preaching of the gospel itself.

   Never is it too early for good to be communicated. Infancy and
   childhood are the ages most pliant to good. And who can think it
   necessary that the plastic nature of childhood must first be hardened
   into stone, and stiffened into enmity towards God and all duty, before
   it can become a candidate for Christian character! There could not be a
   more unnecessary mistake, and it is as unnatural and pernicious, I
   fear, as it is unnecessary.

   There are many who assume the radical goodness of human nature, and the
   work of Christian education is, in their view, only to educate or educe
   the good that is in us. Let no one be disturbed by the suspicion of a
   coincidence between what I have here said and such a theory. The
   natural pravity of man is plainly asserted in the Scriptures, and, if
   it were not, the familiar laws of physiology would require us to
   believe, what amounts to the same thing. And if neither Scripture nor
   physiology taught us the doctrine, if the child was born as clear of
   natural prejudice or damage, as Adam before his sin, spiritual
   education, or, what is the same, probation, that which trains a being
   for a stable, intelligent virtue hereafter, would still involve an
   experiment of evil, therefore a fall and a bondage under the laws of
   evil; so that, view the matter as we will, there is no so unreasonable
   assumption, none so wide of all just philosophy, as that which proposes
   to form a child to virtue, by simply educing or drawing out what is in
   him.

   The growth of Christian virtue is no vegetable process, no mere onward
   development. It involves a struggle with evil, a fall and a rescue. The
   soul becomes established in holy virtue, as a free exercise, only as it
   is passed round the corner of fall and redemption, ascending thus unto
   God through a double experience, in which it ]earns the bitterness of
   evil and the worth of good, fighting its way out of one, and achieving
   the other as a victory. The child, therefore, may as well begin life
   under a law of hereditary damage, as to plunge himself into evil by his
   own experiment, which he will as naturally do from the simple impulse
   of curiosity, or the instinct of knowledge, as from any noxious quality
   in his mold derived by descent. For it is not sin which he derives from
   his parents; at least, not sin in any sense which imports blame, but
   only some prejudice to the perfect harmony of this mold, some kind of
   pravity or obliquity which inclines him to evil. These suggestions are
   offered, not as necessary to be received in every particular, but
   simply to show that the scheme of education proposed, is not to be
   identified with another, which assumes the radical goodness of human
   nature, and according to which, if it be true, Christian education is
   insignificant.

   5. It is implied in all our religious philosophy, that if a child ever
   does any thing in a right spirit, ever loves any thing because it is
   good and right, it involves the dawn of a new life. This we can not
   deny or doubt, without bringing in question our whole scheme of
   doctrine. Is it then incredible that some really good feeling should be
   called into exercise in a child? In all the discipline of the house,
   quickened as it should be by the Spirit of God, is it true that he can
   never once be brought to submit to parental authority lovingly and
   because it is right? Must we even hold the absurdity of the scripture
   counsel--"Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right?"
   When we speak thus of a love for what is right and good, we must of
   course discriminate between the mere excitement of a natural
   sensibility to pleasure in the contemplation of what is good (of which
   the worst minds are more or less capable,) and a practicable
   subordination of the soul to its power, a practicable embrace of its
   law. The child must not only be touched with some gentle emotions
   toward what is right, but he must love it with a fixed love, love it
   for the sake of its principle, receive it as a vital and formative
   power.

   Nor is there any age, which offers itself to God's truth and love, and
   to that Quickening Spirit whence all good proceeds, with so much of
   ductile feeling and susceptibilities so tender. The child is under
   parental authority too for the very purpose, it would seem, of having
   the otherwise abstract principle of all duty impersonated in his
   parents, and thus brought home to his practical embrace; so that,
   learning to obey his parents in the Lord, because it is right, he may
   thus receive, before he can receive it intellectually, the principle of
   all piety and holy obedience. And when he is brought to exercise a
   spirit of true and loving submission to the good law of his parents,
   what will you see, many times: but a look of childish joy, and a happy
   sweetness of manner, and a ready delight in authority, as like to all
   the demonstrations of Christian experience, as any thing childish can
   be to what is mature?

   6. Children have been so trained as never to remember the time when
   they began to be religious. Baxter was, at one time, greatly troubled
   concerning himself, because he could recollect no time when there was a
   gracious change in his character. But he discovered, at length, that
   "education is as properly a means of grace as preaching," and thus
   found the sweeter comfort in his love to God, that he learned to love
   him so early. The European churches, generally, regard Christian piety
   more as a habit of life, formed under the training of childhood, and
   less as a marked spiritual change in experience. In Germany, for
   example, the church includes all the people, and it is remarkable that,
   under a scheme so loose, and with so much of pernicious error taught in
   the pulpit, there is yet so much of deep religious feeling, so much of
   lovely and simple character, and a savor of Christian piety so
   generally prevalent in the community. So true is this, that the German
   people are every day spoken of as a people religious by nature; no
   other way being observed of accounting for the strong religious bent
   they manifest. Whereas it is due, beyond any reasonable question, to
   the fact that children are placed under a form of treatment which
   expects them to be religious, and are not discouraged by the demand of
   an experience above their years.

   Again, the Moravian Brethren, it is agreed by all, give as ripe and
   graceful an exhibition of piety, as any body of Christians living on
   the earth, and it is the radical distinction of their system that it
   rests its power on Christian education. They make their churches
   schools of holy nurture to childhood, and expect their children to grow
   up there, as plants in the house of the Lord. Accordingly it is
   affirmed that not one in ten of the members of that church, recollects
   any time when he began to be religious. Is it then incredible that what
   has been can be? Would it not be wiser and more modest, when facts are
   against us, to admit that there is certainly some bad error, either in
   our life, or in our doctrine, or in both, which it becomes us to amend?

   Once more, if we narrowly examine the relation of parent and child, we
   shall not fail to discover some thing like a law of organic connection,
   as regards character, subsisting between them. Such a connection as
   makes it easy to believe, and natural to expect, that the faith of the
   one will be propagated in the other. Perhaps I should rather say, such
   a connection as induces the conviction that the character of one is
   actually included in that of the other, as a seed is formed in the
   capsule; and being there matured, by a nutriment derived from the stem,
   is gradually separated from it. It is a singular fact, that many
   believe substantially the same thing, in regard to evil character, but
   have no thought of any such possibility in regard to good. There has
   been much speculation, of late, as to whether a child is born in
   depravity, or whether the depraved character is superinduced
   afterwards. But, like many other great questions, it determines much
   less than its commonly supposed; for, according to the most propel'
   view of the subject, a child is really not born till he emerges from
   the infantile state, and never before that time can he be said to
   receive a separate and properly individual nature.

   The declarations of Scripture, and the laws of physiology, I have
   already intimated, compel the belief that a child's nature is somehow
   depravated by descent from parents, who are under the corrupting
   effects of sin. But this, taken as a question relating to the mere
   punctum temporis, or precise point of birth, is not a question of any
   so grave import as is generally supposed; for the child, after birth,
   is still within the matrix of the parental life, and will be, more or
   less, for many years. And the parental life will be flowing into him
   all that time, just as naturally, and by a law as truly organic, as
   when the sap of the trunk flows into a limb. We must not govern our
   thoughts, in such a matter, by our eyes; and because the physical
   separation has taken place, conclude that no organic relation remains.
   Even the physical being of the child is dependent still for many
   months, in the matter of nutrition, on organic processes not in itself.
   Meantime, the mental being and character have scarcely begun to have a
   proper individual life. Will, in connection with conscience, is the
   basis of personality, or individuality, and these exist as yet only in
   their rudimental type, as when the form of a seed is beginning to be
   unfolded at the root of a flower.

   At first, the child is held as a mere passive lump in the arms, and he
   opens into conscious life, under the soul of the parent streaming into
   his eyes and ears, through the manners and tones of the nursery. The
   kind and degree of passivity are gradually changed as life advances. A
   little farther on it is observed that a smile wakens a smile; any kind
   of sentiment or passion, playing in the face of the parent, wakens a
   responsive sentiment or passion. Irritation irritates, a frown withers,
   love expands a look congenial to itself, and why not holy love? Next
   the ear is opened to the understanding of words, but what words the
   child shall hear, he can not choose, and has as little capacity to
   select the sentiments that are poured into his soul. Farther on, the
   parents begin to govern him by appeals to will, expressed in commands,
   and whatever their requirement may be, he can as little withstand it,
   as the violet can cool the scorching sun, or the tattered leaf can tame
   the hurricane. Next they appoint his school, choose his books, regulate
   his company, decide what form of religion, and what religious opinions
   he shall be taught, by taking him to a church of their own selection.
   In all this, they infringe upon no right of the child, they only
   fulfill an office which belongs to them. Their will and character are
   designed to be the matrix of the child's will and character. Meantime,
   he approaches more and more closely, and by a gradual process, to the
   proper rank and responsibility of an individual creature, during all
   which process of separation, he is having their exercises and ways
   translated into him. Then, at last, he comes forth to act his part in
   such color of evil, and why not of good, as he has derived from them.

   The tendency of all our modern speculations is to an extreme
   individualism, and we carry our doctrines of free will so far as to
   make little or nothing of organic laws; not observing that character
   may be, to a great extent, only the free development of exercises
   previously wrought in us, or extended to us, when other wills had us
   within their sphere. All the Baptist theories of religion are based in
   this error. They assume, as a first truth, that no such thing is
   possible as an organic connection of character, an assumption which is
   plainly refuted by what we see with our eyes, and, as I shall by and by
   show, by the declarations of Scripture. We have much to say also, in
   common with the Baptists, about the beginning of moral agency, and we
   seem to fancy that there is some definite moment when a child becomes a
   moral agent, passing out of a condition where he is a moral nullity,
   and where no moral agency touches his being. Whereas he is rather to be
   regarded, at the first, as lying within the moral agency of the parent,
   and passing out, by degrees, through a course of mixed agency, to a
   proper independency and self possession. The supposition that he
   becomes, at some certain moment, a complete moral agent, which a moment
   before he was not, is clumsy, and has no agreement with observation.
   The separation is gradual. Ie is never, at any moment after birth, to
   be regarded as perfectly beyond the sphere of good and bad exercises;
   for the parent exercises himself in the child, playing his emotions and
   sentiments, and working a character in him, by virtue of an organic
   power.

   And this is the very idea of Christian education, that it begins with
   nurture or cultivation. And the intention is that the Christian life
   and spirit of the parents, which are in and by the Spirit of God, shall
   flow into the mind of the child, to blend with his incipient and
   half-formed exercises; that they shall thus beget their own good within
   him--their thoughts, opinions, faith, and love, which are to become a
   little more, and yet a little more, his own separate exercise, but
   still the same in character. The contrary assumption, that virtue must
   be the product of separate and absolutely independent choice, is pure
   assumption. As regards tle measure of personal merit and demerit, it is
   doubtless true that every subject of God is to be responsible only for
   what is his own. But virtue still is rather a state of being than an
   act or series of acts; and, if we look at the causes which induce or
   prepare such a state, the will of the person himself may have a part
   among these causes more or less important, and it works no absurdity to
   suppose that one may be even prepared to such a state, by causes prior
   to his own will; so that, when be sets off to act for himself, his
   struggle and duty may be rather to sustain and perfect the state begun,
   than to produce a new one. Certain it is that we are never, at any age,
   so independent as to be wholly out of the reach of organic laws which
   affect our character.

   All society is organic--the church, the state, the school, the family;
   and there is a spirit in each of these organisms, peculiar to itself,
   and more or less hostile, more or less favorable to religious
   character, and to some extent, at least, sovereign over the individual
   man. A very great share of the power in what is called a revival of
   religion, is organic power; nor is it any the less divine on that
   account. The child is only more within the power of organic laws than
   we all are. We possess only a mixed individuality all our life long. A
   pure, separate, individual man, living wholly within, and from himself,
   is a mere fiction. No such person ever existed, or ever can. I need not
   say that this view of an organic connection of character subsisting
   between parent and child, lays a basis for notions of Christian
   education, far different from those which now prevail, under the cover
   of a merely fictitious and mischievous individualism.

   Perhaps it may be necessary to add, that, in the strong language I have
   used concerning the organic connection of character between the parent
   and the child, it is not designed to assert a power in the parent to
   renew the child, or that the child can be renewed by any agency of the
   Spirit less immediate, than that which renews the parent himself. When
   a germ is formed on the stem of any plant, the formative instinct of
   the plant may be said in one view to produce it; but the same solar
   heat which quickens the plant, must quicken also the germ, and sustain
   the internal action of growth, by a common presence in both. So, if
   there be an organic power of character in the parent, such as that of
   which I have spoken, it is not a complete power in itself, but only
   such a power as demands the realizing presence of the Spirit of God,
   both in the parent and the child, to give it effect. As Paul said, "I
   have begotten you through the gospel," so may we say of the parent,
   who, having a living gospel enveloped in his life, brings it into
   organic connection with the soul of childhood. But the declaration
   excludes the necessity of a divine influence, not more in one case than
   in the other.

   Such are some of the considerations that offer themselves, viewing our
   subject on the human side, or as it appears in the light of human
   evidence--all concurring to produce the conviction, that it is the only
   true idea of Christian education, that the child is to grow up in the
   life of the parent, and be a Christian in principle, from his earliest
   years.
     __________________________________________________________________

  II. WHAT CHRISTIAN NURTURE IS.

   "Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord."--Ephesians,
   vi. 4.

   WE proceed now to inquire--

   II. How far God, in the revelation made of his character and will,
   favors the view of Christian nurture vindicated, in a former discourse,
   by arguments and evidences of an inferior nature? And--

   1. According to all that God has taught us concerning his own
   dispositions, he desires on his part, that children should grow up in
   piety, as earnestly as the parent can desire it; nay, as much more
   earnestly, as he hates sin more intensely, and desires good with less
   mixture of qualification. Goodness, or the production of goodness, is
   the supreme end of God, and therefore, we know, on first principles,
   that he desires to bestow whatsoever spiritual grace is necessary to
   the moral renovation of childhood, and will do it, unless some
   collateral reasons in his plan, involving the extension of holy virtue,
   require him to withhold.

   Thus, if nothing were hung upon parental faithfulness and example, if
   the child were not used, in some degree or way, as all argument, to
   hold the parent to a life of Christian diligence, then the good
   principle in the parent might lack the necessary stimulus to bring it
   to maturity. Or, if all children alike, in spite of ithe evil and
   unchristian example of the house, were to be started into life as
   spiritually renewed, one of the strongest motives to holy living would
   be taken away from parents, in the fact that their children are safe as
   regards a good beginning, without any carefulness in them, or
   prayerfulness in their life; and their own virtue might so overgrow
   itself with weeds, as never to attain to a sound maturity. Let it be
   enough to know, on first principles in the character of God, that he
   will so dispense his spiritual agency to you and to your children, as
   to produce, considering the freedom of you both, the best measure and
   the ripest state of holy virtue. And how far short is this of the
   conclusion, that if you live as you ought and may yourselves, God will
   so dispense his Spirit that you may see your children grow up in piety?

   Observe, too, that he expressly pledges his Holy Spirit to you, as one
   of his first gifts, and, what is more, even commands you to be filled
   with the Spirit; and considering the organic relation that subsists, by
   his own appointment, between you and your children, how far off is he,
   in this, from pledging you a mercy that accrues to their benefit? He
   appoints you also to be a light to the world, and, by the grace he
   pours into your being, prepares you to be; how much more a light to
   minds that are fed by simple nurture from your own? And when you
   consider how fond he is, if I may so speak, in the blessings he pours
   on the good, of gathering their children with them in the same circle
   of favor, how many of his promises, in all ages, run--"to you and to
   your children," what better assurance can you reasonably ask, to
   fortify your confidence in whatever spiritual grace may be necessary to
   your utmost success?

   2. If there be any such thing as Christian nurture, distinguished from
   that which is not Christian, which is generally admitted, and, by the
   Scriptures clearly asserted, then is it some kind of nurture which God
   appoints. Does it then accord with the known character of God, to
   appoint a scheme of education, the only proper result of which shall be
   that children are trained up under it in sin? It would not be more
   absurd to suppose that God has appointed church education, to produce a
   first crop of sin, and then a crop of holiness. God appoints nothing of
   which sin, and only sin, is to be the proper and legitimate result,
   whether for a longer or a shorter time; least of all, a mode of
   training which is to produce sin. Holy virtue is the aim of every plan
   God adopts, every means he prescribes, and we have no right to look
   only for sin, in that which he has appointed as a means of virtue. We
   can not do it understandingly without great impiety.

   3. God does expressly lay it upon us to expect that our children will
   grow up in piety, under the parental nurture, and assumes the
   possibility that such a result may ordinarily be realized. "Train up a
   child"--how? for future conversion?--No, but "in the way he should go,
   and when he is old he will not depart from it." If it be said that this
   relates only to outward habits of virtue and vice, not to spiritual
   life, the Old Testament, I reply, does not raise that distinction, as
   it is raised in the New. It puts all good together, all evil together,
   and regards a child trained up in the way he should go, as going in all
   the ways, and fulfilling all the ideas of virtue. The phraseology of
   the New Testament carries the same import. "Bring them up in the
   nurture and admonition of the Lord," a form of expression, which
   indicates the existence of a Divine nurture, that is to encompass the
   child and mold him unto God; so that he shall be brought up, as it
   were, in Him.

   4. A time is foretold, as our churches generally believe, when all
   shall know God, even from the least to the greatest; that is, shall
   spiritually know him, or so that there shall be no need of exhorting
   one another to know him; for intellectual knowledge is not carried by
   exhortation. If such a time is ever to come, then, at least, children
   are to grow up in Christ. Can it come too soon? And, if we have the
   opinion that any such thing is impossible, either we, or those who come
   after us, must get rid of it. A principal reason why the great
   expectations of the future, that we, in this age, are giving out so
   confidently, seem only visionary and idle dreams to many, is that we
   are perpetually assuming their impossibility ourselves. Our very theory
   of religion is, that men are to grow up in evil, and be dragged into
   the church of God by conquest. The world is to lie in halves, and the
   kingdom of God is to stretch itself side by side with the kingdom of
   darkness, making sallies into it, and taking captive those who are
   sufficiently hardened and bronzed in guiltiness to be converted!

   Thus we assume even the absurdity of all our expectations in regard to
   the possible advancement of human society and the universal prevalence
   of Christian virtue. And thus we throw an air of extravagance and
   unreason over all we do. Whereas there is a sober and rational
   possibility, that human society should be universally pervaded by
   Christian virtue. The Christian scheme has a scope of intention, and
   instruments and powers adequate to this: it descends upon the world to
   claim all souls for its dominion--all men of all climes, all ages from
   childhood to the grave. It is, indeed, a plan which supposes the
   existence of sin, and sin will be in the world, and in all hearts in
   it, as long as the world or human society continues; but the scheme has
   a breadth of conception, and has powers and provisions embodied in it,
   which, apart from all promises and predictions, certify us of a day
   when it will reign in all human hearts, and all that live shall live in
   Christ. Let us either renounce any such confidence, or show, by a
   thorough consistency in our religious doctrines, that we hold it
   deliberately and manfully.

   5. We discover in the Scriptures that the organic law, of which I have
   spoken, is distinctly recognized, and that character in children is
   often regarded as, in some very important sense, derivative from their
   parents. It is thus that "sin has passed upon all men." "By the offense
   of one, judgment came upon all." Christian faith is also spoken of in a
   similar way--"The unfeigned faith, which dwelt first, in thy
   grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and, I am persuaded, that in
   thee also." Not that, in the bald and naked sense, it had descended
   thus through three generations. But the apostle conceives a power, in
   the good life of these mothers, that must needs transmit some flavor of
   piety. In like manner, God is represented as "keeping covenant and
   mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments, to a thousand
   generations;" which, if it signifies any thing, amounts to a
   declaration that he will spiritually own and bless every succeeding
   generation, to the end of the world, if only the preceding will live so
   as to be fit vehicles of his blessing; for it is not any covenant, as a
   form of mutual contract, which carries the divine favor, but it is the
   loving Him rather, and keeping His commandments, by an upright, godly
   life, which sets the parents on terms of friendship with God, and
   secures the inhabitation of his power.

   Declarations like those in the eighteenth chapter of Ezekiel, "the son
   shall not bear the iniquity of the father,"--"the soul that sinneth, it
   shall die,"--are hastily applied by many, not to show that the child is
   to be punished only for his own sin, which is their true import, but,
   as if it were the same thing, to disprove the fact of an organic
   connection, by which children receive a character from their parents.
   Whereas this latter is a truth which we see with our eyes, and one that
   is constantly affirmed in the Scriptures, both in respect to bad
   character and to good. "God layeth up the iniquity of the wicked for
   his children,"--"Visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the
   children to the third and fourth generation." By which we are to
   understand, what is every day exhibited in actual historic proof, that
   the wickedness of parents propagates itself in the character and
   condition of their children, and that it ordinarily requires three or
   four generations to ripen the sad harvest of misery and debasement.
   Again, on the other side, "he hath blessed thy children with
   thee,"--"For the good of them and their children after them,"--"For the
   promise is to you and to your children." The Scriptures have a
   perpetual habit, if I may so speak, of associating children with the
   character and destiny of their parents. In this respect, they maintain
   a marked contrast with the extreme individualism of our modern
   philosophy. They do not always regard the individual as an isolated
   unit, but they often look upon men as they exist, in families and
   races, and under organic laws.

   Something has undoubtedly been gained to modern theology, as a human
   science, by fixing the attention strongly upon the individual man, as a
   moral agent, immediately related to God, and responsible only for his
   own actions; at the same time there was a truth, an important truth,
   underlying the old doctrine of federal headship and original or imputed
   sin, though strangely misconceived, which we seem, in our one-sided
   speculations, to have quite lost sight of. And how can we ever attain
   to any right conception of organic duties, until we discover the
   reality of organic powers and relations? And how can we hope to set
   ourselves in harmony with the Scriptures, in regard to family nurture
   or household baptism, or any other kindred subject, while our theories
   exclude, or overlook precisely that which is the base of their
   teachings, and appointments? This brings me to my--

   Last argument, which is drawn from infant or household baptism--a rite
   which supposes the fact of an organic connection of character between
   the parent and the child; a seal of faith in the parent, applied over
   to the child, on the ground of a presumption that his faith is wrapped
   up in the parent's faith; so that he is ac counted a believer from the
   beginning. We must distinguish here between a fact and a presumption of
   fact. If you look upon a seed of wheat, it contains, in itself
   presumptively, a thousand generations of wheat, though by reason of
   some fault in the cultivation, or some speck of diseased matter in
   itself, it may, in fact, never repro duce at all. So the Christian
   parent has, in his character, a germ, which has power, presumptively,
   to produce its like in his children, though by reason of some bad fault
   in itself, or possibly some outward hindrance in the Church, or some
   providence of death, it may fail to do so. Thus it is that infant
   baptism becomes an appropriate rite. It sees the child in the parent,
   counts him presumptively a believer and a Christian, and, with the
   parent, baptizes him also. Furthermore, you will perceive that it must
   be presumed, either that the child will grow up a believer, or that he
   will not. The Baptist presumes that he will not, and therefore declares
   the right to be inappropriate. God presumes that he will, and therefore
   appoints it. The Baptist tells the child that nothing but sin can be
   expected of him; God tells him that for his parents' sakes, whose faith
   he is to follow, he has written his own name upon him, and expects him
   to grow up in all duty and piety.

   I have no desire to press the passages in which mention is made of
   household baptism beyond their true import. When Paul is said to have
   "baptized the household of Stephanas," our Baptist friends reply that
   the text proves nothing, in respect to infant baptism, because it can
   not be shown that there were any children in the household; and some,
   who practice infant baptism, have conceded the sufficiency of the
   objection. But the power of this proof-text does not depend, in the
   least, on the fact that there were children in the household of
   Stephanas, but simply on the form of the language. Indeed, it has
   always seemed to me that the argument for infant baptism is rather
   strengthened than weakened, by the supposition that there were, in
   fact, no infants or children in this household; for a household
   generally contains children, and a term so inclusive in its import,
   could never come into use, unless it was the practice for baptism to go
   by households. Under a practice like that of our Baptist brethren, what
   preacher would ever be heard to speak, in this general inclusive way,
   of having baptized a household? In the case of the jailor, too, the
   same reasoning holds. Here, however, our Baptist brethren go farther,
   endeavoring to show positively, from the language used, that there were
   no infants or children in the household; for when it is said that the
   jailor "rejoiced, believing in God with all his house," it is argued
   that, inasmuch as infant children are incapable of believing, there
   could have been no infants in the family. Admitting the correctness of
   the translation, which some have questioned, the argument seems rather
   plausible as a turn of logic, than just and convincing; for, if we
   consider the more decisive position held in that age by the heads of
   families, and how, in common speech, they were supposed to carry the
   religion of the family with them, we shall be convinced that nothing
   was more natural than the very language here used. It was taken for
   granted, as a matter of common understanding, that, in a change of
   religion, the children went with the parents: if they became Jews, that
   their children would be Jews; if Christian believers, that their
   children would be Christians. Hence all the terms used, in reference to
   their religion, took the most inclusive form. If one believed in God,
   he believed with all his house: the change he suffered, in the common
   understanding of the age, carried the house with him; and it occurred
   to no one to question the literal exactness of such like inclusive
   terms.

   It has been a fashion, with many modern critics, to surrender both
   these passages as proofs of infant baptism, and they certainly do not
   prove it, in just the way in which many have used them as proof-texts.
   But if any one will seek a point of view, whence he may be able to give
   a natural and easy interpretation to the language used, or if he will
   ask, on the simple doctrine of chances, what chance there was that
   these two households should include no children, and moreover what
   chance that, in the only three cases of household baptism mentioned in
   the Scripture, the households should have been distinguished by this
   singularity, he will be as little likely as possible, to concede the
   fact that infant baptism is not adequately proved by these passages.

   But the true idea of these passages, and also of the rite itself, is
   seen most evidently in the history of its establishment by Christ, in
   the third chapter of John. The Jewish nation regarded other nations as
   unclean. Hence, when a Gentile family wished to become Jewish citizens,
   they were baptized in token of cleansing. Then they were said to be
   re-born, or regenerated, so as to be accounted true descendants of
   Abraham. We use the term naturalize, that is, to make natural born, in
   the same sense. But Christ had come to set up a spiritual kingdom, the
   kingdom of heaven; and finding all men aliens, and spiritually unclean,
   he applies over the rite of baptism, which was familiar to the Jews,
   ("art thou a Master in Israel, and knowest not these things?") giving
   it a higher sense. "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
   can not enter the kingdom of heaven." But the Gentile proselyte,
   according to the custom here described--here is the point of the
   argument--came with his family. They were all baptized together, young
   and old, all regenerated or naturalized together; and therefore, in the
   new application made of the rite to signify spiritual cleansing and
   regeneration, it is understood, of course, that children are to come
   with their parents. To have excluded them would have been, to every
   Jewish mind, the bight of absurdity. They could not have been excluded,
   without express exception, and no exception was made.

   Some have questioned whether proselyte baptism existed at this early
   age; but of this the third chapter of John is itself conclusive proof;
   for how else was baptism familiarly known to the Jews as connected with
   regeneration; that is, civil regeneration? There is always a historic
   reason for religious rites and for usages of language; and you will
   find it impossible to suppose that Christ appointed baptism, and set
   the rite in connection with spiritual regeneration, by any mere
   accident, or without some historic basis, answering to that which I
   have just described. In this manner, all his language, in the interview
   with Nicodemus, becomes natural and easy.

   It follows that the children of Christian disciples, being baptized
   with their parents, as the children of Gentile proselytes were baptized
   with theirs, would be taken or presumed by the church to be spiritually
   cleansed, in the same manner. Accordingly, just as the children of Jews
   were accounted Jews, and not as unclean, when one of the parents was a
   Jew, so Paul tells us, that in the church of God, the believing party
   sanctifies the unbelieving, "else were your children unclean, but now
   are they holy;" showing that the Jewish analogies, in regard to
   children, were in fact translated, or passed over to the church, and
   adopted there--a translation that naturally followed. from the
   reapplication of proselyte baptism.

   Then passing into the early history of the church, we hear Justin
   Martyr saying: "There are some of us, eighty years old, who were made
   disciples to Christ in their childhood;" that is, in the age of the
   apostles, and while they were yet living; for it was now less than
   eighty years since their death. And in the expression "made disciples,"
   taken in connection with the baptismal formula, "Go disciple all
   nations, baptizing," &c., we see that he alludes to baptism; for
   baptism was the rite that introduced the subject into the Christian
   school as a disciple; and what so natural as that the children of
   disciples should be disciples with them?

   Then again, Ireneus, who lived within one generation of the apostles,
   gives us the second mention of this rite which appears in history, when
   he says: "Christ came to save all persons through himself; all, I say,
   who through him are regenerated unto God: infants and little ones, and
   children and youth, and the aged." Which phrase, "regenerated unto
   God," applied to parents and little ones, alludes to baptism: showing
   that a notion of baptism, as connected with regeneration, coincident
   with that which we found in the third chapter of John, was then current
   in the church.

   I have been thus full upon the rite of baptism, not because that is my
   subject, but because the rite involves, in all its grounds and reasons,
   the same view of Christian education which I am seeking to establish.
   One can not be thoroughly understood and received without the other.
   And it is precisely on this account that we have so great difficulty in
   sustaining the rite of infant baptism. It ought to be difficult to
   sustain any ite, after the sense of it is wholly gone from us. You
   perceive, too, in this exposition, that the view of Christian nurture I
   am endeavoring to vindicate, is not new, but is older, by far, than the
   one now prevalent--as old as the Christian church. It is radically one
   with the ancient doctrine of baptism and regeneration, advanced by
   Christ, and accepted by the first fathers.

   We have much to say of baptismal regeneration as a great error, which
   undoubtedly it is, in the form in which it is held; but it is only a
   less hurtful error than some of us hold in denying it. The distinction
   between our doctrine of baptismal regeneration, and the ancient
   Scripture view, is too broad and palpable to be mistaken. According to
   the modern church dogma, no faith, in the parents, is necessary to the
   effect of the rite. Sponsors, too, are brought in between all parents
   and their duty, to assume the very office which belongs only to them.
   And, what is worse, the child is said to be actually regenerated by the
   act of the priest. According to the more ancient view, or that of the
   Scriptures, nothing depends upon the priest or minister, save that he
   execute the rite in due form. The regeneration is not actual, but only
   presumptive, and every thing depends upon the organic law of character
   pertaining between the parent and the child, the church and the child,
   thus upon duty and holy living and gracious example. The child is too
   young to choose the rite for himself, but the parent, having him as it
   were in his own life, is allowed the confidence that his own faith and
   character will be reproduced in the child, and grow up in his growth,
   and that thus the propriety of the rite as a seal of faith will not be
   violated. In giving us this rite, on the grounds stated, God promises,
   in fact, on his part, to dispense that spiritual grace which is
   necessary to the fulfillment of its import. In this way too is it seen
   that the Christian economy has a place for persons of all ages; for it
   would be singular if, after all we say of the universality of God's
   mercy as a gift to the human race, it could yet not limber itself to
   man, so as to adapt a place for the age of childhood, but must leave a
   full fourth part of the race, the part least hardened in evil and
   tenderest to good, unrecognized and unprovided for--gathering a flock
   without lambs, or, I should rather say, gathering a flock away from the
   lambs. Such is not the spirit of Him who said, "forbid them not, for of
   such is the kingdom of heaven." Therefore we bring them into the school
   of Christ and the pale of his mercy with us, there to be trained up in
   the holy nurture of the Lord. And then the result is to be tested
   afterwards, or at an advanced period of life, by trying their character
   in the same way as the character of all Christians is tried; for many
   are baptized in adult age, who truly do not believe, as is afterwards
   discovered. And yet our Baptist brethren never rebaptize them,
   notwithstanding all they say of faith as the necessary condition of
   baptism.

   But there are two objections to this view of Christian nurture, which,
   if they are not removed, may even suffice to break the force of my
   argument.

   1. A theoretical objection, that it leaves no room for the sovereignty
   of God, in appointing the moral character of men and families. Thus it
   is declared that "all are not Israel who are of Israel," and that God,
   before the children Jacob and Esau had done either good or evil.
   professed his love to one, and his rejection of the ether. But the
   wonder is, in this case of Rebecca and her children, that such a mother
   did not ruin them both. A partial mother, scorning one child, teaching
   the other to lie and trick his blind father, and extort from a starving
   brother his birthright honor, can not be said to furnish a very good
   test of the power of Christian education. But show me the case, where
   the whole conduct of the parents has been such as it should be to
   produce the best effects, and where the sovereignty of God has
   appointed the ruin of the children, whether all, or any one of them.
   The sovereignty of God has always a relation to means, and we are not
   authorized to think of it, in any case, as separated from means.

   2. An objection from observation--asking why it is, if our doctrine be
   true, that many persons, remarkable for their piety, have yet been so
   unfortunate in their children? Because, I answer, many persons,
   remarkable for their piety, are yet very disagreeable persons, arid
   that too, by reason of some very marked defect in their religious
   character. They display just that spirit, and act in just that manner,
   which is likely to make religion odious--the more odious, the more
   urgently they commend it. Sometimes they appear well to the world one
   remove distant from them, they shine well in their written biography,
   but one living in their family will know what others do not; and if
   their children turn out badly, will never be at a loss for the reason.
   Many persons, too, have such defective views of the manner of teaching
   appropriate to early childhood, that they really discourage their
   children. "Fathers provoke not your children to anger," says one, "lest
   they be discouraged;" implying that there is such a thing as
   encouraging, and such a thing as discouraging good principle and piety
   in a child. And there are other ways of discouraging children besides
   provoking them to an angry and wounded feeling by harsh treatment.

   I once took up a book, from a Sabbath-school library, one problem of
   which was to teach a child that he wants a new heart. A lovely boy (for
   it was a narrative) was called every day to resolve that he would do no
   wrong that day, a task which he undertook most cheerfully, at first,
   and even with a show of delight. But, before the sun welt down, he was
   sure to fall into some ill-temper or be overtaken by some infirmity.
   Whereupon, the conclusion was immediately sprung upon him that he
   "wanted a new heart." We are even amazed that any teacher of ordinary
   intelligence should not once have imagined how she herself, or how the
   holiest Christian living, would fare under such kind of regimen; how
   she would discover every day, and probably some hours before sunset,
   that she too wanted a new heart? And the practical cruelty of the
   experiment is yet more to be deplored, than its want of consideration.
   Had the problem been how to discourage most effectually every ingenuous
   struggle of childhood, no readier or surer method could have been
   devised.

   Simply to tell a child, as he just begins to make acquaintance with
   words, that he "must have a new heart before he can be good," is to
   inflict a double discouragement. First, he can not guess what this
   technical phraseology means, and thus he takes up the impression that
   he can do or think nothing right, till he is able to comprehend what is
   above his age--why then should he make the endeavor? Secondly, he is
   told that he must have a new heart before he can be good, not that he
   may hope to exercise a renewed spirit, in the endeavor to be good--why
   then attempt what must be worthless, till something previous befalls
   him? Discouraged thus on every side, his tender soul turns hither and
   thither, in hopeless despair, and finally he consents to be what he
   must--a sinner against God, and that only. Well is it, under such a
   process, wearing down his childish soul into soreness and despair of
   good, sealing up his nature in silence and cessation as regards all
   right endeavors, and compelling him to turn his feelings into other
   channels, where he shall find his good in evil--well is it, I say, if
   he has not contracted a dislike to the very subject of religion, as
   inveterate as the subject is impossible.

   Many teach in this way, no doubt, with the best intentions imaginable;
   their design is only to be faithful, and sometimes they appear even to
   think that the more they discourage their children, the better and more
   faithful they are. But the mistake, if not cruelly meant, is certainly
   most cruel in the experience; and it is just this mistake, I am
   confident, which accounts for a large share of the unhappy failures
   made by Christian parents, in the training of their children. Rather
   should they begin with a kind of teaching suited to the age of the
   child. First of all, they should rather seek to teach. a feeling than a
   doctrine; to bathe the child in their own feeling of love to God, and
   dependence on him, and contrition for wrong before him, bearing up
   their child's heart in their own, not fearing to encourage every good
   motion they can call into exercise; to make what is good, happy and
   attractive, what is wrong, odious and hateful; then as the
   understanding advances, to give it food suited to its capacity, opening
   upon it, gradually the more difficult views of Christian doctrine and
   experience.

   Sometimes Christian parents fail of success in the religious training
   of their children, because the church counteracts their effort and
   example. The church makes a bad atmosphere about the house, and the
   poison comes in at the doors and windows. It is rent by divisions,
   burnt up by fanaticism, frozen by the chill of a worldly spirit,
   petrified in a rigid and dead orthodoxy. It makes no element of genial
   warmth and love about the child, according to the intention of Christ
   ill its appointment, but gives to religion, rather, a forbidding
   aspect, and thus, instead of assisting the parent, becomes one of the
   worst impediments to his success. What kind of element the world makes
   about the child is of little consequence; for here there is no pretence
   of piety. But when the school of Christ makes itself an element of sin
   and death, the child's baptism becomes as great a fiction as the church
   itself, and the arrangements of divine mercy fail of their intended
   power. There are, in short, too many ways of accounting for the failure
   of success, in the family training of those who are remarkable for
   their piety, without being led to doubt the correctness of my argument
   in these discourses.

   To sum up all, we conclude, not that every child can certainly be made
   to grow up in Christian piety--nothing is gained by asserting so much,
   and perhaps I could not prove it to be true, neither can any one prove
   the contrary--I merely show that this is the true idea and aim of
   Christian nurture as a nurture of the Lord. It is presumptively true
   that such a result can be realized, just as it is presumptively true
   that a school will forward the pupils in knowledge, though possibly
   sometimes it may fail to do it. And, without such a presumption, no
   parent can do his duty and fill his office well, any more than it is
   possible to make a good school, in the expectation that the scholars
   will learn something five or ten years hence, and not before.

   To give this subject its practical effect, let me urge it--

   1. Upon the careful attention of those who neglect, or decline,
   offering their children in baptism. Some of you are simply indifferent
   to this duty, not seeing what good it can do to baptize a child; others
   have positive theological objections to it. With the former class I
   certainly agree, so far as to admit that baptism, as an operation, can
   do no good to your child; but, if it has no importance in what it
   operates, it has the greatest importance in what it signifies; and,
   what is more to be deplored by you, the withholding it signifies as
   much, viz: that you yourselves have no sense of the relation that
   subsists between your character and that of your child, and as little
   of the mercy that Christ intends for your child, by including him with
   you in his fold, to grow up there by your side in the same common
   hopes. Had you any just sense of these things, you would look upon the
   baptism of your child as a rite of as great importance and spiritual
   propriety as your own; for, in neither case, has the form any value
   beyond what it signifies. The other class among you suffer the same
   defect; for it is my settled conviction that no man ever objected to
   infant baptism, who had not at the bottom of his objections, false
   views of Christian education--who did not hold a notion of
   individualism, in regard to Christian character in childhood, which is
   justified, neither by observation nor by Scripture.

   It is the prevalence of false views, on this subject, which creates so
   great difficulty in sustaining infant baptism in our churches. If
   children are to grow up in sin, to be converted when they come to the
   age of maturity, if this is tie only aim and expectation of family
   nurture, there really is no meaning or dignity whatever in the rite.
   They are even baptized into sin, and every propriety of the rite as a
   seal of faith is violated. And it is the feeling of this impropriety
   which lies at the basis of all your objections. Returning to the old
   Scripture doctrine of an organic law, connecting the child morally with
   the parents, so that he is, as it were, included in them, to grow up in
   their life; perceiving then that he is a kind of rudimental being,
   coining up gradually into a separate and complete individuality, having
   the parental life extended to him, first, with an almost absolutely
   controlling power, then less and less, till he takes, at length, the
   helm of his own spirit--every difficulty that you now feel vanishes,
   and the rite of infant baptism becomes one of the greatest beauty, and
   perfectly coincident with the spirit and the rules of adult baptism.
   The very command, "believe and be baptized," of which so much is made,
   is exactly met, and with no modifications, save what are necessary to
   suit the peculiar state and age of childhood: for the child, being
   included as it were in the parental life, is accounted presumptively
   one with the parents, and sealed with the seal of their faith.

   And it would certainly be very singular if Christ Jesus, in a scheme of
   mercy for the world, had found no place for infants and little
   children: more singular still, if he had given them the place of
   adults; and worse than singular, if he had appointed them to years of
   sin as the necessary preparation for his mercy. But if you see him
   counting them one with you, bringing them tenderly into his fold with
   you, there to grow up in him, you will not doubt that he has given them
   a place exactly and beautifully suited to them. And is it for you to
   withhold them from that place? Is it worthy of your tenderness, as a
   Christian parent, to leave them outside of the fold, when the gate is
   open, only taking care to go in yourself? I will not accuse you of
   intended wrong, but I am quite sure your thoughts are not as God's
   thoughts, and I ask you to study this question again, and more deeply.
   You are giving your children, as they grow up, impressions that will
   assuredly be very injurious to them, and robbing them of impressions
   that would have great power and value to their minds. What can be
   worse, what can make them aliens, more sensibly, from Christ's
   sympathies, what can more effectually discourage and chill them to all
   thoughts of a good life, than to make them feel that Christ has no
   place for them till their sins are ripe, and they are capable of a
   grace that is now above their years? What more persuasive, than to know
   that he has taken them into his school already, to grow up round him as
   disciples? And if God should call you to himself, what will draw upon
   their hearts more tenderly than to remember that the father and mother
   whose name they revere, brought them believingly in with themselves, to
   be owned in that general assembly of the just which occupies both
   worlds, and become partakers with them there, in the grace which is now
   their song?

   You rob yourselves too of an influence which is necessary to a right
   fulfillment of your duty. Their character, you say, is their own; let
   them believe for themselves and be baptized when they will. You have
   never the same genial feeling that you would, if you regarded them as
   morally linked to your character and drawing from you the mold of their
   being. You are not kept in the same state of carefulness and spiritual
   tenderness. No matter if you are cold to them, at times, and do not
   always live Christ in the house, they are growing up to be converted,
   and almost any thing is good enough for conversion! Christ himself,
   too, has no such relation to you, in your family, as to make your piety
   a domestic spirit. He has not gathered your children round you, as a
   flock of young disciples, pouring all his tenderness into your family
   ties, to make them vehicles of mercy and blessing. Once more I ask you
   to consider whether God is not better to you than you yourselves have
   thought, and whether, in withholding your children from God, you are
   not like to fall as far short of your duty, as you do of the privilege
   offered you.

   2. What motives are laid upon all Christian parents, by the doctrine I
   have established, to make the first article of family discipline a
   constant and careful discipline of themselves. I would not undervalue a
   strong and decided government in families. No family can be rightly
   trained without it. But there is a kind of virtue, my brethren, which
   is not in the rod--the virtue, I mean, of a truly good and sanctified
   life. And a reign of brute force is much more easily maintained, than a
   reign whose power is righteousness and love. There are, too, I must
   warn you, many who talk much of the rod as the orthodox symbol of
   parental duty, but who might really as well be heathens as Christians;
   who only storm about their house with heathenish ferocity, who lecture,
   and threaten, and castigate, and bruise, and call this family
   government. They even dare to speak of this as the nurture of the Lord.
   So much easier is it to be violent than to be holy, that they
   substitute force for goodness and grace, and are wholly unconscious of
   the imposture. It is frightful to think how they batter and bruise the
   delicate, tender souls of their children, extinguishing in them what
   they ought to cultivate, crushing that sensibility which is the hope of
   their being, and all in the sacred name of Christ Jesus. By no such
   summary process can you dispatch your duties to your children. You are
   not to be a savage to them, but a father and a Christian. Your real aim
   and study must be to infuse into them a new life, and, to this end, the
   Life of God must perpetually reign in you. Gathered round you as a
   family, they are all to be so many motives, strong as the love you bear
   them, to make you Christ-like in your spirit. It must be seen and felt
   with them that religion is a first thing with you. And it must be
   first, not in words and talk, but visibly first in your love--that
   which fixes your aims, feeds your enjoyments, sanctifies your
   pleasures, supports your trials, satisfies your wants, contents your
   ambition, beautifies and blesses your character. No mock piety, no
   sanctimony of phrase, or longitude of face on Sundays will suffice. You
   must live in the light of God, and hold such a spirit in exercise as
   you wish to see translated into your children. You must take them into
   your feeling, as a loving and joyous element, and beget, if by the
   grace of God you may, the spirit of your own heart in theirs.

   This is Christian education, the nurture of the Lord. Ah, how dismal is
   the contrast of a half-worldly, carnal piety; proposing money as the
   good thing of life: stimulating, ambition for place and show; provoking
   ill-nature by petulance and falsehood; praying, to save the rule of
   family worship; having now and then a religious fit, and, when it is
   on, weeping and exhorting the family to undo all that the life has
   taught them to do; and then, when the passions have burnt out their
   fire, dropping down again to sleep in the embers, only hoping still
   that the family will sometime be converted! When shall we discover that
   families ought to be ruined by such training as this? When shall we
   turn ourselves wholly to God, and looking on our children as one with
   us and drawing their character from us, make them arguments to duty and
   constancy-duty and constancy not as a burden, but, since they are
   enforced by motives so dear, our pleasure and delight? For these ties
   and duties exist not for the religious good of our children only, but
   quite as much for our own. And God, who understands us well, has
   appointed them to keep us in a perpetual frame of love; for so ready is
   our bad nature to kindle with our good, and burn with it, that what we
   call our piety, is, otherwise, in constant danger of degenerating into
   a fiery, censorious, unmerciful and intolerant spirit.

   Hence it is that monks have been so prone to persecution. Not dwelling
   with children as the objects of affection, having their hearts softened
   by no family love, their life identified with no objects that excite
   gentleness, their nature hardens into a Christian abstraction, and
   blood and doctrine go together. Therefore God hath set Israel in
   families, that the argument to duty may come upon the gentle side of
   your nature, and fall, as a baptism, on the head of your natural
   affections. Your character is to be a parent character, infolding
   lovingly the spirits of your children, as birds are gathered in the
   nest, there to be sheltered and fed, and got ready for the flight.
   Every hour is to be an hour of duty, every look and smile, every
   reproof and care, an effusion of Christian love. For it is the very
   beauty of the work you have to do that you are to cherish and encourage
   good, and live a better life into the spirits of your children.

   3. It is to be deeply considered, in connection with this view of
   family nurture, whether it does not meet many of the deficiencies we
   deplore in the Christian character of our times, and the present state
   of our churches. We have been expecting to thrive too much by conquest,
   and too little by growth. I desire to speak with all caution of what
   are very unfortunately called revivals of religion; for, apart from the
   name, which is modern, and from certain crudities and excesses that go
   with it--which name, crudities, and excesses are wholly adventitious as
   regards the substantial merits of such scenes--apart from these, I say,
   there is abundant reason to believe that God's spiritual economy
   includes varieties of exercise, answering, in all important respects,
   to these visitations of mercy, so much coveted in our churches. They
   are needed. A perfectly uniform demonstration in religion is not
   possible or desirable. Nothing is thus uniform but death. Our exercise
   varies every year and day from childhood onward. Society is going
   through new modes of exercise in the same manner, excited by new
   subjects, running into new types of feeling, and struggling with new
   combinations of thought. Quite as necessary is it that all holy
   principle should have a varied exercise--now in one duty, now in
   another; now in public aims and efforts, now in bosom struggles; now in
   social methods, now in those which are solitary and private; now in
   high emotion, now in deliberative thought and study. Accordingly the
   Christian church began with a scene of extraordinary social
   demonstration, and the like, in one form or another, may be traced in
   every period of its history since that day.

   But the difficulty is with us that we idolize such scenes, and make
   them the whole of our religion. We assume that nothing good is doing,
   or can be done at any other time. And what is even worse, we often look
   upon these scenes, and desire them, rather as scenes of victory, than
   of piety. They are the harvest-times of conversion, and conversion is
   too nearly every thing with us. In particular we see no way to gather
   in disciples, save by means of certain marked experiences, developed in
   such scenes, in adult years. Our very children can possibly come to no
   good, save in this way. Instrumentalities are invented to compass our
   object, that are only mechanical, and the hope of mere present effect
   is supposed to justify them. Present effect, in the view of many,
   justifies any thing and every thing. We strain every nerve of motion,
   exhaust every capacity of endurance, and push on till nature sinks in
   exhaustion. We preach too much, and live Christ too little. We do many
   things which, in a cooler mood, are seen to hurt the dignity of
   religion, and which somewhat shame and sicken ourselves. Hence the
   present state of religion in our country. We have worked a vein till it
   has run out. The churches are exhausted. [1] There is little to attract
   them, when they look upon the renewal of scenes through which many of
   them have passed. They look about them, with a sigh, to ask if possibly
   there is no better way, and some are ready to find that better way, in
   a change of their religion. Nothing different from this ought to have
   been expected. No nation can long thrive by a spirit of conquest; no
   more can a church. There must be an internal growth, that is made by
   holy industry, in the common walks of life and duty.

   Let us turn now, not away from revivals of religion, certainly not away
   from the conviction that God will bring upon the churches tides of
   spiritual exercise, and vary his divine culture by times and seasons
   suited to their advancement; but let us turn to inquire whether there
   is not a fund of increase in the very bosom of the church itself. Let
   us try if we may not train up our children in the way that they should
   go. Simply this, if we can do it, will make the church multiply her
   numbers many fold more rapidly than now, with the advantage that many
   more will be gained from without than now. For she will cease to hold a
   mere piety of occasions, a piety whose chief use is to get up
   occasions; she will follow a gentler and more constant method, as her
   duty is more constant, and blends with the very life of her natural
   affections. Her piety will be of a more even and genial quality, and
   will be more respected. She will not strive and cry, but she will live.
   The school of John the Baptist will be succeeded by the school of
   Christ, as a dew comes after a fire. Families will not be a temptation
   to you, half the time hurrying you on to get money, and prepare a show,
   and the other half, a motive to repentance and shame, and profitless
   exhortation; but all the time, an argument for Christian love and holy
   living.

   Then also the piety of the coming age will be deeper, and more akin to
   habit than ours, because it began earlier. It will have more of an air
   of naturalness, and will be less a work of will. A generation will come
   forward, who will have been educated to all good undertakings and
   enterprises--ardent without fanaticisinm, powerful without machinery.
   Not born, so generally, in a storm, and brought to Christ by an abrupt
   transition, the latter portion of life will not have an unequal war to
   maintain with the beginning, but life will be more nearly one, and in
   harmony with itself. Is not this a result to be desired? Could we tell
   our American churches, at this moment, what they want, should we not
   tell them this? Neither, if God, as many fear, is about to bring upon
   his church a day of wrath and stormy conflict, let any one suspect that
   such a kind of piety will want vigor and nerve to withstand the fiery
   assaults anticipated. See what turn the mind of out apostle took when
   he was arming his disciples for the great conflict of their age.
   Children, obey your parents--Fathers, provoke not your
   children--Servants, be obedient to your masters--Masters, forbear
   threatening--Finally, to include all, put on the whole armor of God. As
   if the first thought, in arming the church for great trials and stout
   victories, was to fill common life and the relations of the house with
   a Christian spirit. There is no truer truth, or more sublime. Religion
   never thoroughly penetrates life, till it becomes domestic. Like that
   patriotic fire which makes a nation invincible, it never burns with
   inextinguishable devotion till it burns at the hearth.

   4. Parents who are not religious in their character. have reason, in
   our subject, seriously to consider what effect they are producing, and
   likely to produce, in their children. Probably you do not wish them to
   be irreligious; few parents have the hardihood or indiscretion to
   desire that the fear of God, the salutary restraints of religion,
   should be removed from their children. Possibly you exert yourselves,
   in a degree, to give them religious counsel and instruction. But, alas!
   how difficult is it for you to convince them, by words, of the value of
   what you practically reject yourselves. Have I not shown you that they
   are set in organic connection with you, to draw their spirit, and
   principles and character from yours? What then are they daily deriving
   from you, but that which you yourselves reveal, in your prayerless
   house, and at your thankless table? Is it a spirit of duty and
   Christian love, a faith that has its home and rest in other worlds, or
   is it the carnal spirit of gain, indifference to God, deadness to
   Christ, love of the world, pride, ambition, all that is earthly,
   nothing that is heavenly?

   Do not imagine that you have done corrupting them when they are born.
   Their character is yet to be born, and, in you, is to have its
   parentage. Your spirit is to pass into them, by a law of transition
   that is natural, and well nigh irresistible. And then you are to meet
   them in a future life, and see how much of blessing or of sorrow they
   will impute to you--to share their unknown future, and look upon
   yourselves as father and mother to their destiny. Such thoughts, I
   know, are difficult for you to meet; difficult because they open real
   scenes, which you are, one day, to look upon. Loving these your
   children, as most assuredly you do, can you think that you are
   fulfilling the office that your love requires? Go home to your
   Christless house, look upon them all as they gather round you, and ask
   it of your love faithfully to say, whether it is well between you? And
   if no other argument can draw you to God, let these dear living
   arguments come into your soul, and prevail there.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] This was written, I believe, in the year, A.D., 1846.
     __________________________________________________________________

III
THE OSTRICH NURTURE.

   "The daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the
   wilderness."--Lam. iv. 3.

   I CITE this comparison for the sake of the comparison itself, and not
   to make an example of the mothers of Israel represented in it. They are
   not to be blamed, if, in the terrors of the siege and the wild
   feverings of starvation, the voice of nature has been stifled in their
   bosom. Indeed, it is the wonder of the prophet himself that, while the
   coarse sea-monsters draw out the breast and faithfully nurse their
   young, the human mother, so much tenderer and more loving, can be so
   maddened by distress as to become like the ostrich, and forget the
   cries of her children.

   The ostrich, it will be observed, is nature's type of all unmotherhood.
   She hatches her young without incubation, depositing her eggs in the
   sand to be quickened by the solar heat. Her office as a mother-bird is
   there ended. When the young are hatched, they are to go forth untended,
   or unmothered, save by the general motherhood of nature itself. Hence
   the ostrich is called sometimes the "wicked," and sometimes the
   "stupid" bird. Job describes her with a feeling of natural
   dislike--"Which leaveth her eggs in the earth, and warmneth them in the
   dust, and forgetteth that the foot may crush them, or that the wild
   beast may break them. She is hardened against her young ones, as though
   they were not hers, her labor is in vain without care, [in our version,
   "without fear."] Because God hath deprived her of wisdom, neither hath
   he imparted unto her understanding." In other words, she is both
   heartless and senseless; too heartless to care for her young, and too
   senseless to maintain a motherhood as genial even as that of the sand.

   Now there is no human mother, unless it be in some terrible stress of
   siege and starvation, when the mind itself is unsettled by the wild
   instigation of suffering, who will cease from the bodily care and
   feeding of her children. And yet there are many forms of nurture for
   the mind and character of children, that are so far resembled to the
   ostrich nurture, as to be fitly represented under that type. Practices
   are adopted, opinions accepted, theories of church life and conversion
   taught, that make a true Christian parentage virtually impossible, and
   leave the child, in fact, to a kind of nurture in the sands.

   What I propose, accordingly, at the present time, is to characterize
   these modes of ostrich nurture, miscalled Christian, showing what they
   are, and the real, though doubtless undesigned, cruelty of them.

   As a curious illustration of the looseness and the un settled feeling
   of the times, in regard to this great subject, it is just now beginning
   to be asserted by some, that the true principle of training for
   children is exactly that of the ostrich, viz: no training at all; the
   best government, no government. All endeavors tc fashion them by the
   parental standards, or to induct them into the belief of their parents,
   is alleged to be a real oppression put upon their natural liberty. It
   is nothing less, it is said, than an effort to fill them with
   prejudices, and put them under the sway of prejudices, all their lives
   long. Why not let the child have his own way, think his own thoughts,
   generate his own principles, and so be developed in the freedom and
   beauty of the flowers? Or, if he should sometimes fall into bad tempers
   and disgraceful or uncomely practices, as flowers do not, let him learn
   how to correct himself, and be righted by his own discoveries. Having
   thus no artificial conscience formed to hamper his natural freedom, no
   religious scruples and superstitions inculcated to be a detention, or
   limitation, upon his impulses, he will grow up as a genuine character,
   stunted by no cant or affectation; a large-minded, liberal, original,
   and beautiful soul.

   This kind of nurture supposes, evidently, a faith in human nature that
   is total and complete. As the mother ostrich might be supposed to
   reason, that her eggs are ostrich's eggs, and must therefore produce
   genuine ostriches and nothing else, so it assumes that human children
   will grow up, left to themselves, into the most genuine, highest style
   of human character. Whereas, it is the misery of human children that,
   as free beings, answerable for their choices and their character, and
   already touched with evil, they require some training, over and above
   the mere indulgence of their natural instincts. They can not be left to
   merely blossom into character; or, if they are, it will most assuredly
   be any sort of character but that which parental love would desire.
   What they most especially want is, what no ostrich or mere animal
   nurture can give; to be preoccupied with holy principles and laws; to
   have prejudices instilled that are holy prejudices; and so to be
   tempered beforehand by moderating and guiding influences, such as their
   perilous freedom and hereditary damage require.

   The question here at issue does not really need to be discussed, but it
   will greatly instruct and impress those parents who allow their minds
   to fluctuate in such looseness as quite unsettles the feeling of their
   obligation, just to notice the immense distinction between the
   relationship of human parents to their offspring, and that of the
   animals to theirs. It is not given to the animals, they will perceive,
   as to men, to pass any results matured by their own experience, to
   their posterity. They prepare no inventions, create no institutions for
   their offspring; produce no sciences, write no histories, preserve no
   records, accumulate no property or wealth that is to be transmitted;
   even their thoughts they can perpetuate in no literary treasures.
   Hence, there is no progress among them, over and above that small
   physiological improvement that may pass by the laws of natural
   propagation. So far they are all ostriches. All they can de is to
   follow their instincts, and leave their posterity to follow them over
   again, in the same manner, beginning at the same point. But with men,
   as creatures of reason, it is far otherwise. They are creators, all,
   for them that are to come after. What they can discover, build,
   produce, acquire, learn, think, enjoy, they are to transmit; giving it
   to them that come after to begin at the point where they cease, and
   have the full advantage of their opinions, works, and character. One of
   their first duties, therefore, is to educate and train their offspring,
   transmitting to them what they have known, believed, and proved by
   their experience. If they sometimes transmit their low thoughts, and
   narrow opinions, and mistaken principles, and so far give their
   children a great disadvantage, that is but a necessary evil which is
   incidental manifestly to a system otherwise beneficent, and for that
   they are of course responsible. If nothing were to pass but mere
   instincts, the disadvantage would be far greater, and the whole scale
   of existence lower. How unnatural and monstrous, therefore, is that
   scheme of nurture which requires it of parents to pass nothing, or as
   little as possible, to their children. If they have learned wisdom,
   they are not to inculcate that wisdom, lest it should create a
   prejudice! If they have found their conscience and the principles of
   virtue, to be their truest friends aid the best guardians of their
   life, they are not to hamper their children by subjecting them to the
   same! If they have found the principal joys that freshen life, in God
   and the faith of his Son, they are still to let their children find
   their own sources of strength and joy for themselves, and not to train
   them, or indoctrinate them in such ways of blessing, lest perchance
   they be not sufficiently original and free in their development! Why,
   if they were to discover mines and hide the discovery forever, or
   acquire immense treasures of property appointing them by their will to
   be sunk in the sea, leaving their children in utter destitution, they
   would not be as false to their office of parentage! God has given it to
   them, as rational creatures, to transmit all possible benefits to their
   offspring. And what shall they more carefully transmit than what is
   valuable above every thing else, their principles and their piety?

   We find, then, a most solid ground for the obligations of Christian
   nurture. It is one of the grand distinctions of humanity that it has
   such a power to pass, and is set in such a duty of passing, its gifts,
   principles, and virtues, on to the ages that come after. Happily, few
   will need to be convinced of this; and yet there awe a great many, we
   shall find, who manage, even under what they regard as truly Christian
   pretexts, to maintain schemes of nurture so nearly unparental and
   unnatural, as to have a much closer affinity with the ostrich nurture
   than they suspect themselves.

   We have many, for example, who have taken up notions of liberty, or
   free moral agency, in religion, that separate them effectually from the
   true sense of their power and privilege in regard to their children.
   Assuming the unquestionable first truth that religious virtue, or
   piety, is a matter strictly personal, the free will offering of
   obedience and duty to God, they sub side into the impression that they
   are of course absolved from any close responsibility for that which
   lies so en tirely in the choices of their children themselves. They may
   not take their absolution by any formal inference, and may not even be
   aware that they have taken it at all; but the distinction between
   manhood and childhood is so far hidden, or slurred over, under their
   supposed principle of responsibility grounded in free agency, that
   their self-indulgence is accommodated, by the pretext, more easily than
   they know. Sometimes the inference will be half uttered in their
   feeling; as when they ask, only not aloud--"after all, must not our
   children answer for themselves?" So they submit resignedly, to the
   supposed necessity, and do it with so much less of compunction, because
   they consciously have so tender a feeling for their children, and are
   so much pained by the sense of their religious perils. But the
   submission they fall into, in this pious way, amounts, in fact, to a
   real absolution, not seldom, from all the finest, tenderest, most
   faithful, most unworldly cares of their parental office. They subside
   thus into a habit of remissness and religious negligence, and their way
   of nurture becomes unparental even as that of the ostriches.

   Their blame in such defections from duty is greater than they know. For
   God has probably instituted the reproductive order of existence,
   including the parental and filial relation, with a special design to
   mitigate the perils of free agency. One generation is to be ripe in
   knowledge and character, and the next is to be put in charge of the
   former, in the tenderest, most flexible, most dependent state possible,
   to be by them inducted into the choices where their safety lies.
   Furthermore, they are bound to fidelity in their charge, by the fact,
   that, as they have given existence to the subjects of it, so they have
   also communicated the poison of their own fallen state, to increase the
   perils of existence. In this manner, God has put it upon them to be the
   more strenuous in their charge, because of these perils, and expects,
   by means of their fidelity, to reduce the otherwise disastrous results
   of free agency to the smallest possible measure. Their responsibility
   in the parental office is not diminished, but increased even a hundred
   fold, by the personal liberty and strict individuality of their
   children. It would be far less cruel to be negligent of their bodily
   wants; for the body will maintain its growth, and will even manage to
   increase in robustness, when it is poorly clad and fed upon the
   coarsest fare. But the mind, or soul, born to greater perils than want
   or the weather, even the tremendous perils of untaught liberty, and
   principles unfixed, waits, at the point of its magnificent infancy, to
   be led into the choices, tastes, affinities, and habits, that are to be
   the character of its eternity. Tenderness every where else, and
   remissness here, is only the mockery of kindness. Let the first want be
   first, and the highest nature have the promptest care; and if any thing
   is left to the nurtire of the sands, let it be the body, where the
   crime of the desertion will be less and will certainly not be hid.

   Many true Christians, again, fall of, unwittingly, from the humanly
   parental modes of nurture, in taking up notions of conversion that are
   mechanical, and proper only to the adult age. They make a merit of
   great persistency and firmness, in asserting the universal necessity of
   a new spiritual birth; not perceiving under what varieties of form that
   change may be wrought. The soul must be exercised, they think, in one
   given way, viz: by a struggle with sin, a conscious self-renunciation,
   and a true turning to Christ for mercy, followed by the joy and peace
   of a new life in the Spirit. A child, in other words, can be born of
   God only in the same way as an adult can be. There is no quickening
   grace, or new creation of the Spirit, proper to him as a child. If he
   dies in infancy, God may, it is true, find some way, possibly, to save
   him, but if he stays among the living, he can not be a Christian till
   he is older. He is therefore left, in this most tender and beautiful
   and pliant age, in a condition most of all unprivileged, and most sadly
   unhopeful. The necessity of a great spiritual change is upon him, and
   yet he is wholly incapable of the change! What other being has the good
   Lord and Father of the world left in a condition as pitiful as this of
   a human child? Even the most wicked and hardened of men has, at least,
   the gate of conversion left open. And yet there are many Christian
   parents, living an outwardly decent and fair life, who consent, without
   difficulty, and with a kind of consciously orthodox merit, to this very
   unnatural and truly hard lot of childhood, and fall into easy
   conformity with it. Their practically accepted notion of Christian
   nurture, in which they mean to bc piously faithful is, that they are to
   bring up their children outside of all possible acceptance with God,
   till such time as their conversion may be looked for in a church-wise
   form. And their whole scheme of treatment corresponds. They
   indoctrinate them soundly in respect to their need of a new heart; tell
   them what conversion is, and how it comes to pass with grown people;
   pray that God will arrest them when they are old enough to be converted
   according to the manner; drill them, meantime, into all the
   constraints, separated from all the hopes and liberties of religion;
   turning all their little misdoings and bad tempers into evidences of
   their need of regeneration, and assuring them that all such signs must
   be upon them till after they have passed the change. Their nurture is a
   nurture, thus, of despair; and the bread of life itself, held before
   them as a fruit to be looked upon, but not tasted, till they are old
   enough to have it as grown people do, finally becomes repulsive, just
   because they have been so long repelled and fenced away from it. And so
   religion itself, pressed down upon them till they are fatally sored by
   its impossible claims, becomes their fixed aversion. How plain is it
   that such kind of nurture is unnatural and, though it be not so
   intended, unchristian. It makes even the loving gospel of Jesus a most
   galling chain upon the neck of childhood!--this and nothing more. For
   so long a time, and that the most ductile and hopeful, as regards all
   new implantings of good, it really proposes nothing but to have the
   depravated nature grow, and the plague of sin deepen its bad infection.

   Meantime, it will be strange, if the parents themselves do not fall
   away from all that is necessary to their Christian power, when the
   conversion of their children is postponed, in this manner, by the
   merely adult possibilities of their gospel. Why should they live so as
   to gain their children, when their children are not to be gained? Were
   they really to live so as to make their house an element of grace, the
   atmosphere of their life an element, to all that breathe it, of
   unworldly feeling and all godly aspiration, their mechanical doctrine
   of conversion would scarcely suffice to keep away the saving mercies of
   God from their children. Their children would still be converted even
   before the permissible time, and burst up through the poor detentions
   of their bad doctrine, to cover it with blessed confusion. But alas! it
   requires but a very little of genuine, living godliness in the house,
   to bring up children for a future conversion! This kind of ostrich
   nurture can be cheaply maintained, and with a very small expenditure of
   piety. To keep the drill on foot, as a mere legal indoctrination; to
   phrase a hope or desire of conversion, in the family prayers; to be
   exact, stern, stiff in all church practices, requires no faith; or,
   living by faith, no sanctification of the life. A busy, worldly,
   hard-natured father, a vain, irritable, captious, fashion-loving
   mother, a house orthodoxly bad and earthly in all the reigning
   practices, is yet a good enough school to prepare the necessity of a
   future conversion for the children! How different the kind of life that
   is necessary to bring them up in conversion and beget them anew in the
   spirit of a loving obedience to God, at a point even prior to all
   definite recollection. This is Christian nurture, because it nurtures
   Christians, and because it makes an element of Christian grace in the
   house. It invites, it nourishes hope, it breathes in love, it forms the
   new life as a holy, though beautiful prejudice in the soul, before its
   opening and full flowering of intelligence arrives. "Suffer little
   children to come unto me and forbid them not" translates the very
   economy of the house, and has, in that economy, its living
   verification. And the promise, "for of such is the kingdom of heaven,"
   wears no look of violence; for the kingdom of heaven is there. The
   children grow up in it, as being configured to it. The family prayers
   have a sound of gladness, and they sing the family hymn with glad
   voices. The worldliness of the glittering bad world without is set off
   and made fascinating by no doom of repression within. A firm
   administration is loved because, like God's, it is felt to be the
   defense of liberty. Truth, purity, firmness, love to Jesus, all that
   belongs to a formal conversion and more, is centralized thus in the
   soul, as a kind of ingrown habit. The children are all converted by the
   converting element of grace they live in. And so it is proved that
   there is a conversion for children, proper and possible to their age.
   They are not excluded, walled away from Christ by a mechanical
   enforcement of modes proper only and possible to adults. The house
   itself is a converting ordinance.

   Again there is another and different way in which parents, meaning to
   be Christian, fall into the ostrich nurture without being at all aware
   of it. They believe in what are called revivals of religion, and have a
   great opinion of them as being, in a very special sense, the converting
   times of the gospel. They bring up their children, therefore, not for
   conversion exactly, but, what is less dogmatic and formal, for the
   converting times. And this they think is even more evangelical and
   spiritual because it is more practical; though, in fact, much looser
   and connected, commonly, with even greater defections from parental
   duty and fidelity. To bring up a family for revivals of religion
   requires, alas! about the smallest possible amount of consistency and
   Christian assiduity. No matter what opinion may be held of such times,
   or of their inherent value and propriety as pertaining to the genuine
   economy of the gospel, any one can see that Christian parents may very
   easily roll off a great part of their responsibilities, and comfort
   themselves in utter vanity and worldliness of life, by just holding it
   as a principal hope for their children, that they are to be finally
   taken up and rescued from sin, by revivals of religion. As it costs
   much to be steadily and uniformly spiritual, how agreeable the hope
   that gales of the Spirit will come to make amends for their conscious
   defections. If they do not maintain the unworldly and heavenly spirit,
   so as to make it the element of life in their house, God will some time
   have his day of power in the community, and they piously hope that
   their children will then be converted to Christ. So they fall into a
   key of expectation that permits, for the present, modes of life and
   conduct, which they can not quite approve. They go after the world with
   an eagerness which they expect by and by to check, or possibly, for the
   time, to repent of. The family prayers grow cold and formal, and are
   often intermitted. The tempers are earthly, coarse, violent. Discipline
   is ministered in anger, not in love. The children are lectured,
   scolded, scorched by fiery words. The plans are all for money, show,
   position, not for the more sacred and higher interests of character.
   The conversation is uncharitable, harsh, malignant, an effusion of
   spleen, a tirade, a taking down of supposed worth and character by low
   imputations and carping criticisms. In this kind of element the
   children are to have their growth and nurture, but the parents piously
   hope that there will some time be a revival of religion, and that so
   God will mercifully make up what they conceive to be only the natural
   infirmity of their lives. Finally the hoped for day arrives, and there
   begins to be a remarkable and strange piety in the house. The father
   chokes almost in his prayer, showing that he really prays with a
   meaning! The mother, conscious that things have not been going rightly
   with the children, and seeing many frightful signs of their certain
   ruin at hand, warns them, even weeping, of the impending dangers by
   which she is so greatly distressed on their account; adding also bitter
   confessions of fault in herself. The children stare of course, not
   knowing what strange thing has come! They can not be unaffected;
   perhaps they seem to be converted, perhaps not. In many cases it makes
   little difference which; for if all this new piety in the house is to
   burn out in a few days, and the old regimen of worldliness and sin to
   return, it will be wonderful if they are not converted back again to be
   only just as neglectful, in the matter of Christian living, as they
   were brought up to be. Any scheme of nurture that brings up children
   thus for revivals of religion, is a virtual abuse and cruelty. And it
   is none the less cruel that some pious-looking pretexts are cunningly
   blended with it. Instead of that steady, formative, new-creating power
   that ought to be exerted by holiness in the house, it looks to
   campaigns of force that really dispense with holiness, and it results
   that all the best ends of Christian nurture are practically lost.

   Again, there is another form of the unchristian nurture, over opposite
   to these just named, which is quite as wide of the true character. I
   speak of that lower and merely ethical nurture, which undertakes, with
   great assiduity it may be, to form and whittle the age of childhood
   into character, by a merely pruning and humanly culturing process. It
   is a kind of nurture that stops short of religion; and atones for the
   conscious defect, by a drill more or less careful in the moralities.
   The reason of this defect commonly is that the parents are too far
   decayed in piety and too much under the world, to put forth any really
   religious endeavor; but it is to their children as if no such interest
   of religion had existence. They are corrected on this side and on that,
   by human standards and methods, taught to consider what is respectable,
   or what people will think of them, how to win the honors of character
   among men, lectured on the wisdom of conduct, and the resulting
   happiness of a right behavior, but the fact of their relation to God,
   and the standards and motives furnished by religion are wholly passed
   by, or omitted. The cruelty of this sort of nurture is that, however
   delicate and careful it may be of that which lies in mere social
   character and standing, it exactly copies the ostrich nurture in all
   that relates to the higher and properly religious life. The world-ward
   nature is cared for, but the religious, that which opens God-ward, that
   which aspires after God, and, occupied by his inspiring impulse, mounts
   into all good character, as being even liberty itself; that which
   consummates and crowns the real greatness and future eternity of souls,
   is virtually ignored, left to the wild, dry motherhood of the sands.

   Children trained in this mere ethical nurture, are inducted into no way
   of faith or dependence on God. They are taught to look for no spiritual
   transformation. The virtue they practice is to be prayerless virtue.
   They grow up thus on the roots of their natural pride and selfishness,
   bred into the habit of testing their goodness by their appearances, and
   their merit by their works. That they should be molded in this manner
   to a Christian life would be wonderful. Their pareiits may be nominally
   Christian, but they have, in fact, agreed to omit religion in the
   training of their children; and it would be strange if they should
   compliment their only nominally Christian parentage, by unfolding a
   really Christian life. It will be well if they have any genuine respect
   for religion, or even sense of what it is. Trained to have no religious
   conscience, and to practice a virtue unblessed by the nobler impulsions
   of religious inspiration, it will be strange if they maintain evon
   correctness of life; and more so if their heart, undeveloped by
   religion, does not canker itself away in the sordid vices of meanness,
   or burn itself out, as regards all worthy and great feelings, in the
   general hatred of God and his truth. There may be many decencies, or
   even delicacies, in this kind of nurture; and yet, in the complete
   oversight or neglect of the religious nature, it becomes profoundly and
   even cruelly unnatural.

   There is yet another and widely prevalent misconception of childhood
   which, to a certain extent, involves Christianity itself in the same
   unnatural methods that are adopted by men. I speak here more especially
   of the assumed fact that Christ allows no place in the church for such
   as are only children. Is not the church to be composed of such as
   really believe? And what kind of faith can children have who are not
   yet arrived at the age of intelligence? Hence there is supposed to be a
   kind of necessity that children, up to that period of advancement and
   personal maturity when they are able to choose and believe for
   themselves, and become the subjects of a genuine Christian experience,
   should be excluded from the Christian church. It signifies nothing that
   the seal of faith was anciently applied to children only eight days
   old, as being presumptively in the faith of their parents, and included
   with them in the bonds of their covenant. As little does it signify
   that Christ says "let them come, forbid them not; for of such is the
   kingdom of heaven." Still they can not believe--are not old enough to
   believe--how then can they come into the church, or in any conceivable
   way be included in it? Is not the church of God assumed to be made up
   of them that believe? What then is left for children but to stay
   without till they are old enough to be intelligently converted, and
   entered into a new life by their own deliberate choice? Hence the
   Baptist brethren conceive it to be a matter perfectly final, as regards
   the question of baptism, that infants can not believe, and can not
   therefore have any fit plan among believers in the church. Does not the
   Scripture say--"Believe and be baptized?" And how is confession to be
   made with the mouth, except when the heart believeth unto
   righteousness?

   The result of such arguments and inferences is, that children have no
   place given them in the church, however modified, to suit the
   conditions of their age. Theil parents are called by Christ to live
   within and they themselves are left without. There is no church nurture
   for them proper to their tender years; they can not be in the church
   till they are sufficiently grown to believe. And so it is settled that
   there is no church mercy for them. The church turns her back and leaves
   them, separated even from their parents, to try their fortunes, like
   the wild ostriches, in the desert sands without.

   It would seem that the hardness and the monstrous unnaturalness of such
   conceptions must revolt the mind of almost any thoughtful person. If
   the grace of our salvation took the ingenuous children away from their
   sinning, unbelieving parents, and gathered them into the heavenly fold
   by themselves, we should have less reason to be shocked by the
   severity. But instead of this, calling home the penitent fathers and
   mothers and carefully folding them in the church of God's protection,
   Jesus their shepherd shuts away the lambs, we are told, and forbids
   them to come in! The cruelty of such an opinion, or doctrine, is
   evident, and the cruel effects it must have, in making even childhood
   feel itself to be an alien from God's mercies, are even more so. It has
   no conception that there can be a Saviour and salvation for all ages
   and stages of life; Christ is the Saviour of adults only! No! Christ is
   a Saviour bounded by no such narrow and meager theories--a Saviour for
   infants, and children, and youth, as truly as for the adult age;
   gathering them all into his fold together, there to be kept and
   nourished together, by gifts appropriate to their years; even as he
   himself has shown us so convincingly, by passing through all ages and
   stages of life himself, and giving us, in that manner, to see that he
   partakes the want and joins himself to the fallen state of each. Having
   been a child himself, who can imagine, even for one moment, that he has
   no place in his fold for the fit reception of childhood? Dreadful
   insult, both to him and to childhood, and the greater insult, that the
   gospel even of heaven's love is narrowed to this, by a supposed
   necessity of evangelism! What a position is given thus to children,
   growing up to look on an adult church, instructed into the opinion that
   what they look upon--Christ, ordinances, covenant vows--is only for
   adult people!

   I ought perhaps to add, in bringing this argument to a close, that the
   harsh imputations I may seem to some of you to have indulged, must not
   be hastily disallowed. Almost all parents are tender, consciously
   tender of their children. What will not most of you do, to clothe and
   feed, and educate, and, in all respects, make duo provision for your
   children? Sacrifices here are nothing. Health, rest, ease, comfort, you
   gladly renounce for their sake, and some of you would not spare the
   sacrifice even of your soul to serve them. Are you then to be justly
   charged with a mode of nurture so unnatural as to be fitly resembled to
   that of the ostriches? Of what are you more deeply conscious than of
   your willingness even to die for your children? All your tenderest
   movings are toward them; all that you plan, or think; or do, is for
   them. Yes, doubtless, it is even so, as regards their nurture and
   comfort in this world--all your tenderest cares and studies center
   here. Of this there is no question, and far be it from me to suggest a
   doubt of you here.

   No, this defection from nature, of which I have been speaking, relates
   to a different matter--in quite another field. Doing you full honor as
   a careful provider, a most faithful and loving guardian, a
   disinterested, self-sacrificing contriver and laborer for your
   children's good; the question is whether you do not after all put them
   off with a mere ostrich nurture in the matter of the soul? whether you
   do not let in some one or more of these very misconceptions I have
   named, tc control all your modes of conduct and discipline to ward
   them? Do you never throw off your own Christian responsibilities for
   them by allowing, as a pretext, the fact of their liberty and personal
   responsibility for themselves? Are you never let down in the sense of
   your most sacred obligations, by simply allowing yourself to think it
   enough, that your children are brought up for conversion? Do none of
   you subside even to, lower point, and bring up your children only for
   revivals of religion? Are there none of you that make it your whole
   care to form your children by the mere ethical standards, and finish
   them in the graces of a mere human culture? Have none of you theories
   of salvation and of Christ's way respecting it, such as leave no place
   for children in the church, however qualified to meet their age? Little
   now does it signify that you love your children, or do even slave both
   body and mind to get a footing of society and comfort for them in this
   life--even beavers and bears will do as much as that. In giving
   existence to your child you have set him forth into perils that include
   his immortality, and you have therefore no right to handle him
   neglectfully in this great concern. On the contrary, you are to accept
   his immortality, and in a seriously Christian sense. take it on
   yourself, as being in Christ's name responsible for it; responsible,
   that is, for making your house itself such an element of piety, love,
   faith, unworldly and beautiful living, that your children shall grow up
   in it, as in the nurture of the Lord. Take no credit to yourselves for
   any thing which falls short of this. You may be very tender in what
   falls short, but it is no Christian tenderness. You can not live in a
   worldly house, you can not make yourself a family drudge to serve a
   mere family ambition, can not piously hope that God will somehow
   convert your children after they have got by you and become adults,
   without being justly chargeable with giving their souls a mere nurture
   of the sands, in which the genuine Christian grace has no part
   whatever. And be not surprised if these children when they meet you
   before the Judge of your and their life, have a more severe witness to
   give against you than if you had merely neglected their bodies.

   Probably enough there may be some of you that, without being Christians
   yourselves, are yet careful to teach your children all the saving
   truths of religion, and who thus may take it as undue severity to be
   charged with only giving your children this unnatural, ostrich nurture
   of which I have spoken. But how poor a teacher of Christ is any one who
   is not in the light of Christ, and does not know the inward power 9f
   his truth, as a gospel of life to the soul. You press your child, in
   this manner, with duties you do not practice, and promises you do not
   embrace; and if you do not succeed, it only means that you can not
   impose on him to that high extent. A mother teach by words only? No!
   but more, a great deal more, by the atmosphere of love and patience she
   breathes. Besides, how easy is it for her to make every thing she
   teaches legal and repulsive, just because she has no liberty or joy in
   it herself. What is wanted therefore is not merely to give a child the
   law, telling him this is duty, this is right, this God requires, this
   he will punish; but a much greater want is to have the spirit of all
   duty lived and breathed around him; to see, and feel, and breathe,
   himself, the living atmosphere of grace. Therefore it is vain, let all
   parents so understand, to imagine that you can really fulfill the true
   fatherhood and motherhood, unless you are true Christians yourselves. I
   am sorry to discourage you in any good attempts. Rightly taken, what I
   say will not discourage you, but will only prompt you by all that is
   dearest to you on earth, to become truly qualified for your office. By
   these dear pledges God has given you, to call you to himself, I beseech
   you turn yourselves to the true life of religion. Have it first in
   yourselves, then teach it as you live it; teach it by living it; for
   you can do it in no other manner. Be Christians yourselves, and then it
   will not be difficult for you to do your true duties to your children.
   Until then it is really impossible.

   I have only to add in the conclusion of this subject--just what is made
   plain by it--that there is really no great wonder, in the fact often
   spoken of as a subject of wonder, that Christian parents are so
   frequently disappointed in their children. Why is it that such correct
   and apparently Christian people see their children grow up unaffected
   by religion, or even hostile to its sacred claims, falling possibly
   into a character of vice and complete moral abandonment? The answer is,
   alas! too easy. I will not say that, in every case, the result accuses
   them of crime; it may be the effect sometimes of their mistaken, or
   faulty conceptions of parental duty. But no one, it seems to me, can
   once distinguish these bad faults of nurture, and note the very wide
   prevalence they have in the Christian homes, without even expecting
   worse and more fatal results of mischief than actually appear.
   Sometimes it seems to be imagined that nothing but some dark hindrance
   of divine sovereignty can account for such results. The less we have to
   say in that strain the wiser we shall be, and as much less irreverent
   to God. No, there is reason enough for all such miscarriages without
   charging them to God. I could not express myself as the truth requires,
   my brethren, if I did not say, that when I observe the wide-spread
   delusions of nominally Christian parents, their false aims, their
   worldly pretexts, their habitual separation from any living faith in
   God, in the ends, plans, practices, and spirit of their administration,
   I rather wonder that results a great deal worse do not appear. It would
   even be a fit subject of wonder, if children trained in this manner,
   should not turn out badly. If indeed they are so much as converted
   afterwards, saying nothing of their growing up in a sanctified
   character, it is well--more than could be rightly expected.

   No, my friends, these mistaken modes of nurture ought not to make
   Christians; they must even falsify their own nature to do it. Let us be
   just to God, and lay our griefs no longer to his charge. If we can not
   come into his way in the training of our families, let us not complain
   that we do not succeed in ways of our own. After all, there is no cheap
   way of making Christians of our children. Nothing but to practically
   live for it makes it sure. To be Christians ourselves--ah! there is the
   difficulty. How can an unchristian, or only non-christian spirit
   reigning in the house, quicken the spirit of life and holiness in the
   hearts subjected to its sway? Even if our false modes of nurture are
   mistakes, who can expect that mistakes will be as good as verities? O,
   thou, blessed Son of God, advocate and friend of the little ones, rid
   us of our falsities, and set us in thy own true spirit, that we may
   fitly discharge these most sacred and tenderest duties!
     __________________________________________________________________

IV.
THE ORGANIC UNITY OF THE FAMILY.

   "The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the
   women knead dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour
   out drink offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to
   anger."--Jeremiah vii. 18.

   IN this lively picture, you have the illustration of a great and
   momentous truth--the Organic Unity of the Family. If it be an
   idolatrous family, worshipers of the moon, for example, such is the
   organic relation of the members, that they are all involved together,
   and the idol worship is the common act of the house. The children
   gather wood, the fathers kindle the fire, the women prepare the cakes
   for an offering, and the queen of heaven receives it, as one that is
   the joint product of the whole family. The worship is family worship;
   the god of one is the god of all; the spirit of one, the spirit of all.

   And so it is with all family transactions and feelings. They implicate
   ordinarily the whole circle of the house; young and old, male and
   female, fathers and mothers, sons and daughters. Acting thus together,
   they take a common character, accept the same delusions, practice the
   same sins, and ought, I believe, to be sanctified by a common grace.

   This most serious truth is one that is exceedingly remote from the
   present age, and from no part of the Christian world more remote than
   from us. All our modern notions and speculations have taken a bent
   toward individualism. In the state, we have been engaged to bring out
   the civil rights of the individual, asserting his proper liberties as a
   person, and vindicating his conscience, as a subject of God, from the
   constraints of force. In matters of religion, we have burst the bonds
   of church authority, and erected the individual mind into a tribunal of
   judgment within itself; we have asserted free will as the ground of all
   proper responsibility, and framed our theories of religion so as to
   justify the incommunicable nature of persons as distinct units. While
   thus engaged, we have well nigh lost, as was to be expected, the idea
   of organic powers and relations. The state, the church, the family,
   have ceased to be regarded as such, according to their proper idea, and
   become mere collections of units. A national life, a church life, a
   family life, is no longer conceived, or perhaps conceivable, by many.
   Instead of being wrought in together and penetrated, to some extent, by
   historic laws and forces common to all the members, we only seem to lie
   as seeds piled together, without any terms of connection, save the
   accident of proximity, or the fact that we all belong to the heap. And
   thus the three great forms of organic existence, which God has
   appointed for the race, are in fact lost out of mental recognition. The
   conception is so far gone that, when the fact of such an organic
   relation is asserted, our enlightened public will stare at the strange
   conceit, and wonder what can be meant by a paradox so absurd.

   My design, at the present time, is to restore, if possible, the
   conception of one of these organic forms, viz: the family. For though
   we have gained immense advantages, in a civil, ecclesiastical, and
   religious point of view, by our modern development of individualism, we
   have yet run ourselves into many hurtful misapprehensions on all these
   subjects, which, if they are not rectified, will assuredly bring
   disastrous consequences. And nowhere consequences more disastrous than
   in the family, where they are already apparent, though not fully
   matured; for the very change of view, by which we have cleared
   individual responsibility, in our discussions of free will, original
   sin, and kindred subjects, has operated, in another direction, to
   diminish responsibility, where most especially it needs to be felt;
   that is, in Christian families.

   What then do we mean by the organic unity of the family? It will be
   understood, of course, that we do not speak of a physical or vascular
   connection; for, after birth, there is no such connection existing, any
   more than there is between persons of different families. In so far,
   however, as a connection of parentage, or derivation has affected the
   character, that fact must be included, though it can not be regarded as
   a chief element in the unity asserted. Perhaps I shall be understood
   with the greatest facility, if I say that the family is such a body,
   that a power over character is exerted therein, which can not properly
   be called influence. We commonly use the term influence to denote a
   persuasive power, or a governmental power, exerted purposely, and with
   a conscious design to effect some result in the subject. In maintaining
   the organic unity of the family, I mean to assert, that a power is
   exerted by parents over children, not only when they teach, encourage,
   persuade, and govern, but without any purposed control whatever. The
   bond is so intimate that they do it unconsciously and
   undesignedly--they must do it. Their character, feelings, spirit, and
   principles, must propagate themselves, whether they will or not.
   However, as influence, in the sense just given, can not be received by
   childhood prior to the age of reason and deliberative choice, the
   control of parents, purposely exerted, must be regarded, during that
   early period, as an absolute force, not as influence. All such acts of
   control therefore must, in metaphysical propriety, and as far as the
   child is concerned, be classed under the general denomination of
   organic causes. And thus whatever power over character is exerted in
   families one side of consent, in the children, and even before they
   have come to the age of rational choice, must be taken as organic
   power, in the same way as if the effect accrued under the law of simple
   contagion. So too when the child performs acts of will, under parental
   direction, that involve results of character, without knowing or
   considering that they do, these must be classed in the same manner.

   In general, then, we find the organic unity of the family, in every
   exertion of power over character, which is not exerted and received as
   influence; that is, with a design to address the choice on one side,
   and a sense of responsible choice on the other. Or, to use language
   more popular, we conceive the manners, personal views, prejudices,
   practical motives, and spirit of the house, as an atmosphere which
   passes into all1 and pervades all, as naturally as the air they
   breathe. This, however, not in any such absolute or complete sense as
   to leave no room for individual distinctions. Sometimes the two parents
   will have a very different spirit themselves, though the grace of God
   is pledged to make the better, if it be truly right, and hindered by no
   gross inconsistencies, victorious. Sometimes the child, passing into
   the sphere of other causes, as in the school, the church, neighboring
   families, or general society, will emerge and take a character
   partially distinct--partially, I say; never wholly. The odor of the
   house will always be in his garments, and the internal difficulties
   with which he has to struggle, will spring of the family seeds planted
   in his nature.

   Having carefully stated thus what I mean by the organic unity of the
   family, I next proceed to inquire whether any such unity exists? And
   here it is worth noticing--

   1. That there is nothing in this view which conflicts with the proper
   individuality of persons and their separate responsibility. We have
   gained immense advantages, in modern times, as regards society,
   government, and character, by liberating and exalting the individual
   man. Far be it from me to underrate these advantages, or to bring them
   into jeopardy. But a child manifestly can not be a proper individual,
   before he is one. Nothing can be gained by assuming that he is; and, if
   it is not true, much is sure to be lost. Besides, we are never, at any
   age, so completely individual as to be clear of organic connections
   that affect our character. To a certain extent and for certain
   purposes, we are individuals, acting each from his own will. Then to a
   certain extent and for certain other purposes, we are parts or members
   of a common body, as truly as the limbs of a tree. We have an open side
   in our nature, where a common feeling enters, where we adhere, and
   through which we are actuated by a common will. There we are many--here
   we are one.

   It is remarkable too how often, without knowing it, and, as it were
   instinctively, we assume the fact, and act upon it. We do it, for
   example, as between nations, where it is not so much the moral life as
   the national that constructs the supposed unity. One nation, for
   instance. has injured or oppressed another--sought to crush, or
   actually crushed another by invasion. A century or more afterwards, the
   wrong is remembered, and the injured nation takes the field, still
   burning for redress. The history of Carthage and Rome gives us an
   example. But, suppose it had been said--"This is very absurd in you
   Carthaginians. The Romans, who did you the injury, are all dead, and
   those who now bear the name are their children's children. They have
   done you no injury any more than the people of Britain or India.
   Neither is it the walls, or streets, or temples of Rome that have
   injured you. The Roman territory is mere land, and this has not injured
   you. Why then go to war with the Romans? How absurd to think of
   redressing your old injuries by a war with men who have done you no
   harm!" Now it was by just this kind of sophistry that Mr. Jefferson
   proved that a public debt is obligatory for only one generation, and
   possibly the Carthaginians might have been speculatively stumbled by
   such reasonings. Still, they could not have been quite satisfied, I
   think, of their validity. Against all speculation, they would still
   have felt that the proposed war was somehow reconcilable with reason.
   The question is not whether, on Christian principles, they were right,
   but whether, on natural principles, they were absurd. This probably no
   reader of the history has ever felt. For, whether it squares with our
   speculative notions or not, we do all tacitly assume the organic unity
   of nations. The past we behold, living in the present, and all together
   we regard as one, inhabited by the common life. How much more true is
   this (though in a different way) in families, where the common life is
   so nearly absolute over the members; where they are all inclosed within
   the four walls of their dwellings, partakers in a common blood, in
   common interests, wants, feelings, and principles.

   2. We discover the organic unity of families, in the fact that one
   generation is the natural offspring of an other. And so much is there
   in this, that the children almost always betray their origin in their
   looks and features. The stamp of a common nature is on them, revealed
   in the stature, complexion, gait, form, and dispositions. Sometimes we
   seem to see remarkable exceptions. But, in such cases, we should
   commonly find, if we could bring up to view the ancestors of remoter
   generations, that the filmily bond is still perpetuated, only by a
   wider reach of connection. There are said to be two maiden sisters, the
   last of a distinguished family, now living in England, who, having no
   resemblance to any near ancestor, have yet a very striking resemblance
   to the portrait, still hanging in the family mansion, of an ancestor
   seven generations back. Indeed, I have myself distinguished, by their
   looks, the relationship of two persons, connected by a common
   derivation eight generations back, and who more closely resembled each
   other in their persons, than either, his nearest kindred. So that, in
   cases where there seems to be no transmission of resemblances, there is
   yet a probable transmission, only one that is covert and more
   comprehensive. Now, strong external resemblances may coexist with
   marked external differences, and therefore do not prove a coincidence
   of character. And yet it can not be denied that, as far as they go,
   they argue a transmission of capacities and dispositions, which enter
   into character, as remote causes or occasions. Nor does it make any
   difference, as regards the matter in question, whether souls or
   spiritual natures come into being through propagation, or not. If they
   are created, as some fancy, by the immediate inbreathing of God, still
   they are measured by the house they are to live in, and the outward man
   is, in all cases, a fit organ for the person within. The dispositions,
   tempers, capacities--the natural, and, to a great extent, the moral
   character, have the outward frame, as a fit organ of use and
   expression. It will even be observed too that, in cases where there is
   a remarkable change of character, it will be signified, in due time, by
   a change of manner, aspect, and action.

   Besides, it is well understood that qualities received by training, and
   not in themselves natural, do also pass by transmission. It is said,
   for example, that the dog used in hunting was originally trained by
   great care and effort, and that now almost no training is necessary;
   for the artificial quality has become, to a great extent, natural in
   the stock. We have also a most ominous example of this fact in the
   human species. I speak of the Jewish race. The singular devotion of
   this race to money and traffic is even a proverb. But their ancestors,
   of the ancient times, were not thus distinguished. They were a simple,
   agricultural people, remarkable for nothing but their religious
   opinions, and, in a late period of the commonwealth, for their
   fanatical heroism and obstinacy. Whence the change? History gives the
   mournful answer, showing them to view, for long ages, as a hated and
   down-trodden people, allowed no rights in the soil, shut up within some
   narrow and foul precinct in the cities, compelled to subsist by some
   meager traffic, denied every possession but money, and suffered to keep
   in security not even that, save as they could hide it in secret places,
   and cloak the suspicion of wealth under a sordid exterior. They have
   thus been educated to be misers by the extortions and the hatred of
   Christendom; till finally an artificial nature, so to speak, has been
   formed in the race, and we take it even as the instinct of a Jew, to
   get money by small traffic and sharp bargains. So there is little room
   to doubt that every sort of character and employment passes an effect
   and works some predisposition in those who come after.

   Could we enter into the mental habits of those children, who are spoken
   of in my text, and trace out all the threads of their inward character
   and disposition, we should doubtless find some color of idolatry in the
   fiber of their very being. They are not such as they would be, if their
   parents, of this and remote generations, had been worshipers of the
   true God. Their talents, dispositions, propensities are different. The
   idol god is in their faces and their bones, and his stamp is on their
   spirit. Not in such a sense that the sin of idolatry is in them--that
   is inconceivable; for no proper sin can pass by transmission--but that
   they have a vicious, or prejudicial infection from it, a damage
   accruing from their historical connection and that of their progenitors
   with it.

   Nor, with these familiar laws of physiology before us, is it reasonable
   to doubt that, where there is a long line of godly fathers and mothers,
   kept up in regular succession for many generations, a religious
   temperament may at length be produced, that is more in the power of
   conscience, less wayward as regards principles of integrity, and more
   pliant to the Christian motives. More could be said with confidence, if
   the godly character were less ambiguous and more thoroughly sanctified.

   3. We shall find that there is a law of connection, after birth, under
   which power over character is exerted, without any design to do it. For
   a considerable time after birth, the child has no capacity of will and
   choice developed, and therefore is not a subject of influence, in the
   common sense of that term. He is not as yet a complete individual; he
   has only powers and capacities that prepare him to be, when they are
   unfolded. They are in him only as wings and a capacity to fly are in
   the egg. Meantime, he is open to impressions from every thing he sees.
   His character is forming, under a principle, not of choice, but of
   nurture. The spirit of the house is breathed into his nature, day by
   day. The anger and gentleness, the fretfulness and patience--the
   appetites, passions, and manners--all the variant moods of feeling
   exhibited round him, pass into him as impressions, and become seeds of
   character in him; not because the parents will, but because it must be
   so, whether they will or not. They propagate their own evil in the
   child, not by design, but under a law of moral infection. Before the
   children begin to gather wood for the sacrifice, the spirit of the idol
   and his faith has been communicated. The airs and feelings and conduct
   of idolatry have filled their nature with impressions, which are back
   of all choice and memory. Go out to them then, as they are gathering
   faggots for the idol sacrifice, ask them what questions they have had
   about the service of the god? what doubts? whether any unsatisfied
   debate or perplexing struggle has visited their minds? and you will
   probably awaken their first thoughts on the subject by the inquiry
   itself. All because they have grown up in the idol worship, from a
   point back of memory. They received it through their impressions,
   before they were able to receive it from choice. And so it is with all
   the moral transactions of the house. The spirit of the house is in the
   members by nurture, not by teaching, not by any attempt to communicate
   the same, but because it is the air the children breathe.

   Now, it is in the twofold manner set forth, under this and the previous
   head of my discourse, that our race have fallen, as a race, into moral
   corruption and apostasy. In these two methods also, they have been
   subjected, as an organic unity, to evil; so that when they come to the
   age of proper individuality, the damage received has prepared them to
   set forth, on a course of blamable and guilty transgression. The
   question of original or imputed sin has been much debated in modern
   times, and the effort has been to vindicate the personal responsibility
   of each individual, as a moral agent. Nor is any thing more clear, on
   first principles, than that no man is responsible for any sin but his
   own. The sin of no person can be transmitted as a sin, or charged to
   the account of another. But it does not therefore follow, that there
   are no moral connections between individuals, by which one becomes a
   corrupter of others. If we are units, so also are we a race, and the
   race is one--one family, one organic whole; such that the fall of the
   head involves the fall of all the members. Under the old doctrines of
   original sin, federal headship, and the like, cast away by many,
   ridiculed by not a few, there yet lies a great and momentous truth,
   announced by reason as clearly as by Scripture--that in Adam all die;
   that by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; that death hath
   passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Not that this original
   scheme of unity is any disadvantage. I firmly believe and think I could
   show the contrary even. Enough that so the Scriptures speak, and that
   so we see, by inspection itself. There can be no greater credulity,
   than for any man to expect that a sinful and death-struck being, one
   who has fallen out of the harmony of his mold by sin, should yet
   communicate no trace of evil from himself, no diseased or damaged
   quality, no moral discolor, to the gene. rations that derive their
   existence from him. To make that possible, every law of physiology must
   be adjourned, and, what is more, all that we see with our eyes, in the
   eventful era of impressions, must be denied.

   I am well aware that those who have advocated, in former times, the
   church dogma of original sin, as well as those who adhere to it now,
   speak only of a taint derived by natural or physical propagation, and
   do not include the taint derived afterwards, under the law of family
   infection. It certainly can be no heresy to include the latter; and,
   since it is manifest that both fall within the same general category of
   organic connection, it is equally manifest that both ought to be
   included, and, in all systematic reasonings, must be. If, during the
   age of impressions in the child, and previous to the development of
   will, a power is exerted over character--exerted necessarily, both as
   regards the sinful parent and the child, and that as truly as if it
   fell within the laws of propagation itself-it can not be right to
   attribute the moral taint wholly, or even principally, to propagation.
   Until the child comes to his will, we must regard him still as held
   within the matrix of the parental life; and then, when he is ripe for
   responsible choice, as born for action--a proper and complete person.
   Taking this comprehensive view of the organic unity of successive
   generations of men, the truth we assert of human depravation is not a
   half-truth exaggerated, (which many will not regard as any truth at
   all,) but it is a broad, well-authenticated doctrine, which no
   intelligent observer of facts and principles can deny. It shows the
   past descending on the present, the present on the future, by an
   inevitable law, and yet gives every parent the hope of mitigating the
   sad legacy of mischief he entails upon his children, by whatever
   improvements of character and conduct he is able to make--a hope which
   Christian promise so far clears to his view, as even to allow him the
   presumption that his child may be set forth into responsible action, as
   a Christian person.

   In offering these thoughts, it will be seen that I have not digressed
   from my subject, but have extended the proof of my doctrine rather,
   discovering within its scope, the fall of man itself. As a farther
   proof of the organic unity of the family, I allege--

   4. The fact that, in all organic bodies known to us--states, churches,
   sects, armies--there is a common spirit, by which they are pervaded and
   distinguished from each other. And we use this word spirit, in such
   cases, to denote a power interfused, a comprehensive Will actuating the
   members, regarding also the common body itself, as a larger and more
   inclusive individual. How different, for example, is the spirit of
   France from the spirit of England; the spirit of both, from that of the
   United States; and that, from the spirit of the Spartan or Athenian
   republic. This national spirit, too, is, as it were, a common power in
   each, by which the subordinate individual members are assimilated, and
   made to have a kind of organic character. And so much is there in this,
   that an Englishman can not make to himself a French character, or any
   one of us an English character. We can not act the character one of
   another; for so distant are the feelings, prejudices, and temperaments
   of each, that they can not even be accurately conceived and reproduced,
   unless we are actually enveloped in them as an atmosphere.

   In the same manner, there is a peculiar spirit in every church Whether
   you take the larger divisions, the Jewish, the Greek, the Roman, the
   Episcopal, the Presbyterian, the Baptist, the Congregational, or
   descend to the particular churches of a given city, you will find
   something characteristic in each--a common power, which gives a common
   stamp to the members peculiar to themselves. Or, if you visit a Quaker
   settlement, where a few men and women are gathered into a kind of
   church family, you will discover that the members are pervaded, all, by
   a peculiar spirit, as distinct from the world around them as if they
   were a new discovered people. And these Quaker settlements; may be
   taken as a kind of intermediate link between the church-state and the
   family.

   Passing then to families, you are not surprised to discover the same
   thing. This is specially evident where the family is isolated, and does
   not mingle extensively with the world. You can scarcely open the door,
   and take a seat in their house, least of all can you go to their table,
   or spend a night in their hospitality, without being impressed by the
   fact. And this family spirit will sometimes be exceedingly opposite to
   the spirit of goodness. Here it is money, money, written on every face;
   here it is good living; here show; here scandal and detraction.
   Sometimes the sense of religion and of spiritual things will seem to be
   nearly lost, or obliterated. Sometimes a positive hatred of God and all
   good men and principles will constitute the staple of family feeling.
   Sometimes a dull and sullen contempt of such things will hold the place
   of open animosity.

   It is very true that the family spirit does not always perfectly master
   and assimilate all the members You will find a Christian son or
   daughter, here and there, in spite of the ruling spirit of the house.
   This, however, because families are to some extent intermingled; in
   which it comes to pass that children often fall under the power of
   another spirit, that masters the spirit reigning at home. The children
   go into other families, where they are visited by other feelings. They
   go into the church of God, where the church spirit breathes another
   atmosphere. In the school, they are penetrated by the school spirit. In
   the shop, or in the transactions of trade, the same is true. Were it
   not for this, the family spirit might almost uniformly rule the
   character of the members. Who ever expects that an idolatrous religion,
   in the house, will not uniformly produce idolaters? So the Mohammedan
   spirit makes only Mohammedans. In like manner, a thievish house
   perpetuates a race of thieves. Consider also the ductility and the
   perfect passivity of childhood. Early childhood resists nothing. What
   is given it receives, making no selection. To expect therefore that a
   child will form to himself a spirit opposite to the spirit of the
   family, without once feeling the power of a counteractive spirit, would
   be credulous in the highest degree. Doubtless he has a conscience,
   which is the law of God, in his breast, and he has a will free to
   choose what his conscience requires. But his passions are unfolded
   before his discretion, his prejudices bent before he assumes the
   function of self-government. He breathes the atmosphere of the house.
   He sees the world through his parents' eyes. Their objects become his.
   Their life and spirit mold him. If they are carnal, coarse, passionate,
   profane, sensual, devilish, his little plastic nature takes the poison
   of course. Their very motions, manners, and voices, will be
   distinguishable in him. He lives and moves and has his being in them.

   I do not say, of course, that he will exactly resemble them in
   character. Were he to receive a contagious disease, he would,
   doubtless, be differently handled under it, from the person who gave
   the infection. I only say, that the moral disease of the family he
   assuredly will take, and that, probably, without even a question, or a
   cautious feeling started. If some other spirit, from other families, or
   the church, or the world, do not reach him, the organic spirit of the
   house will infallibly shape and subordinate his character.

   5. We are led to the same conclusions, by considering what may be
   called the organic working of a family. The child begins, at length, to
   develop his character, in and through his voluntary power. But he is
   still under the authority of the parent, and has only a partial control
   of himself, in the development of which, he is gradually approaching a
   complete personality. Now, there is a perpetual working in the family,
   by which the wills, both of the parents and the children, are held in
   exercise, and which, without any design to affect character on one
   side, or conscious consent on the other, is yet fashioning results of
   a, moral quality, as it were by the joint industry of the house. And
   these results are to be taken, according to our definition, as included
   in the organic unity of the family. I except, of course, all the
   voluntary actings that are designed to influence the child, and are
   yielded to by him, as consciously right or wrong.

   The truth here brought to view is graphically set forth in my text.
   Whatever working there is in the house, all work together. If the
   fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the cakes, the children
   will gather the wood, and the idol worship will set the whole circle of
   the house in action. The child being under the law of the parents, they
   will keep him at work to execute their plans, or their sins, as the
   case may be; and, as they will seldom think of what they do, or
   require, so he will seldom have any scruple concerning it. The property
   gained belongs to the family. They have a common interest, and every
   prejudice or animosity felt by the parents, the children are sure to
   feel even more intensely. They are all locked together, in one
   cause--in common cares, hopes, offices, and duties; for their honor and
   dishonor, their sustenance, their ambition, all their objects are
   common. So they are trained of necessity to a kind of general working,
   or co6peration, and, like stones, rolled together in some brook or
   eddy, they wear each other into common shapes. If the family subsist by
   plunder, then the infant is swaddled as a thief, the child wears a
   thief's garments, and feeds the growth of his body on stolen meat; and,
   in due time, he will have the trade upon him, without ever knowing that
   he has taken it lip, or when he took it up. If the father is
   intemperate, the children must go on errands to procure his supplies,
   lose the shame that might be their safety, be immersed in the fumes of
   liquor in going and coming, and why not rewarded by an occasional taste
   of what is so essential to the enjoyment of life? If the family subsist
   in idleness and beggary, then the children will be trained to lie
   skillfully, and maintain their false pretences with a plausible
   effrontery--all this, you will observe, not as a sin, but as a trade.

   Nor does what I am saying hold, only in cases of extreme viciousness
   and depravity. Whatever fire the fathers kindle, the children are
   always found gathering the wood--always helping as accessaries and
   apprentices. If the father reads a newspaper, or a sporting gazette, on
   Sunday, the family must help him find it. If he writes a letter of
   business on Sunday, he will send his child to the office with the
   letter. If the mother is a scandal-monger, she will make her children
   spies and eaves-droppers. If she directs her servant to say, at the
   door, that she is not at home, she will sometimes be overheard by her
   child. If she is ambitious that her children should excel in the
   display of finery and fashion, they must wear the show and grow up in
   the spirit of it. If her house is a den of disorder and filth, they
   must be at home in it. Fretfulness and ill-temper in the parents are
   provocations, and therefore somewhat more efficacious than
   commandments, to the same. The proper result will be a congenial
   assemblage, in the house, of petulance and ill-nature. The niggardly
   parsimony that quarrels with a child, when asking for a book needful
   for his proficiency at school, is teaching him that money is worth more
   than knowledge. If the parents are late risers, the children must not
   disturb the house, but stay quiet and take a lesson that is not to
   assist their energy and promptness in the future business of life. If
   they go to church only half of the day, they will not send their
   children the other half. If they never read the Bible, they will never
   teach it. If they laugh at religion, they will put a face upon it,
   which will make their children justify the contempt they express. This
   enumeration might be indefinitely extended. Enough that we see, in the
   working of the house, how all the members work together. The children
   fall into their places naturally, as it were, and unconsciously, to do
   and to suffer exactly what the general scheme of the house requires.
   Without any design to that effect, all the actings of business,
   pleasure, and sin, propagate themselves throughout the circle, as the
   weights of a clock maintain the workings of the wheels. Where there is
   no effort to teach wrong, or thought of it, the house is yet a school
   of wrong, and the life of the house is only a practical drill in evil.

   Having sufficiently established, as I think, by these illustrations,
   the organic unity of families, it remains to add some practical
   thoughts of a more specific nature. And--

   1. It becomes a question of great moment, as connected with the
   doctrine established, whether it is the design of the Christian scheme
   to take possession of the organic laws of the family, and wield them as
   instruments, in any sense, of a regenerative purpose? Arind here we are
   met by the broad principle, that Christianity endeavors to make every
   object, favor, and relation, an instrument of righteousness, according
   to its original design. What intelligent person ever supposed that the
   original constitution, by which one generation derives its existence
   and receives the bent of its character from another, was designed of
   God to be the vehicle only of depravity? It might as well be supposed
   that men themselves were made to be containers of depravity. The only
   supposition that honors God is, that the organic unity, of which I
   speak, was ordained originally for the nurture of holy virtue in the
   beginning of each soul's history; and that Christianity, or redemption,
   must of necessity take possession of the abused vehicle, and sanctify
   it for its own merciful uses. That an engine of so great power should
   be passed by, when every other law and object in the universe is
   appropriated and wielded as an instrument of grace, and that in a
   movement for the redemption of the race, is inconceivable. The
   conclusion thus reached does not carry us, indeed, to the certain
   inference that the organic unity of the family will avail to set forth
   every child of Christian parents, in a Christian life. But if we
   consider the tremendous power it has, as an instrument of evil, how far
   short of such an opinion does it leave us, when computing the reach of
   its power as an instrument of grace?

   Passing next to the Scriptures, we find such reasonings justified, as
   explicitly as we can desire. I am not disposed to press the language of
   Scripture, which is popular, to extreme conclusions. But I observe that
   Christ is called a second Adam and a last Adam: language, to say the
   least, that suits the idea of a proposed union with the race, under its
   organic laws--as if, entering into the Christian family, his design
   were to fill it with a family spirit, which shall controvert and master
   the old evil spirit. The declaration corresponds, that, as by one man's
   disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
   many be made righteous--language that measures the grace by the
   mischief, and shows it flowing in a parallel, but fuller stream. It may
   not be easy to settle, beyond dispute, the relation of the old covenant
   to the new; but there can be no question that the church, under
   Abraham. was measured, in some sense, by the organic unity of the
   family of Abraham. The covenant was a family covenant, in which God
   engaged to be the God of the seed, as of the father. And the seal of
   the covenant was a seal of faith, applied to the whole house, as if the
   continuity of faith were somehow to be, or somehow might be maintained,
   in a line that is parallel with the continuity of sin, in the family.
   Nor was the result to depend on mere natural generation, however
   sanctified, but on the organic causes also, that are involved in family
   nurture, after birth. For we are expressly informed, (Gen. xviii. 19,)
   that God rested his covenant, or engagement, on the conduct of
   Abraham--"for I know him, that he will command his children and his
   household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do
   justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which
   he hath spoken of him." And thus we see that the old church, beyond any
   possible question, was to have its grounds of perpetuity, in and by the
   same terms of organic unity, which sin has made the vehicle of
   depravity. Descending then to the New Testament, Jesus the world's
   Redeemer is declared to have suffered, "that the blessing of Abraham
   might come on the Gentiles," and the Gentiles are said to be "graffed
   in." The new "seed," viz., "Christ," are said to be "the seed of
   Abraham," and "heirs of the promise" made to him. The old rite of
   proselyte baptism, which made the families receiving it Jewish citizens
   and children of Abraham, was applied over directly to the Christian
   uses, and the rite went by "households;" even as the New Testament
   promise also was--"to you and to your children." Even the old Jewish
   law, that one Jewish parent made a Jewish child, is brought into the
   church, and one believing parent "sanctifies" the child. In all of
   which, it seems to be clearly held that grace shall travel by the same
   conveyance with sin; that the organic unity, which I have spoken of
   chiefly as an instrument of corruption, is to be occupied and
   sanctified by Christ, and become an instrument also of mercy and life.
   And thence it follows that the seal of faith, applied to households, is
   to be no absurdity; for it is the privilege and duty of every Christian
   parent that his children shall come forth into responsible action, as a
   regenerated stock. The organic unity is to be a power of life. God
   engages, on his part, that it may be, and calls the Christian parent to
   promise, on his part, that it shall be. Thus the church has a
   constitutive element from the family in it still, as it had in the days
   of Abraham. The church life--that is, the Holy Spirit--collects
   families into a common organism, and then, by sanctifying the laws of
   organic unity in families, extends its quickening power to the
   generation following, so as to include the future, and make it one with
   the past. And so the church, in all ages, becomes a body under Christ
   the head, as the race is a body under Adam the head--a living body,
   quickened by him who hath life in himself, fitly joined together and
   compacted by that which every joint supplieth.

   2. The theological importance of our doctrine of organic unity, when
   brought up to this point, is exhibited in many ways, and especially in
   the fact that it gives the only true solution of the Christian church
   and of baptism as related to membership. I hardly dare attempt to speak
   of the "sacramental grace," supposed to attend the rite of baptism,
   under the priestly forms of Christianity; for I have never been able to
   give any consistent and dignified meaning to the language, in which it
   is set forth. That there is a grace attendant, falling on all the
   parties concerned, is quite evident, if they are doing their duty; for
   no person, whether laic or priest, can do, or intend what is right,
   without some spiritual benefit. But the child is said to be
   "regenerate, spiritually united to Christ, a new creature in Christ
   Jesus," under the official grace of baptism. Then this language, so
   full of import, is defined, after all, to mean only that the child is
   in the church, where the grace of God surrounds him--translated (not
   internally, but externally) from the sphere of nature into a new
   sphere, where all the aids of grace, available for his salvation, are
   furnished. Sometimes it is added that his sins are remitted, though no
   man is likely to believe that he has any sins to remit; or, if the
   meaning be that the corrupted quality, physiologically inherent in his
   nature, is washed away, he will show in due time that it is not; and no
   one, in fact, believes that it is. Then if it be asked, whether the new
   sphere of grace will assuredly work a gracious character? "no," is the
   answer. "If the child is not faithful, or hinders the grace, he will
   lose it"--that is, he will not stay regenerate. And then as the child,
   in every case, is sure, in some bad sense, not to be faithful, he is
   equally sure to lose the grace, and be landed in a second state that is
   worse than the first. And thus it turns out, after all, as far as I can
   see, that the grace magnified in the beginning, by words of so high an
   import, is a thing of no value--it is nothing. It is, in fact, one of
   our most decided objections to this scheme of sacramental grace,
   (paradoxical as it may seem,) that, really and truly, there is not
   enough of import in it to save the meaning of the rite. The grace is
   words only, and an air of imposture is all that remains, after the
   words are explained. The rite is fertile only in maintaining a
   superstition. Practically speaking, it only exalts a prerogative. By a
   motion of his hand, the priest breaks in, to interrupt and displace all
   the laws of character in life--communicating an abrupt, ictic grace, as
   much wider of all dignity and reason, than any which the new light
   theology has asserted, as the regenerative power is more subject to a
   human dispensation. A superstitious homage collects about his person.
   The child looks on him as one who opens heaven by a ceremony! The
   ungodly parent hurries to him, to get the regenerative grace for his
   dying child. The bereaved parent mourns inconsolably, and even curses
   himself, that he neglected to obtain the grace for his child, now
   departed. The priest, in the eye, displaces the memory of duty and
   godliness in the heart. A thousand superstitions, degrading to religion
   and painful to look upon, hang around this view of baptism. Not to
   produce them, the doctrine must yield up its own nature.

   In all this, I speak constructively, as reasoning from the doctrine
   asserted, and as I am able to understand it. Constructive results are
   never more than partially verified by historic facts; for great truths,
   blended with the error, qualify and mitigate its effects.

   Now the true conception is, that baptism is applied to the child, on
   the ground of its organic unity with the parents; imparting and
   pledging a grace to sanctify that unity, and make it good in the field
   of religion. By the supposition, however, the child still remains
   within the known laws of character in the house, to receive. under
   these, whatever good may reach him; not snatched away by an abrupt,
   fantastical, and therefore incredible grace. He is taken to be
   regenerate, not historically speaking, but presumptively, on the ground
   of his known connection with the parent character, and the divine or
   church life, which is the life of that character. Perhaps I shall be
   understood more easily, if I say that the child is potentially
   regenerate, being regarded as existing in connection with powers and
   causes that contain the fact, before time and separate from time. For
   when the fact appears historically, under the law of time, it is not
   more truly real, in a certain sense, than it was before. And then the
   grace conferred, being conferred by no casual act, but resting in the
   established laws of character, in the church and the house, is not lost
   by unfaithfulness, but remains and lingers still, though abused and
   weakened, to encourage new struggles.

   Thus it will be seen that the doctrine of organic unity I have been
   asserting, proves its theologic value, as a ready solvent for the
   rather perplexing difficulties of this difficult subject. Only one
   difficulty remains, viz, that so few can believe the doctrine.

   3. It is evident that the voluntary intention of parents, in regard to
   their children, is no measure, either of their merit or their sin. Few
   parents are so base, or so lost to natural affection, as really to
   intend the injury of their children. However irreligious, or immoral,
   they more commonly desire a worthy and correct character for their
   children, often even a Christian character. But, in the great and
   momentous truth now set forth, you perceive it is not what you intend
   for your children, so much as what you are, that is to have its effect.
   They are connected, by an organic unity, not with your instructions,
   but with your life. And your life is mole powerful than your
   instructions can be. They might be jealous of intended corruption, and
   withstand it: but the spirit of the house, which is your spirit, the
   whole working of the house, which is actuated by you, is what no
   exercise of will, even if they had more of it than they have, could
   well resist. Therefore, what you are, they will almost necessarily be;
   and then, as you are responsible for what you are, you must also be
   responsible for the ruin brought on them. And, if you desired better
   things for them, as you probably say, the more guilty are you that,
   knowing and desiring better things, you thwarted your desires by your
   own evil life.

   So there are Christians who intend and do many things for their
   children, and thus acquit themselves of all blame in regard to their
   character. Here, alas! is the perpetual error of Christian parents, so
   called, that they endeavor to make up, by direct efforts, for the
   mischiefs of a loose and neglectful life. They convince themselves that
   teaching, lecturing, watch, discipline, things done with a purpose, are
   the sum of duty. As if mere affectations and will-works could cheat the
   laws of life and character ordained by God! Your character is a stream,
   a river, flowing down upon your children hour by hour. What you do here
   and there to carry an opposing influence is, at best, only a ripple
   that you make on the surface of the stream. It reveals the sweep of the
   current; nothing more. If you expect your children to go with the
   ripple, instead of the stream, you will be disappointed. I beseech you
   then as you love your children, to admit other and worthier thoughts,
   thoughts more safe for them and certainly for you. Understand that it
   is the family spirit, the organic life of the house, the silent power
   of a domestic godliness, working, as it does, unconsciously and with
   sovereign effect--this it is which forms your children to God. And, if
   this be wanting, all that you may do beside, will be as likely to annoy
   and harden as to bless.

   4. It seems to be a proper inference from the doctrine I have
   exhibited, that Christian parents ought to speak freely to their
   children, at times, of their own faults and infirmities. If they are
   faithful, if they live as Christians, if the spirit of Christ bears
   rule in the house, they will yet have faults, and they ought to make no
   secret of the fact. The impression should be made, that they themselves
   are struggling with infirmities; that they are humbled under a sense of
   these infirmities; that there is much in them for God to pardon, much
   for their children to overlook, or even to forgive; and that God alone
   can assist them to lead themselves and their family up to a better
   world. Instead of lecturing their children, always, on their
   peccadilloes and sins, it would be better, sometimes, to give a lecture
   on their own. This, if rightly done, would attract the friendly
   sympathy of their children, guard them against the injurious
   impressions they make when they trip themselves, and unite the whole
   family in a common struggle heavenward. There is no other way to
   correct the mixture of evil you will blend with the family spirit, but
   to deplore it, and make it an acknowledged truth, that you, too, are
   only a child in goodness. But if you take a throne of papal
   infallibility in your family, and endeavor to fight out, with the rod,
   what you fail in by your misconduct, you may make your children fear
   you and hate you, but you will not win them to Christ. Alas! there are
   too many Christian families that are only little popedoms. The rule
   itself is tyranny--infallibility assumed, then maintained, by the holy
   inquisition of terror and penal chastisement! God will not smile on
   such a kind of discipline.

   5. It is evident what rule should regulate the society and external
   intercourse of children. It is a very great mercy, as I have said, that
   the children of a bad or irreligious family are sometimes permitted to
   be inmates elsewhere; to go into virtuous and Christian families, where
   a better spirit reigns. There they see, perhaps, the genuine
   demonstrations of order, of purity, and of good affections; they hear
   the voice of prayer, they come where the spirit of heaven breathes. It
   is a new world, and they are filled with new impressions. So, if a
   child may go to a school where order, right principle, virtuous
   manners, and the love of knowledge reign, and find a respite there from
   the shiftlessness, vice, and brutality at home, how great is the
   privilege. In this view, a good school is almost the only mercy that
   can be extended to the hapless sons and daughters of vice. Their
   good--most dismal thought!--is to be delivered from their home; to
   escape the spirit of hell that encompasses their helpless age, and
   fee], though it be but a few hours a day, the power of another spirit!

   But I was speaking of the rule to be observed in the society of
   children. Let every Christian beware how he makes his children inmates
   in an irreligious family. It will do, sometimes, to allow the children
   of an irreligious family to be inmates, temporarily, in your own. You
   may do it for their advantage; and if you can en list the hearts of
   your children in the merciful intentions you cherish, it may even be a
   good exercise for them. But it is a very different thing to place your
   children within the atmosphere of another house. Send them not where
   the spirit of evil reigns. Understand how plastic their nature is, how
   easily it receives the contagion of another spirit. You yourselves may
   have intercourse with ungodly persons; it may be your duty to seek it
   for their benefit; but you may well be cautious how far you subject
   your children, especially in early years, to the intercourse of
   irreligious families

   And what shall I say to parents, who are themselves irreligious?
   Perhaps you make it your boast that you give your children their
   liberty; that you mean to allow them to be just as religious as they
   please. And is that enough, do you think, to discharge your duties to
   them? Is it enough to breathe the spirit of evil and sin into them and
   around them every hour, to give them no Christian counsel, to train
   them up in a prayerless house, drill them into conformity with all your
   worldly ways, and then say that you allow them full liberty to be
   Christians? Having them under your law, determining yourselves that
   organic spirit, which is to be the element, the very breath of their
   moral existence, will you then boast that you mean to allow them to be
   as virtuous as they please? Ah, if there be any argument, which might
   compel you to be Christians yourselves, it is these arguments of
   affection that God has given you. But if you will not be Christians
   yourselves, then, at least, show your children some degree of mercy, by
   delivering them, as much as possible, from yourselves! Send them, as
   often as you may, where a better spirit reigns. Make them inmates with
   Christian families, as you have opportunity. Let them go where they
   will hear a prayer and see a Christian Sabbath. Send them, or take them
   with you, to the church of God, and the Sabbath-school. Give them a
   respite often from the family spirit and the organic law of the house.
   If you yourselves will not fashion them for the skies, let others, more
   faithful than you, and more merciful, do it for you.
     __________________________________________________________________

V.
INFANT BAPTISM, HOW DEVELOPED.

   "For she promise is unto you and to your children, and to all that are
   afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call."--Acts, ii. 39.

   IT is a matter of wonder, with many professed disciples of Jesus in our
   time, that if the baptism of children and their qualified introduction
   into the church is any genuine part of the Christian economy, there is
   so little authority for it, by express mention in the New Testament
   writings. And yet, over opposite to this, it is quite as fair a subject
   of wonder that in Peter's first sermon, on the day of Pentecost, when
   addressing only the adult sinners of the assembly, in terms appropriate
   to their age, he should yet have given out, as it were unconsciously, a
   declaration that can signify nothing but the engagement of Christ, in
   his new and more spiritual economy, to identify children with their
   parents, even as they had been identified in the coarser provisions of
   the Old. "To you and to your children," says the apostle, and here,
   covertly as it were to himself, are hid infant baptism, infant church
   relations, potentially present but as yet undeveloped, even in what may
   be fitly called the seed sermon of the Christian church. This was no
   time to be thinking of infants, or children, as related to church
   polity; probably there is not one present in the great assembly. It
   will be soon enough to settle the church position of children, when the
   question rises practically afterwards. These converted pilgrims,
   Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and strangers of all names, may not even so
   much as think of the question till they reach their homes again. But
   the language, we can see, is Jewish; language of promise, or covenant,
   only with a Christian addition--"And to them that are afar off, even as
   many as the Lord our God shall call"--and Peter, as we know, did not
   really come into the meaning of this language himself till years after,
   when the great sheet let down from heaven three times, and the actual
   ministering to a Gentile convert, showed him whither, and how far off,
   the call of the Lord might be going, in these times, to run. Let it not
   surprise us then, that the facts of infant baptism, and of infant
   church relations, covered, as they are, by Peter's language in this
   first sermon, are still not yet developed, even to himself--any more
   than the fact of Christ's call to the Gentiles.

   And when our Baptist brethren reiterate the formula, "believe and be
   baptized," "believe and be baptized," which they assume to be
   absolutely conclusive and final on the question of infant baptism
   because infants can not believe, they have only to make due allowance
   for the fact that Christianity must needs make its chief address, at
   the outset, to adult persons, and their argument vanishes. Christianity
   will of course address itself to the subjects addressed; and, telling
   them what they must do to be saved, it will not of course tell them, at
   the same breath, every thing else that is fit to be known. In this
   manner its language was naturally shaped, for a considerable time, so
   as to meet only the conditions of adult minds. When at length it shall
   begin lo be inquired, what is the condition of immature, or infant
   minds? it will be soon enough to say something appropriate to them.

   Besides, the formula has another side--"He that believeth not shall be
   damned." Does it therefore follow, because it is so continually given
   to adults as the fixed law of salvation--he that believeth shall be
   saved, and he that believeth not shall be damned--that infants dying in
   infancy, and too young to believe, must therefore be inevitably damned?
   No, it will be answered, even by our Baptist brethren themselves; for
   the language referred to was evidently designed only for adult persons,
   and is of course to be qualified so as to meet the demands of reason,
   when we come to the case of child hood. And why not also the language
   "believe and be baptized?" Say not that the child is not old enough to
   believe, and therefore can not be baptized. If he is not old enough to
   believe, how can he better be saved? Is it a greater, and higher, and
   more difficult thing to be admitted to baptism, than to be admitted to
   eternal glory?

   Now I can most readily admit that the subject of infant baptism is not
   as definitely mentioned and formally prescribed in the New Testament,
   as we might, without any great extravagance, expect. For many will
   never notice how great a thing it is for Christianity to pass from the
   first stage of mere propagation, to the stage of a fixed institution.
   What worlds of modification, correction, new arrangement, are necessary
   to the transition, they have never observed. They see the real figure
   of Christianity in the day of Pentecost, having never a conception, it
   may be, that this figure is most intensely occasional and casual, and
   the whole scene one that has scarcely a vestige of Christian
   institution in it.

   What I propose, then, is to go over some of the incidents of this
   Pentecostal scene and show you how it will drop out one point after
   another, as Christianity becomes a fixed institution; which
   institutional character, again, will, by a necessary law, bring in
   other elements whereby to shape itself and complete its organization.

   First of all, we are delighted here at the picture given of a new form
   of society, and a thing so beautiful, so wonderfully hopeful and
   peculiar, we are ready to think must be the very essence of the new
   institution itself. "And all that believed were together and had all
   things common; and sold their possessions and goods and parted them to
   all men, as every man had need. And they, continuing with one accord in
   the temple and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat
   with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God and having favor
   with all the people. And the Lord added to the church daily such as
   should be saved." What a picture, taken as a mere external description!
   Saying nothing of internal experiences, it goes to the simple outward
   demonstrations, and by these it paints the spring-time, or first
   blossoming of the Christian love The beauty of the scene consists in
   the fact, that the disciples hardly know, as yet, what their love
   signifies. Assembled as pilgrims, from all parts of the world, the
   Christian love has fallen upon then, and they find, what is altogether
   new and strange,. that rich and poor, honorable and base, despite of
   all distinctions, they love one another as brethren! Not knowing what
   to make of it, or, apparently, whether they are hereafter to have any
   thing to do but to love one another, they give themselves wholly up to
   love, as children to a play--come what will, they are all agreed in
   this, that they want only fellowship with each other, fellowship in
   doctrine, fellowship in praise, fellowship in bread,--and why not also
   in goods?

   How sad, that a scene so amiable and lovely could not continue, and
   that all Christian disciples, to the end of the world, could not fall
   into the same delightful picture in their conduct! Just as sad, I
   answer, as it is that children can not always be children; for these
   are the children of love, acting out the simple instinct of love, and
   wholly ignorant, as yet, of the cares, labors, and confused struggles,
   in which their Christian spirit is to have its trial. Doubtless we are
   to regret, as a loss, whatever departure we may have suffered from the
   spirit of these first disciples; for the spirit of Christian life is
   one and the same, in all diversities of form and conduct. But it is
   plain to any one, who will exercise the least consideration, that it
   was just as impossible to perpetuate these first demonstrations, as it
   is to preserve the infantile airs of children after childhood is
   passed, carrying them still on through the sturdy toils and cares of a
   mature age. The moment we leave these first scenes, following the
   pilgrims off to their homes, see them entering into the duties of home,
   see the Christian churches getting body and form in so many places and
   becoming incorporated as fixed elements of human society, we shall
   discover that almost all the modes and hospitalities of the Pentecostal
   society are inevitably discontinued.

   But we must go deeper into the history and show, by distinct
   specification, how intensely casual much that belongs to the scene of
   the Pentecost was even designed to be, and how many things are to be
   added to give the new gospel a permanently instituted life. We begin
   with the things casual that were designed to cease.

   The doctrine of the Holy Spirit was here to be inaugurated, as a Divine
   Force, entered systematically into the world, to work subjectively in
   men all the characters of love and beauty that are shown objectively in
   the life of Jesus. He is to be, in other words, a perpetual indwelling
   Christ in men's hearts. In times more ancient, good men had been wont
   to pray for spiritual help in a manner correspondent, but now the
   kingdom of Help, that kingdom which is righteousness and peace and joy
   in the Holy Ghost, is to be set up as a Christly dispensation. But, at
   the beginning, there must be something done before the senses, to waken
   sensuous impressions. Otherwise, whatever power the Spirit might exert
   in the recesses of the human soul, it would probably occur to no one to
   refer the effects wrought to a Divine Agency. Hence the wondrous
   character of the scene, which here bursts upon the world--a sound from
   heaven, a rushing, mighty wind sweeping through the hall, lambent tips
   of fire resting on the heads of the assembly, wondrous utterances or
   tongues.

   Now, the physical incidents of this scene had nothing to do with its
   substantial import, save as they were added to suggest the idea of a
   Divine Agency. They hold the same mechanical relation, as a vehicle, to
   the Spirit, that the human nature of Jesus held to the Divine Word.
   They are the body, the sensible show of the Spirit, the smoke by which
   the fire was revealed. So of the tongues. They were the sign of a power
   that was playing the action of the inner man, and making audible, as it
   were, the activity within, of a Divine Influence. All these, like the
   miraculous gifts so conspicuous in the subsequent history, were
   manifestations of the Spirit, given to profit withal; but being only
   accidents or exponents, were, of course, to be discontinued, when the
   doctrine of a spiritual influence from God was sufficiently
   developed--discontinued and never restored, unless perhaps in cases
   where the sense of the Spirit is so nearly lost as to require a kind of
   new development. Accordingly as these fall off, the spiritual influence
   inaugurated by such tokens, may be expected, for much the same reasons,
   to move upon the world in a less imposing method; to remit, in some
   degree, the extraordinary, and, as life is itself ordinary, become, to
   the human spirit, what the air is to the body--a Perpetual Element of
   inbreathing love; to dwell in the families, to follow the individual,
   and whisper holy thoughts in solitary places and silent hours. He is to
   fill the world, and be a Spirit of Life and love, present to all human
   hearts. He will produce the same exercises, produced in the first
   disciples, in the scene of the Pentecost. Sometimes, too, he will
   glorify himself in scenes of social effect and power. But the grand
   reality revealed is an Abiding Spirit--not a Scene Spirit, but an
   Abiding Spirit--accordantly with Christ's own promise--"He shall give
   you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever." When the
   sound, therefore, which then shook the air is hushed to be heard no
   more; when the rushing, mighty wind that typified so powerfully the
   breath of the arriving Spirit of God has dropped into calm; when the
   fire-tips have ceased to burn on the heads of all assemblies, and all
   the Pentecostal signs are over; then is there seen to be left as a
   result, the fixed conviction of a Jesus unlocalized, a Spirit of Jesus
   pres. ent in all places, working in all hearts, present, in conscious
   manifestation, to all discerning souls, as the life of their life. How
   very casual, in this view, is the scene of the Pentecost. And that is
   very soon discovered. One year afterwards, not even the persons present
   in that scene look upon it as being, in any sense, a properly
   institutional element of Christianity. The Spirit inaugurated is
   institutional, the life of all hol) institutions, but nothing in the
   forms of the scene is regarded as having a perpetual character.

   Again, it will be found that the preaching of the day of Pentecost,
   powerful as the sermon of Peter appears to have been upon the assembly
   at that time, was not such, either in style or substance, as could be
   continued after the first day or two of the gospel proclamation, and
   was in fact superseded, in a very short time, by the sturdier methods
   of argument and instruction. We see this in all the epistles, and as
   truly in those of Peter as of Paul. The infant churches had scarcely
   begun to be institutions, before this change was apparent.

   And yet we have many, in our own time, who do not appear to see this,
   even though the manner of Peter's sermon is so completely gone by, that
   one can hardly imagine how it had any power at all. "See," they say,
   "how simple it was, how easy of apprehension--nothing but a recitation
   of facts--and then what power it had!" As if the telling, over and
   over, of old news, announcing again facts that have been known to every
   reader of the New Testament from his childhood up, as familiarly as he
   knows his right hand, could have the same value and be means to ends
   for producing the same effects! Most of us have a better understanding
   of the subject, perceiving, as clearly as possible, that while Peter's
   sermon was good for the occasion, it was good for almost no occasion
   since. It was one of the first things, of which there can not, by the
   supposition, be many. A camp meeting, or a band of pilgrims gathered
   for a single week, a thousand miles from home, may well enough desire
   such kind of preaching as will serve the zest of the occasion. But it
   is no design of Christianity to get by the need of intelligence, and
   fashion a sanctity that has no fellowship with dignity. A regularly
   instituted Christian congregation, who are to live and grow up on the
   same spot, from age to age, it has long ago been discovered, must be
   compelled to gird up the loins of their mind. They must reject the mere
   gospel drinks and betake themselves to meat. Their life, it will be
   found, depends, not on scenes and machineries, not on storms and
   paroxysms; but on a capacity rather to receive instruction, to be
   exercised in high argument, to bear with patience the discovery how
   little they know; and on a good healthful appetite for Christian food.
   To be able to burn in a fire decides nothing. They must know how to
   supply the fuel of devotion out of their own exercise in God's truth.
   They must love a ministry of doctrine, or intellectual teaching.
   Neither is it doctrine, as many fancy, when they complain of a want of
   doctrinal preaching, to get a few stale dogmas impounded in the head,
   or stuck in the brain, as dead flies in ointment: all the rich
   treasures of thought, and high motive, and solemn contemplation,
   garnered up in God's word, must be brought out, seen, understood, and
   fall upon the soul, as manna from the skies. Like manna, too, it must
   be the supply of to-day only. A new shower must be gathered for
   to-morrow, and the mind of the people must be kept in active and
   progressive motion.

   Such a kind of preaching will feed the intelligence of the hearers, and
   raise up pillars in the churches. And here is the great distinction
   between the preaching proper to the scene of the Pentecost, and that of
   an established Christian congregation. It is the difference between
   Peter, giving news to the pilgrims, and Paul offering some "things hard
   to be understood," to churches of organized disciples. Such preaching
   is required, in an established congregation, as will exert an educating
   power. And yet it will, in that way, be a converting power, as
   efficacious as any other, if only it is expected to be. When the
   community is more deeply moved by spiritual things, it will, of course,
   vary its tone and its subjects to suit the occasion, perhaps multiply
   its efforts; but never as being in a hurry, lest the grace of the
   occasion may be capriciously withdrawn, never over-preaching, or
   preaching out, as if nothing were to be done by thought in the hearers,
   but all by the power of a commotion round them; for it is not the same
   thing to fall out of dignity and self-possession as to get rid of sin,
   neither is a fever or a whirlwind any proper instrument of
   sanctification. Mournful proofs have we to the contrary. Better is it
   to reserve a power for the ordinary, even when we are in the
   extraordinary. It is not wisdom to overwork the harvest, so that we
   have no strength left for the bread. Rather let the preacher believe in
   the Abiding Spirit, and count upon a kind of perpetual harvest. Let him
   think to gain many to Christ imperceptibly, by keeping alive the
   interest of God's truth, and letting it distill upon the hearers as a
   dew, and through them on the rising families. Whatever he gains in this
   way will assuredly remain; for it is not the birth of an occasion, but
   of quiet conviction. It partakes the nature of habit. It is the fruit
   of a godly training. Seldom, therefore. will it fall away, or
   disappoint expectation.

   There is yet another class of incidents, or demonstrations, in the
   scene of the Pentecost, which are referable to the fact that these
   first converts are not at home, and all these must, of course, be
   modified, or discontinued by their simple return. They are pilgrims at
   the feasts; Parthians, Medes, Elamites--Jewish emigrants, who have
   returned from every most distant clime of the world, to enjoy the great
   festivals of their religion.

   Their property, their business, and, more commonly, their families, are
   left behind. Many of them are poor persons, wholly unable to support
   the expense even of a short stay at Jerusalem. The others can not, of
   course, leave them to suffer. So they divide their resources with the
   poor; and some, who belong at Jerusalem, are moved by the overflowing
   love of Christ in their hearts, to part with their whole property, that
   they may relieve the necessities of the brotherhood. Only a few days or
   weeks are thus spent together. Probably, within three months, they are,
   every man, at home in his own house, providing for his own family, out
   of the increase of his own industry and property. During their short
   stay at Jerusalem, they had nothing to do but to exercise their
   religion. Accordingly they gave themselves wholly up to it. Now the
   religious occasion is past; the extraordinary is over, and the ordinary
   has returned. By this time, they have learned, probably, and received
   it even as a Christian maxim, that one who does not provide for his
   own, denies the faith, and is worse than an infidel.

   Again, these first disciples had not yet been called to blend their
   piety with the common cares and duties of life. Quite likely, they did
   not, for some time, consider whether they should hereafter have any
   thing more to do with these gross and earthly callings. But we, at
   least, have learned what they must also have learned very soon, that
   though we can not live by bread alone, it is yet difficult to live
   without bread. We have learned that the very church of God itself is
   perpetuated, in part, by industry and production, that it can not live
   by expenditure, that we have something therefore to do, besides
   breaking bread from house to house; six days to labor, a spectacle of
   thrift to present to mankind, as a proof that Christian virtue has its
   blessings. We must shine as good citizens, neighbors, parents, friends.
   Life is no mere camp-meeting scene; but the greatest of all Christian
   attainments, we find, is precisely that which the first disciples had
   not yet thought of, the learning how to blend the spiritual and
   economical or industrial together; to live in the world, and not be of
   it; to labor in earthly things, and maintain a conversation in heaven;
   to unite thrift with charity, and separate gain from greediness; to use
   property, and not worship it; to prepare comfort, without pursuing
   pleasure. For it is, by just this kind of trial, that all spiritual
   strength is gotten, and the Christian life becomes a light to men.

   Having glanced, in this manner, at some of the types and conditions of
   the scene of Pentecost that were, and were inevitably to be,
   discontinued, let us notice briefly, some of the matters that must also
   as inevitably be added in the process by which Christianity becomes an
   institution.

   Thus, first of all, as Christ and his evangelists had given the new
   facts to the world, so it was inevitable that a grand process of
   thinking or mental elaboration should begin to work out the import or
   doctrinal interpretation of those facts. In this process, diverse
   opinions, formulas, sects, controversies, must be
   developed--consequently new modes of duty.

   The simplicity of mere love, displayed, as it was, in the first scenes
   of the gospel, could not continue, however desirable it may seem. Men
   must think, as well as love, and thought must make its inroads on mere
   relations of feeling. And thus a long process of forming and reforming
   must go on, till the Christ of the head becomes as catholic as the
   Christ of the heart. Meantime, all must stand for the truth, and there
   must be no countenance given to error. The happy days of Christian
   childhood are left far behind, and every church is set in relations of
   duty that are partly antagonistic. It must take a form required by its
   new necessities. What to do for the. truth, whom to acknowledge, when
   to resist and when to forbear, how much consequence to attribute to
   opinions, over what errors to spread the mantle of charity, how to
   maintain a polemic attitude in the unity of the Spirit--these are the
   grave questions that are to occupy ministers and churches, and, in the
   right exercise of which, they are to justify their Christian name. And
   on this will depend the power of religion, quite as much as on the
   duties done to those who are aliens and unbelievers.

   Next we pass on to a field where the new creating power of the gospel
   is displayed yet more distinctly. The first disciples had no thought
   but to swim in the strange joy they felt, as forgiven of God and filled
   with the love of Jesus. Of Christianity, as a fixed institution, taking
   the whole society of man into its bosom, and becoming the school of the
   race, they had probably, at first, no conception. Passing thence to the
   modern Christian faith, how great is the change! What a variety of
   means, instruments and arrangements has it created, maintaining all
   from age to age, by a sacrifice, compared with which, the casual
   contributions to poor saints at Jerusalem were far less significant in
   their effects, and, perhaps, not more to be commended, as proofs of a
   Christian spirit.

   First, a house of worship; and, in order to this, the new spiritual
   life must become a holder of real estate, and be acknowledged as such
   in the laws. To make the place worthy of the cause, genius and taste
   are to be called into exercise, and a new Christian art developed.

   To maintain expenses and repairs, and collect and disburse charities,
   there must be officers created, such as deacons and committees of
   various kinds, and this requires elections, by-laws, records, and a
   fully organized institutional state.

   Mere forms and sacraments being insufficient, preachers of the word
   must be carefully trained for the service, and installed therein, to
   feed the intelligence of the flock, and lead them in the truth. Their
   official rights and duties must be ascertained, and, correspondently,
   the rights and duties of the flock-matters all how distant from the
   scene of the Pentecost!

   The times and forms of worship need to be settled; for, whether a
   liturgy is used or not, no organic action can be maintained without
   forms of some kind, to serve as laws of concert and rules of order.

   Christian music, as a new art, must be created, and the children and
   youth must be trained therein, so that all may bear their part in the
   worship, and the worship exercise and inspire a devout feeling in all.

   There must be a punctual and regular attendance somehow established and
   made obligatory; for the habit of worship is necessary to its value, as
   a power over character. Hence there must be a common
   responsibility--all must be enlisted. There must be a church spirit,
   and, in order to this, a fraternal spirit in the members, verified by
   mutual sympathy and aid under the common burdens of life--a kind of
   service, I will add, which is often far more beneficent than a
   community of goods would be; for this latter might be only a premium
   given to idleness, while the other is but a good encouragement to the
   ingenuous struggles of industry. There must, however, be some Christian
   provision for the poor, that they also may have their part in the
   Christian flock, and the blessings of charity descend upon it and dwell
   in it.

   Nor is the article of dress, in a Christian assembly, too insignificant
   to be a subject of care. Probably no one had a thought of this in the
   Pentecostal assembly; but we find the apostles, not long after, giving
   serious lectures to the disciples upon their dress. Dress and manners,
   manners and morals, morals and piety, are all connected by an intimate
   or secret law. A people, therefore, who are careful to appear before
   God, in a well-chosen, modest, and appropriate dress--one that is
   neither careless nor ostentatious, one that indicates sobriety,
   neatness, good sense, and a desire to be approved of God more than to
   be seen of men--will avoid barbarous improprieties of every sort. Their
   manner will express reverence to God. What they express, they will be
   likely to feel; and if they become true disciples of Christ, as there
   is greater reason to hope, their manner will have a nicer propriety.
   and their whole demeanor will be more thoughtful, consistent, and
   lovely.

   It may, by and by, become evident that, in order to maintain the full
   power of religion, and to gain the neglected youth or children, and
   such children as would grow up otherwise in the power of vice, a parish
   school must be instituted. as in Scotland, in connection with every
   church. And then, at a much later day, it may become evident that
   Sunday-schools require to be instituted in the same way, and that
   these, enlisting the more capable and devoted of the churches in
   Christian studies, and good works--works, that is, of teaching and
   attention to the poor--are finally regarded every where, though wholly
   unknown to the apostles and the Pentecostal assembly, as being among
   the best means for the training of a practically Christian character,
   and the gathering in of the outcast families to God.

   So far we proceed without difficulty; all these things, though never
   preached by apostles, must finally come, we perceive, a outgrowths of
   the Christian church. Pentecostal incidents will disappear, and these
   will as certainly grow apace in their time.

   But the particular point for which I have drawn this sketch has been
   purposely left behind. Infant baptism, the relation of the seminal and
   undeveloped first period of human existence to Christ and his flock,
   that which appears only implicitly in the sermon of Peter, on the day
   of Pentecost--where is this, and what is to come, in the way of
   development, here? There was no reason, or even room, among the scenes
   of the Pentecost, for so much as thinking on this subject of infants
   and their church relations, and scarcely more for a considerable time
   afterward. It could not become a subject of attention, until the church
   itself began to settle into forms of order and structural organization;
   and how soon that came to pass we do not definitely know. It should
   therefore be no subject of wonder that infant baptism figures somewhat
   indistinctly, for so long a time at least; and scarcely more, that it
   shows itself only by implication and a kind of tacit development, for a
   brief time afterwards.

   Furthermore, if it came to pass, by a transference of Jewish ideas into
   Christian spheres, Jewish modes and conditions into the Christian order
   and economy--just as Peter's Jewish language, when he said, in his
   Pentecostal speech, "to you and to your children," finally came back to
   him in its Christian power,--it would make no bold and staring figure
   any where. If the Christian teachers looked to see all the better
   mercies of the old economy transferred into the Christian, and exalted
   there into some higher and more perfect meaning, we ought certainly not
   to expect any debate, or any thing but a silent, scarcely conscious
   flow of transition, when infants are taken to be with their parents, in
   the church, the covenant, the Christian Israel of their faith. And in
   just this way the defect of any bold declarations on the subject of
   infant baptism in the writings of the New Testament, and the fact that
   it appears only in a few historic glimpses, and occasional modes of
   speech that are subtle implications of the fact, is sufficiently
   accounted for.

   But we are inquiring after the mode in which this rite became an
   accepted element of the Christian organization, and a part of the
   church practice, as we certainly know that it did at sometime
   afterward. Peter probably conceived as little what his language might
   infer respecting it, as he certainly did, what hidden import there was
   in his testimony, by the same words. of a grace to the Gentiles; for he
   spoke in prophetic exaltation, as the ancient prophets did, not knowing
   what the spirit of Christ that was in them did signify. But suppose one
   of these adult converts at the Pentecost to have set off, after the few
   happy weeks of his sojourn are ended, for his home in some remote
   region of Arabia, Parthia, or Greece. He carries Christ with him, he is
   a new man, filled with a strange joy, burning with a strange,
   all-sacrificing love to the cause of his new Master, and to every
   sinner of mankind. He begins to preach the Christ he loves to his
   friends, tells them all he knows of the new gospel, speaks to them as
   one whom Christ has endowed with power to speak. He gathers a little
   circle, which we may call a church, around him, perhaps converts a
   little obscure synagogue into a church. He knows that he himself was
   baptized as a token of his faith, and he has heard, a thousand times
   repeated, Christ's word, "he that believeth and is baptized," "except a
   man be born of water and of the Spirit," and he does not scruple to
   baptize all his new fellow disciples. Then comes the question, what of
   the families? what of the infants we have, who are not old enough to
   believe? This, on the supposition that he had heard nothing of infant
   baptism before he left Jerusalem, which may or may not be true. But he
   has heard the whole story of Christ's life many times over, including
   the fact of his beautiful interest in children, and his declaration-"of
   such is the kingdom." He recollects also the ancient religion of his
   people; how it identified always the children with the fathers, and
   included them in the covenant of the fathers, raising doubtless the
   question, whether the gospel in its nobler, wider generosity and
   completer grace, would fall short even of the old religion in its
   tenderness to the family affections, and its provisions for the
   religious unity of families. And just here, we will suppose, the words
   of Peter, in that first sermon flash on his recollection--"For the
   promise is to you and to your children." They meant almost nothing, it
   may be, when they were spoken, but how full and clear the meaning they
   now take. It is like a revelation. The doubt struggling in his bosom is
   over, the question is settled. "My children," he says, "are with me,
   one with me in my faith, included with me in all my titles and hopes,
   and as I came in, out of the defilements of sin, and was baptized in
   token of my cleansing, so too are they to share my baptism and be heirs
   together with me in the grace of life."

   Thus instructed, he will baptize his children, and( make his religion a
   strictly family grace, expecting them to grow up in it; others also
   consenting with him in the same conclusion, and offering their children
   to God in the same manner. And, as the result, they will no more be
   Christians with families, but Christian families--all together in the
   church of God. In this manner the Pentecost itself, when the seeds that
   are in it are developed, will almost certainly issue the adult baptism
   there begun, the baptism of the three thousand, in the common baptism
   of the house.

   And here we have, in small, just what would most naturally take place
   in the development of Christianity itself. Taken as connected with its
   own precedent history and preparations, the church could hardly be held
   back from infant baptism, except by some specific revelation...
     __________________________________________________________________

VI.
APOSTOLIC AUTHORITY OF INFANT BAPTISM.

   "And I baptized also the household of Stephanas."--1 Cotinthians, i.
   16.

   WE have traced the conditions under which infant baptism would almost
   certainly be developed. But we do not leave the question here. We have
   many and distinct evidences for the rite, which are abundantly
   decisive; some from the nature of the family state, some from the New
   Testament, and some from the subsequent history of the church. These I
   will now undertake to present in the briefest mianner possible. And

   1. The organic unity of the family makes a ground for it, and sets it
   in terms of rational respect. The child that is born, is really not
   born, in the higher sense of that term, till he has breathed a long
   time. He does not live in his own will, but is in the will and life of
   his parents. To bring him forward into his own will and responsibility
   is the problem of years. He is in the matrix still of parental
   character, where all the graces, faiths, prayers, promises, of the
   parents are his also. He lives and breathes in them, and is of them,
   almost as truly as they are of themselves. What we call the house, is
   the organic life that grows him as a mind or agent, tempers him, works
   him into his habits, fashions him as by a precedent power, to be born
   and finally take dominion of himself. Why then should religion make no
   recognition of a fact so profoundly religious? Why not assume that the
   child is just where he is; in the faith of the house, to grow up there?
   It would even be a supposition against nature to suppose that he will
   not. It is very true that he may not, because the faith of the house is
   no faith, or so mixed with sense and passion as to have none of the
   true power. Still, when the discipleship is assumed to be made by
   faith, it must also be assumed that, being so made, it will have all
   the power of faith, shaping the parental life in the molds of that
   power, and just as certainly including or inclosing in those molds,
   there to be also shaped, the infant life of the offspring. The father
   and mother are not merely a man and a woman, but they are a man and
   woman having children; and accordingly it is the father and mother,
   that is, the man and woman and their children, that are to be baptized.

   2. It is precisely this great fact of an organic unity that is taken
   hold of and consecrated, in the field of religion, by the Abrahamic and
   other family covenants. And the whole course of revelation, both in the
   Old and New Testament, is tinged by associations, and sprinkled over
   with expressions that recognize the religious unity of families, and
   the inclusion of the children with the parents All the promises
   run--"to you and to your children;" for Peter's language here is only
   an inspired transfer and reassertion of the Jewish family ideas at the
   earliest moment, in the field of Christianity itself. It recognizes the
   fact that Christianity is just what we know it to be, nothing but a
   continuation and fuller development of the old religion. It widens out
   the scope of the old religion, so as to include all nations, even as
   the prophets foretold; and raises all the rites and symbols into a
   higher spiritual sense, as they were appointed from the first to be
   raised. Taken all together, the old and the new constitute a perfect
   whole or system, and the process is neither more nor less than God's
   way of developing and authenticating a universal religion. In this
   universal religion, therefore, we are to look for the continuance
   onward of the old family character and the inclusive oneness of fathers
   with their children. The only difference will be that the oneness will
   be raised into a more spiritual and higher sense, just as every thing
   else was raised. The children are thus to be looked upon presumptively
   as believing in the faith, and regenerated in the regeneration of the
   fathers. And here again,

   3. Circumcision comes to our aid, as another and distinct evidence. For
   it was given to be "a seal of the righteousness of faith," and the
   application of it, as a seal, to infant children, involves all the
   precise difficulties--neither more nor less--that are raised by the
   deniers of infant baptism. Let the point here made be accurately
   understood. The argument is not that infant baptism was directly
   substituted for circumcision. Of this there is no probable evidence.
   Such a substitution could not have been made without remark,
   discussion, oppositions of prejudice, and the raising of contentions
   that would have required distinct mention, many times over, in the
   apostolic history. But the argument is this: that the Jewish mind was
   so familiarized by custom with the notion of an inclusive religious
   unity in families, (partly by the rite of circumcision,) that Christian
   baptism, being the seal of faith, was naturally and by a kind of
   associational instinct, applied over to families in the same manner.
   Not to have made such an application would have required some
   authoritative interposition, some dike of positive hindrance, to turn
   aside the current of Jewish prepossessions. And if there had risen up,
   somewhere, a man of Baptist notions, to ask, where is the propriety of
   applying baptism, given as a rite for believers, to infants, who we
   certainly know are not old enough to believe? he could not even have
   begun to raise an impression by it. Was not circumcision given to
   Abraham to be the seal of faith? and has it not been applied from his
   time down to the present, in this way--applied to infant children eight
   days old? True it is the doctrine of Christ, "he that believeth and is
   baptized shall be saved," and our apostles too are saying, "if thou
   believest with all thy heart thou mayest." So we all say and think, as
   relating to adult persons; but do we not all know that what is given to
   the father includes the children, and that his faith is the faith of
   the house? Nothing, in short, is plainer than that every argument
   raised to convict infant baptism of absurdity, holds, iri he same
   manner, as convicting circumcision of absurdity, and all the religious
   polity of the former ages. Every such argument, too, mocks the
   religious feeling and conviction of all these former ages, in a way of
   disrespect equally presumptuous.

   It is very true, as declared by the apostle Paul, in his epistle to the
   Romans, that circumcision, seal of faith as it was, did not always have
   its meaning fulfilled; "for all are not Israel that are of Israel."
   Esau and Edom, his posterity, became, thus, an apostate race; and this,
   in a certain sense, by Providential appointment. But the scope of God's
   providential purpose, as every intelligent Christian ought to know,
   does not correspond with the scope of his grace or the measures of his
   gifts and promises. For the Providential plan takes in all the
   perversities of human action, while the grace-plan or promise
   corresponds with the aims and measures of God's paternal goodness. He
   means and offers, in other words, more than human perversity will take;
   gives a presumption of good, on his part, which he knows that human
   wrongs will not allow to be actualized. Then, as his Providential
   purposes and plan are graduated to what will actually be, not to what
   he means, wishes, and promises, it follows that the facts or issues of
   his Providential order do not answer to the scope of his gracious
   intention. And thus it comes to pass that, while he gives a seal of
   faith, which ought to be answered, by a result in which all are Israel
   that are of Israel, the fact is different. Had Israel ruled his house
   as he ought, had Rebekah been an honest woman, loving both her sons
   impartially, and seeking the true welfare of both--not conspiring with
   one to rob and cheat the other--Esau might have been a different man,
   and Edom might have been a family of Israel. In circumcision, as a seal
   of faith, God gave, on his part, the pledge and presumption that so it
   should be. But Edom was thrown off into apostasy by courses of human
   perversity that disappointed the seal. And the same is true of infant
   baptism in all those cases where the faith is narrowed, or denied, by
   parental misconduct. There is yet no falsity in the circumcision, or
   the baptism, because all which it signified was true; viz., that God,
   on his part, sought and meant and would have made actual, the whole
   promise of it. How often is adult baptism itself applied to such as
   have no faith at all; but this does not affect the inherent truth of
   the rite, and if they should live so as not to allow it any
   correspondence with fact, when applied to their children, does it any
   more affect the truth of it there? The rite measures God's intent and
   promise, and refuses to narrow itself by the perversity of the
   subjects. It says, "this child shall grow up in faith--give it
   baptism." Then if, by unbelief and graceless conduct in the parents, it
   grows up to be the stem of an Edomitish stock, it will not disappoint
   God's providential order and plan, and as little will it disprove God's
   promise and truth in the baptism. God is honored, and the rite is
   honored still. It is only the parental faith atd life that are not.

   4. It appears that Christian baptism was not a rite wholly new, but a
   reapplication of proselyte baptism. The custom had been, as the Gentile
   was an unclean person, to baptize him, as a token of cleansing, when he
   was received to be a Jew; and his family, of course, were baptized with
   him, to make the lustration complete. So Christ proposes baptism, as
   the token of that lustration, which is to purify such as become
   citizens in the kingdom of heaven. And the conversation ot Christ with
   Nicodemus evidently supposes such a rite previously existing and
   familiarly known by him. This being true, all that he says of baptism,
   or the lustration by water and the Spirit, supposes a baptism also of
   children with their parents, according to the custom. The civil
   regeneration of the proselyte and his family by such ceremonies will be
   answered, in reapplying the rite, by the spiritual regeneration of the
   convert and his family. If infants were, in this case, to be excepted,
   or not baptized, the exception required to be expressly made; for
   otherwise, the very transfer of the rite to a spiritual use must, of
   itself, carry infant baptism with it. Thus Lightfoot says with great
   force, "the Baptists object--it is not commanded that infants should be
   baptized, therefore they should not be baptized. But I say it is not
   prohibited that infants should be baptized, therefore they should be
   baptized; for since the baptism of children was familiarly practiced in
   the admission of proselytes, there was no need that it should be
   confirmed by express precept, when baptism came to be an evangelical
   sacrament. For Christ took baptism as he found it, and the whole nation
   knew perfectly well that little children had always been baptized. On
   the contrary, if he had intended that the custom should be abolished,
   he would have expressly prohibited it." Wetstein also says, in the same
   manner--"I do not see how it could enter into their thoughts to expunge
   boys and infants from the list of disciples, or from baptism, unless
   they had been excluded by the express injunction of Christ, which we
   nowhere find." [2]

   5. Christ comes very near to a specific and formal command of infant
   baptism, when we put together, side by side, what he says of baptism in
   the third chapter of John, and what he says concerning infants
   elsewhere. There he recognizes baptism as a token of one's entrance
   into the kingdom of God; elsewhere he says--suffer little children to
   come unto me and forbid them not for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
   These terms, "kingdom of God," and "kingdom of heaven," denote,
   externally, the church; and the church is also presented under the
   figure of a school, as here of a kingdom, in all those cases where
   becoming "a disciple" or learner is spoken of. In this latter view or
   figure, baptism is conceived to be one's enrollment openly as a
   disciple; and what is more fit than that children should be
   learners--brought in by their parents to be learners with them--of the
   Christian grace? This, in fact, was the general significance of faith
   in those times; they were called believers who so recognized the truth
   of Christ's person that they were ready to become learners under him.
   And the Baptists themselves act on this same principle, never holding
   the necessity that baptism should actually follow faith. in the high
   and complete sense of spiritual conversion. Probably half their
   members, in the church, come into doubt, before they die, of the time
   when they were really born of the Spirit; and, in cases of open
   apostasy, where there is a recovery, and the disciple openly testifies
   that he was not before a truly converted person, he is not rebaptized.
   It is enough that, by his baptism, he has openly signified his wish to
   be a disciple in the school of Christ; where, if he has never learned
   before, it is only the more necessary that he be a true learner now;
   which if he become, tht great law, "he that believeth and is baptized,"
   is sufficiently fulfilled. Just so with the child of a Christian
   parentage; whatever doubts may be entertained of his certainly growing
   up in the faith, there is a much better presumption that he will, if
   the parents are faithful, than there is, in the case of persons
   converted from the world, that they will prove to be true believers;
   and if he should not grow up in the faith, but afterwards becomes a
   Christian, there is just as much greater propriety in his baptism as an
   infant, and no more reason why he should be rebaptized, than there is
   in the case of apostate professors who become truly converted.

   6. What is said in the New Testament of household baptism, or the
   baptizing of households, is positive proof that infants were baptized
   in the times of the apostles--baptized, that is, in and because of the
   supposed faith of the parents. The fact of such baptism is three times
   distinctly mentioned; in the case of "the household of Stephanas," of
   Lydia "and her household," and the jailor "and all his." In the first
   case, nothing is said of faith at all, though doubtless he was baptized
   as a believer. In the second, every thing turns on the personal faith
   of Lydia--"if ye have judged me to be faithful." In the third, it seems
   to be said, according to an English translation, that all the house
   believed--"he rejoiced, believing in God, with All his house." But the
   participle, believing, is singular and not plural in the original, and
   the phrase--"with all his house"--plainly belongs to the verb and not
   to the participle. Rigidly translated, the passage would read--"he
   rejoiced with all his house, himself believing."

   It is often objected that, in all these three cases, for aught that
   appears, the households were made up of adult persons, who were
   baptized because they all believed. But the chance that this should be
   true of the only three households said to be baptized, and that there
   should be three households, as households were commonly made up in that
   time, in which there were no young children or infants, is not even one
   in a million, as computed by what is called the doctrine of chances.
   Besides, if it was a thing understood that infants were never to be
   baptized, it is important to observe that no such way of speaking could
   ever come into use. What Baptist could ever be induced, with his view
   of baptism, to say inclusively, and without some kind of qualification,
   that he had baptized the household of Richard or Mary? We need not
   stop, in this view, to ask whether certainly there were infants in any
   one of these households; the mode of speaking itself shows that baptism
   went by households, and that when the head was judged to be faithful,
   his baptism carried the presumptive faith and consequent baptism of
   all. Of this, too,

   7. We have a distinct indication, in what is said of children, where
   but one of the parents believes. Thus Paul distinctly teaches, "For the
   unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife
   is sanctified by the husband; else were your children unclean, but now
   are they holy." It is not meant here that the children are actually and
   inwardly holy persons, but that only having one Christian parent is
   enough to change their presumptive relations to God; enough to make
   them Christian children, as distinguished from the children of
   unbelievers. So strong is the conviction, even. in these apostolic
   times, of an organic unity sovereign over the faith and the religious
   affinities of children that, where but one parent believes, that faith
   carries presumptively the faith of the children with it And upon this
   grand fact of the religious economy, baptism was, from the first, and
   properly, applied to the children of them that believe. Hence, too--

   8. It was that the children of believers were familiarly addressed with
   them as believers; as in the epistles of Paul to the Ephesians and
   Colossians. These epistles are formally inscribed to churches or
   Christian brotherhoods--"to the saints, which are at Ephesus, and to
   the faithful in Christ Jesus"--"to the saints and faithful brethren,
   which are at Colosse." And yet in both, the children are particularly
   addressed --"Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is
   right"--"Children obey your parents in all things; for this is well
   pleasing unto the Lord." In this manner, children are formally included
   among the "faithful in Christ Jesus." The conception is that children
   are, of course, included in the religion of their parentage, grow up
   faithful with their faithful or believing parents. Or. the ground of
   this same presumption, they were properly baptized with them, or on
   their account. Again--

   9. It is a point of consequence to notice that such as reject all these
   and similar evidences from the Scripture, on the ground that infant
   baptism can not be rightly practiced, because it is not directly and
   specifically appointed in the Scripture, do yet make nothing of their
   own argument in other observances familiarly accepted. Why infant
   baptism was not and should not be required to have been specifically
   commanded, I have shown already; how, for example, it was necessarily
   developed, as from a point distinctly referred to in Peter's first
   sermon, and how the very institution of baptism carried, of necessity,
   infant baptism with it, apart from any express mention. In the
   meantime, it will be found that the objectors themselves are admitting
   and practicing, without difficulty, observances that have comparatively
   no specific authority at all. At the sacrament of the Supper, they use
   leavened bread without scruple, when they know that it was not used by
   Christ himself, and was solemnly forbidden at the festival, he was
   there, in fact, reappointing for the Christian uses of his disciples in
   all future ages. Where then is the authority given for a change even in
   the element of the Holy Supper itself? The Christian Lord's day, too,
   accepted in the place of the Jewish Sabbath, and that even against a
   specific command of the decalogue--how readily, and with how little
   scruple, do they accept this Lord's day and let the ancient Sabbath go,
   when it is only by the faintest, most equivocal, or evanescent
   indications they can make out a shadow of authority for the change?
   "Direct proof! positive command! specific injunction!" they say,
   "without these, infant baptism has no right." Where then do they get
   their authority for these other observances; one of them never referred
   to in Scripture at all, and the other so doubtfully, that infant
   baptism has, in comparison, the clear evidence of day?

   Lastly, it remains to glance at the evidences from church history, or
   the history of times subsequent to the age of the apostles. It has been
   the mood of Christian learning, in the generation past--for the learned
   men have moods and phases, not to say fashions, like others in the less
   thoughtful conditions--to make large concessions in the matter of
   baptism, both as regards the manner and the subjects. But a reaction is
   now begun, and it is my fixed conviction that it will not stop, till
   the encouragement heretofore given to the Baptist opinions is quite
   taken away.

   It has never been questioned, however, that infant baptism, became the
   current practice of the church at a very early date. It is mentioned,
   incidentally and otherwise, in the writings of the earliest church
   fathers after the age of the apostles.

   Thus it is testified by Justin Martyr, who was probably born before the
   death of the apostle John--"There are many of us, of both sexes, some
   sixty and some seventy years old, who were made disciples from their
   childhood." And the word made disciples is the same that Christ himself
   used when he said, "Go teach [i.e. disciple] all nations, baptizing,"
   &c.; the same that was currently applied to baptized children
   afterwards.

   Ireneus, born a few years later, writes--"Christ came to redeem all by
   himself; all who through him are regenerated unto God; infants and
   little children, and young men, and older persons. Hence, he passed
   through every age, and for the infants he became an infant, sanctifying
   infants; among the little children, he became a little child,
   sanctifying those who belong to this age; and at the same time,
   presenting them an example of well doing, and obedience; among the
   young men he became a young man, that he might set them an example, and
   sanctify them to the Lord." In the phrase, "regenerated to God," which
   is thus applied to infants, expressly named as distinguished from
   little children, he refers, it can not be doubted, to baptism; which,
   being the outward sign of such inward grace, was naturally and very
   commonly called regeneration. Infants plainly could be regenerated to
   God in no other sense; and therefore his language can not even be
   supposed to have any meaning, if this be rejected.

   Tertullian follows, urging the delay of baptism, and, in fact,
   advocating the disuse of infant baptism altogether. But his appeal
   supposes the current practice of such baptism at the time, and in that
   way rather augments than diminishes the weight of historic evidence.
   And the more so that he urges the delay of baptism on grounds that are
   false and even superstitious, viz.: that baptism carries the
   forgiveness of sins, and should therefore be postponed to a later
   period, because the sins committed after baptism must otherwise be
   cleared by a more purgatorial method.

   Origen, who was born near the close of the second century, or about a
   hundred years after the time of the apostles, testifies--"According to
   the usage of the church, baptism is given to infants." And again--"The
   church received an order from the apostles to baptize infants."

   Somewhere in these first two centuries, the ancient writing called the
   "Shepherd," or the "Shepherd of Hermas," because it purports to have
   been written by a teacher of that name, declares the opinion that--"All
   infants are in honor with the Lord, and are esteemed first of all--the
   baptism of water is necessary to all" Who this Hermas was, and when he
   lived, is not ascertained, but he is supposed by many to be the very
   same person mentioned by Paul, Rom. xvi. 14. He is acknowledged by
   Neander, as one who "had great authority in the first centuries."

   It is a remarkable evidence, too, that inscriptions are found on the
   monuments of children, considered by antiquarians to be of a very early
   age, probably of the first two or three centuries, in which they are
   called fideles, that is faithfuls; just as children are addressed by
   Paul among the "faithful brethren" of Ephesus and Colosse. The
   following is an example --(Buonarotti, 17 Fabretti, Cap. 4,) "A
   faithful among faithfuls, here lies Zosimus. He lived two years one
   month and twenty-five days." How far they carried the presumption of
   infant baptism, that children are to grow up in the grace of their
   parents, is here seen.

   It signifies little, therefore, as respects this question, after the
   authorities cited, that the Bishops of the North African Church, in a
   council called by Cyprian, about the middle of the third century,
   decided that baptism should not of course be delayed for eight days,
   according to the law of circumcision, which many supposed to govern the
   rite.

   So clear, in short, and decided was the authority of infant baptism,
   that Pelagius, a man of great learning, who had traveled in Britain,
   France, Italy, Africa Proper, Egypt, and Palestine, declared, in his
   controversy with Augustine, about the beginning of the fifth century,
   that "he had never heard of any impious heretic or sectary, who had
   denied infant baptism." "What," he also asked, "can be so impious as to
   hinder the baptism of infants?"

   Augustine himself also testifies--"The whole church of Christ has
   constantly held that infants were baptized. Infant baptism the whole
   church practices. It was not instituted by councils, but was ever in
   use."

   Infant baptism, therefore, is a fact of church history not to be fairly
   questioned. And accordingly the argument may be summed up thus:
   beginning at a point previous, we find customs and associations that
   would almost certainly be issued in such a rite of family religion; in
   the discourses of Christ and the apostolical writings we find that it
   actually was; and then we find the facts of church history
   correspondent. On the whole, while it may be admitted that baptism
   itself is a little more positively authenticated, it can not be denied
   that infant baptism is authenticated by all sufficient evidence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2] This subject of proselyte baptism has been spoken of also in the
   second Sermon, and need not be further dwelt upon here.
     __________________________________________________________________

VII.
CHURCH MEMBERSHIP OF CHILDREN.

   "To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at
   Colosse."--Colossians, i. 2.

   THESE "saints and faithful brethren," it will be seen, include young
   children; for the apostle makes a distribution of them afterwards, in
   the third chapter of the epistle, addressing the class of wives, the
   class of husbands, the class of fathers, the class of servants, the
   class of masters, and, among all these, the class of
   children--"Children obey your parents in all things; for this is well
   pleasing unto the Lord." The Epistle to the Ephesians, too, is
   inscribed, in the same way--"to the saints which are at Ephesus, and to
   the faithful in Christ;" and this, again, makes a like distribution;
   addressing the classes of husbands, wives, fathers, mothers, children,
   servants, and masters, all as being included in the church at
   Ephesus--"children obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right.
   Honor thy father and mother; for this is the first commandment with
   promise." Where also it is made clear that he is speaking to quite
   young children; for he turns immediately to the fathers, exhorting them
   to bring up their children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
   They are children so young, therefore, as to be subjects of nurture,
   and yet are addressed among the faithful brethren.

   The explanation, then, is not that such children were believers, in the
   sense of being converts entered into the fold by an adult experience,
   and distinguished from other children not thus converted. When Lydia
   speaks of herself as one adjudged to be "faithful," it is probably in
   this sense. But when Titus, in ordaining elders, is directed to choose
   such as have "faithful children, not accused of riot, or unruly," it
   would be very singular, if he was permitted to ordain only such as have
   all their children thus formally converted. Paul obviously means that
   the elders shall be such as are under no scandal on account of their
   families; whose children are growing up in the Christian way and grace;
   sober, well-behaved, hopefully Christian children. We can see, too, in
   the language employed, that Paul includes the Colossian and Ephesian
   children among the faithful brethren of the two cities, in this more
   presumptive or merely anticipative way. For when he says, "children
   obey your parents in the Lord," it is not "children in the Lord," or
   "children obey in the Lord, your parents," but it is "obey them who are
   parents in the Lord;" as if their very parentage itself, in the flesh,
   were a parentage also in the Spirit, communicating both a personal and
   a Christian life. So, also, when the parents are required to give a
   nurture in the Lord, we may see that the children are expected to be
   grown as saints and faithfuls, and to be presumptively in the Lord,
   apart from all expectations and processes of adult conversion.

   And it was out of such uses that the term "faithful" grew into the
   peculiar kind of church use, in which it denotes all the supposed
   members of the Christian body, whether adults, or only baptized
   children; as, for example, in that very ancient inscription cited by
   Buonarotti, where the child "two years, one month, and twenty-five days
   old," is described as lying among his Christian kinsmen--"a faithful
   among faithfuls." The very language supposes a membership in the
   church, or among the faithful brethren, by virtue of baptism and mere
   Christian nurture; such as on the footing of strict individualism, held
   by our Baptist brethren, could never even be thought of.

   What I propose then, at the present time, is a full and careful
   discussion of this great subject, the church membership of baptized
   children.

   And as it has fallen out, in the extreme individualism of our modern
   era, that multitudes are unable to conceive it as being any thing less
   than a kind of absurdity, or self-evident monstrosity, I shall be
   obliged to show the nature and kind of this membership.

   As it is very commonly disrespected on the ground of its practical
   insignificance, I must also show the reasons why it should exist.

   And then, since it is to the same extent, disowned as a rightful part
   of the true church economy, I must also establish the fact of its
   existence.

   1. I am to show the nature and extent of this membership.

   All those classes of Christian disciples who practice infant baptism
   conceive it, of course, to have a certain common character with adult
   baptism, and so to create a supposed, or somehow supposable membership
   in the church. And yet they often have it as a question, suppressed, or
   openly put without satisfaction --"who is a member of Christ's body,
   but one who is able to act and choose for himself, and in that manner
   to believe?" Many preachers, too, quite pass over the fact of any
   assignable reality in this relationship, publishing a call of salvation
   that practically ignores it as having any meaning at all; addressing
   young persons and children who have been baptized, in a way that as
   steadily and unqualifiedly assumes their unregenerate state, as if they
   were the children of heathenism. The opposers of infant baptism are
   bolder and more positive, of course, insisting always on the manifest
   absurdity of this nondescript, unintelligible, unintelligent
   membership; which makes a child a church member, not to be a voter nor
   a subject of discipline; which puts the initiatory rite of faith upon
   him, when he does not believe any thing, or even know there is anything
   to believe; creating thus a membership that has no rational meaning and
   no sound verity, but supposes a faith that does not exist, and
   constitutes a relationship that brings into no relation.

   What then, is this infant membership? what conception can we take of
   it, which will justify its Christian dignity? A great many persons who
   are very sharp at this kind of criticism, appear to have never observed
   that creatures existing under conditions of growth, allow no such terms
   of classification as those do which are dead, and have no growth; such,
   for example, as stones, metals, and earths. They are certain that gold
   is not iron, and iron is not silver, and they suppose that they can
   class the growing and transitional creatures, that are separated by no
   absolute lines, in the same manner. They talk of colts and horses,
   lambs and sheep, and it, possibly, not once occurs to them, that they
   can never tell when the colt becomes a horse, or the lamb a sheep; and
   that about the most definite thing they can say, when pressed with that
   question, is that the colt is potentially a horse, the lamb a sheep,
   even from the first, having in itself this definite futurition; and,
   therefore, that, while horses and sheep are not all to be classed as
   colts and lambs, all colts and lambs may be classed as horses and
   sheep. And just so children are all men and women; and, if there is any
   law of futurition in them to justify it, may be fitly classed as
   believing men and women. And all the sharp arguments that go to cover
   their membership, as such, in the church, with absurdity, or turn it
   into derision, are just such arguments as the inventors could raise
   with equal point, to ridicule the horsehood and sheephood of the young
   animals just referred to. The propriety of this membership does not lie
   in what those infants can or can not believe, or do or do not believe,
   at some given time, as, for example, on the day of their baptism; but
   it lies in the covenant of promise, which makes their parents, parents
   in the Lord; their nurture, a nurture of the Lord; and so constitutes a
   force of futurition by which they are to grow up, imperceptibly, into
   "faithfuls among faithfuls," in Christ Jesus. Perhaps no one can tell
   when they become such, and it may be that some initiating touch of
   grace began to work inductively in them, by a process too delicate for
   human observation, even from their earliest infancy, or from their
   baptismal day. For there is a nurture of grace, as well as a grace of
   conversion; that for childhood, as this for the age of maturity, and
   one as sure and genuine as the other.

   The conception, then, of this membership is, that it is a potentially
   real one; that it stands, for the present, in the faith of the parents
   and the promise which is to them and to their children, and that, on
   this ground, they may well enough be accounted believers, just as they
   are accounted potentially men and women. Then, as they come forward
   into maturity, it is to be assumed that they will come forward into
   faith, being grown in the nurture of faith, and will claim for
   themselves, the membership, into which they were before inserted.

   Nor is this a case which has no analogies, that it should be held up as
   a mark of derision. It is generally supposed that our common law has
   some basis of common sense. And yet this body of law makes every infant
   child a citizen; requiring, as a point of public order, the whole
   constabulary and even military force of the state to come to the
   rescue, or the redress of his wrongs, when his person is seized or
   property invaded by conspiracy. This infant child can sue and be sued;
   for the court of chancery will appoint him a guardian, whose acts shall
   be the child's acts; and it shall be as if he were answering for his
   own education, dress, board, entertainments, and the damages done by
   his servants, precisely as if he were a man acting in his own cause.
   Doubtless it may sound very absurdly to call him a citizen. What can he
   do as a citizen? He can not vote, nor bear arms; he does not even know
   what these things mean, and yet he is a citizen. In one view, he votes,
   bears arms, legislates, even in his cradle; for the potentiality is in
   him, and the state takes him up in her arms, as it were, to own him as
   her citizen.

   In a strongly related sense, it is, that the baptized child is a
   believer and a member of the church. There is no unreality in the
   position assigned him; for the futurition of God's promise is in him,
   and, by a kind of sublime anticipation, he is accepted in God's
   supernatural economy as a believer; even as the law accepts him, in the
   economy of society, to be a citizen. He is potentially both, and both
   is actually to be, in a way of transition so subtle and imperceptible
   that no one can tell, when he begins to be, either one, or the other.

   Nor is it any objection that there might be some difficulty in the
   exercise of a regular church discipline over baptized children; or that
   if this can not be done, they are really not church members in any
   sense that ought to be implied in the terms. Is then a child no
   citizen, because he is not held responsible in the law in precisely the
   same manner as adults; responsible, in a private action, for slander;
   or responsible, in a public, for murder and treason? The church
   membership is, of course, to be qualified and shaded by the gradations
   of age; just as the law contrives to shade the progress of the citizen
   child into the citizen man. All the logical or theological bantering we
   hear, therefore, on one side or the other, showing that the child,
   being a church member, ought to be held subject to discipline; or, if
   he is not held subject to discipline, that he is really no church
   member, is without reason or any proper show of practical dignity.

   It was proposed--

   II. To show the reasons why this relation of infant membership should
   exist, or be appointed. And here it is very obvious--

   First of all, that, if there is really no place in the church of God
   for infant children, then it must be said, and formally maintained,
   that there is none. And what could be worse in its effect on a child's
   feeling, than to find himself repelled from the brotherhood of God's
   elect, in that manner. What can the hapless creature think, either of
   himself or of God, when he is told that he is not old enough to be a
   Christian, or be owned by the Saviour as a disciple?

   Again, it would be most remarkable, if Christianity, organizing a fold
   of grace and love, in the world and for it, had yet no place in the
   fold for children. It spreads its arms to say--"For God so loved the
   world," and even declares that publicans and harlots shall flock in,
   before the captious priests and princes of the day; and yet it has no
   place, we are told, for children; children are out of the category of
   grace I Jesus himself was a child, and went through all the phases and
   conditions of childhood, not to show any thing by that fact, as the
   Christian Fathers fondly supposed; he said, too, "Suffer little
   children," but this was only his human feeling; he had no official
   relationship to such, and no particular grace for them! They are all
   outside the salvation-fold, hardening there in the storm, till their
   choosing, refusing, desiring, sinning power is sufficiently unfolded to
   have a place assigned them within! Is this Christianity? Is it a
   preparation so clumsy, so little human, so imperfectly graduated to man
   as he is, that it has no place for a full sixth part of the human race;
   a part also to which the other five-sixths are bound, in the dearest
   ties of love and care, and all but compulsory expectation? It would
   seem that any Christian heart, meeting Christianity at this point, and
   surveying it with only a little natural feeling, would even be
   oppressed by the sense of some strange defect in it, as a grace for the
   world. In this view it gives to little children the heritage only of
   Cain, requiring them to be driven out from the presence of the Lord,
   and grow up there among the outside crew of aliens and enemies. Let no
   one be surprised that, under such treatment, they stiffen into
   alienated, wrathful men, ripened for wickedness, by the ranges of all
   but reprobate exclusion in which they have been classed.

   Nor, again, is it any breach on their liberty, that children are
   entered into this qualified membership by their parents. What is it but
   a being entered into privilege? Is it a hard thing for human parents to
   enter their child into the lot of wealth and high society, and a
   station of family dignity, because it does not leave them to acquire
   the wealth and the position of honor in society, by their own original
   exertion, unassisted? When the order of the Cincinnati took their sons
   into the grand society of revolutionary honor with them, was it a
   breach on the liberty of the children? Or we may take another view of
   the question. The church of God is a school, and the members are
   disciples, or learners. Does not every parent choose the school for his
   children, giving them no choice in the matter, and taking it to be his
   own unquestionable right? This, too, on the ground that they are to
   have the benefit of his maturer judgment, and his more competent
   choice. Where then is the encroachment, when Christian parents baptize
   their child into the same discipleship with themselves, and set it in
   the school of Christ? It is only a part of their ordinary charge as
   parents, for it is given them to have the child in their own character,
   so to speak, and be themselves discipled with it and for it, (and why
   not it with them?) in all the honors and hopes of the heavenly kingdom.

   Consider again the remarkable and certainly painful fact that, in the
   view which excludes infant baptism and the discipleship of children,
   the conversion itself of a parent operates a kind of dissolution in the
   family state, than which nothing could be more unnatural. It is much as
   if our process of naturalization in the state, were to naturalize the
   parents and not the children; leaving these to be foreigners still, and
   aliens. God's effectual calling is no such unnatural grace; it will
   never call the parents away from the children; to be themselves
   included in the great family of salvation, and look out, in their joy,
   to see their children fenced away! No--"The promise is to you and to
   your children;" not, to you without your children. Come in hither,
   then, ye guilty families of man, parents to be parents in the Lord,
   children to obey in the Lord, all to be circled by the common grace of
   life and the common fellowship of the saints. Why should we think that
   our Great Father who has been refusing, ever since the world began, to
   so much as put into any bird of the air, an instinct that will draw it
   away from its nest, may yet, as a matter of celestial mercy, be engaged
   by his Spirit, in the gathering of human parents away from their young!

   It is a matter, too, of great consequence to parents, as respects their
   own fidelity in their office, that their children are not put away, by
   the Saviour, to hold rank with heathens outside of the fold, but are
   brought in with them, to be heirs together with them in the grace of
   life. What will justify, or will naturally produce, a more sullen
   remissness of duty in parents, than to feel that;, for the present, God
   has shut away, and is holding away their children, and that they are
   never to be disciples of the fold, till after they have been passed
   round into it, through long detours of estrangement and ripening
   guiltiness? If there is nothing better for them than to be converted
   just as heathens are, why should they, as parents, be greatly concerned
   for their own example, and the faithfulness of their training, when the
   conversion is to be every thing and will have power to remedy every
   defect?

   How refreshing the contrast, when the children, given to God in
   baptism, are accounted members of the church with them, as being
   included in their faith, and having the seal of it upon them. They look
   upon it now as their privilege to be parents in the Lord. Their
   prayers, they understand, are to keep heaven open upon their house.
   Their aims are to be Christian. Their tastes and manners to be flavored
   by the Christian hope in which they live. There is to be a quickening
   element in the atmosphere they make. They will set all things upon a
   Christian footing for their children's sake; and their children,
   growing up in such nurture of the Lord, will, how certainly, unfold
   what their nurture itself has quickened.

   It is still another consideration, that the church itself, having this
   infant membership in it, will unfold other aims and tempers, and exert
   a finer quality of power. It will not be a dry convention of simply
   grown up men and women; the men will, some of them, be fathers, the
   women mothers, and the children being also included, their tender
   brotherhood will make an element of common, consciously felt,
   gentleness for all. The parents will learn from the children quite as
   much as they teach, and will do their teaching fitly, just be cause
   they learn. The church prayers will have a certain paternity and
   maternity in them, and the children will feel the grace of these
   prayers warming always round them. Even the church life itself, two, or
   three, or more, generations deep, will be qualified by the grandfather
   and grandmother spirit, and the father and mother spirit, and the
   reverent manners of the little ones, and the whole volume of religious
   life will be unfolded thus, by taking into itself the whole volume of
   nature and family feeling.

   Such are some of the reasons, briefly and faintly presented, which
   determine, as I conceive, God's appointment of the great fact of an
   infant membership in his church. And yet the reasons, taken by
   themselves, are hardly a sufficient evidence of the fact. They set us
   in the mood of respect, and even put us in the expectation of it, but
   they leave the inquiry still upon our hands--

   III. Whether the supposed infant membership is a real and true fact?
   That it is, may be seen from the following proofs:--

   1. Those declarations of Scripture which assert or assume the fact.
   Thus, when the Saviour commands--"Suffer little children to come unto
   me and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven," it would
   be very singular if they could not come in with the disciples, when
   they may so freely come to the Master himself. And if Christ had been
   calling his disciples themselves into fraternity with him, what more
   could he have said for them, than that of such is the kingdom of
   heaven? Nor is it any objection, as respects the children, that, except
   a man be born again, he can not be entered into this kingdom; for
   potentially, at least they are thus born again; and so are as fitly to
   be counted citizens of the kingdom, as they are to be citizens of the
   state. Besides, there is still less in this objection, inasmuch as the
   kingdom of God, taken in its lower sense as identical with the church,
   is expressly likened by the Saviour to a net that gathers of every
   kind. And what again does it signify, as regards the apostolic ideas of
   this matter of infant membership, that the great apostle to the
   Gentiles, in at least two of his epistles to Christian churches,
   addresses, directly, children, as being included among the saints and
   faithful in Christ Jesus? I allege as proof,

   2. The analogy of circumcision. This was given to be the seal of faith,
   and the church token, in that manner, of a godly seed. Baptism can
   certainly be the same, with as little difficulty, or as little charge
   of absurdity. True, they were not all Israel that were of Israel, and
   so all may not be Israel that are baptized. Enough that God gives the
   possibility, in both cases, in giving the rite itself; and then it is
   to be seen whether the parents will be parents in the Lord, as it is
   formally permitted them to be. Let the true point here be carefully
   observed; some kind of presumption must be given by God, in respect to
   the church position of children; for they must either be taken into the
   church. or else they must be excluded till they are old enough to be
   admitted on the ground of a religious experience--there is no other
   alternative. If they are excluded, then it is taken for granted, that
   they are to grow up as unbelievers and aliens, which is only their
   public consignment to evil. If they are taken to be in the faith,
   presumptively, as in the nurture of their parents, and so accepted,
   then every kind encouragement is given to them, and every pledge of
   divine help is graciously given to their parents. Which of the two
   methods is most consonant to nature, and worthiest of God's
   beneficence, it is not difficult to see. God, on his part, gives no
   presumption, either to the parents or their child, that he is to be
   only a transgressor and alien, but he gives the seal of the faith, as a
   pledge, to raise their expectation of what he will do for them, and to
   throw the blame of a godless childhood and youth, if such there is to
   be, on themselves.

   3. The church connection of children is virtually assumed, as we may
   see, by the apostle Paul, when he teaches that the believing wife
   sanctifies the unbelieving husband, and the believing husband the
   unbelieving wife--"else were your children unclean, but now are they
   holy." He refers, in this matter, it is plain, to the effect of a
   parental faith, on the church position of children. He does not, of
   course, use the term "sanctify," in any spiritual sense, as affirming
   the regeneration of character in the children; but he alludes only to
   the church ideas of clean and unclean, affirming that the unclean state
   of a godless father, or mother, is so far taken away by the clean state
   of a godly mother, or father, that the children are accounted clean, or
   holy --so far holy, that is, that they are of the fold, and not aliens,
   or unclean foreigners without the fold, as the Jews were accustomed to
   regard all the uncircumcised races. One believing parent, he declares,
   puts the children in the church classification of believers.

   4. All the reasons I have given for the observance of infant baptism,
   go to establish also the fact of infant membership in the church. And
   this holds good, especially of that which discovers the origin of the
   rite in proselyte baptism. For as foreigners, becoming proselytes, were
   baptized and so made clean, thus to be accounted natural born citizens,
   so Christ, reapplying the rite to a spiritual use, makes it the token
   of that regeneration which enters the soul into his heavenly kingdom,
   and gives a divine citizenship there. In which you may see how my
   comparison of infant membership in the church, to the well-known
   citizenship of infants in the state, is borne out by Christian
   authority itself. Their very baptism is the figure of their
   citizenship; wherein they are shown to be "fellow-citizens of the
   saints, and of the household of God." Now it is to be conceded, as
   respects all these proofs from the Scripture, that the church
   membership of children is not formally asserted in them. According to a
   certain coarse way of judging, therefore, they are not as strong as
   they might be. And yet, in a more perceptive and really truer mode of
   judgment, they lack that kind of strength just because they have too
   much of another, which is deeper and more satisfactory, to suffer it.
   So familiar is the idea, to all Jewish minds, of a religious oneness in
   parents and their offspring, that a church institution of any kind,
   arranged to include parents and not their offspring, would even have
   been a shocking offense to the nation. Children were as much expected
   to be with their parents in their religion, as they were to be in their
   sustentation. Does any one doubt that children were citizens in the old
   theocracy? And yet I recollect no passage where that sort of membership
   with their parents is instituted, or formally asserted. And the reason,
   is that it is a fact too familiar, too close to the sentiment or sense
   of nature, to be asserted. We can even see for ourselves that they look
   upon religious faith itself as a kind of heir-loom ill the family,
   descending on the child by laws of family connexion, where it is not
   hindered by some bad fault in the manners and walk of the parents. Thus
   we hear even Paul himself, the man who knew as well as any other, and
   taught as powerfully, the significance of Christian faith, addressing
   his young brother Timothy, as having the greater confidence in his
   faith because it is hereditary--"When I call to remembrance the
   unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother
   Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that in thee also."
   This unfeigned, this certainly true Christian faith, he conceives to
   have even leapt the gulf between the old religion and the new, and so
   to have come down upon him, through at least two generations of godly
   motherhood under the law and before the coming of Jesus. When such
   notions of family grace are familiar, what does it signify that the
   church membership of children is not formally asserted? How could that
   be instituted by an apostolic decree, which no apostle, or man, or
   woman, had ever thought could be otherwise?

   Over and above these more direct evidences, for the church membership
   of baptized children, there is still another kind of evidence to be
   adduced, which has, and very properly should have, much weight. I
   allude to the opinions of the church and her most qualified teachers,
   from the apostolic era downward. In one sense, the mere opinions of men
   regarding such a question are of little consequence. But where they
   coincide with the known practice of the church from the earliest times
   downward, and show the practice to be grounded in the same reasons of
   organic unity and presumptive grace that we are now asserting, they
   both show that our doctrine is no novelty, and contribute a powerful
   evidence in support of its original authenticity.

   Thus I have cited already in support of infant baptism, passages from
   Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, Origen, the Shepherd of Hermas, and
   others, which not only show the fact of infant baptism, but discover
   also, in their phraseology, the same views of church membership that I
   am now asserting. This whole view of infant membership, as it stood in
   the first three centuries of the church history, appears to be wet]
   summed up, both as regards the facts anid the reasons, in the following
   statement of Neander:--

   "It is the idea of infant baptism that Christ, through the divine life
   which he imparted to, and revealed in, human nature, sanctified that
   germ from its earliest development. The child born in a Christian
   family was, when all things were as they should be, to have this
   advantage over others, that he did not come to Christianity out of
   heathenism or the sinful natural life, but from the first dawning of
   consciousness unfolded his powers under the imperceptible, preventing
   influences of a sanctifying, ennobling religion; that with the earliest
   germinations of the natural self-conscious life, another divine
   principle of life, transforming the nature, should be brought nigh to
   him, ere yet the ungodly principle could come into full activity, and
   the latter should at once, find here its powerful counterpoise. In such
   a life, the new birth was not to constitute a new crisis, beginning at
   some definable moment, but it was to begin imperceptibly, and so
   proceed through the whole life. Hence baptism, the visible sign of
   regeneration, was to be given to the child at the very outset: the
   child was to be consecrated to the Redeemer from the very beginning of
   its life." [3]

   A more popular and practical view of Christianity, as seen in the
   domestic life of families, and one, at the same time, wholly
   coincident, is given by Cave:--

   "Gregory Nazianzen peculiarly commends his mother, that not only she
   herself was consecrated to God, and brought up under a pious education,
   but that she conveyed it down, as a necessary inheritance, to her
   children; and it seems her daughter Gorgonia was so well seasoned with
   these holy principles, that she religiously walked in the steps of so
   good a pattern; and did not only reclaim her husband, but educated her
   children and nephews in the ways of religion, giving them an excellent
   example while she lived, and leaving this, as her last charge and
   request when she died. * * * This was the discipline under which
   Christians were brought up in those times. Religion was instilled into
   them betimes, which grew up and mixed itself with their ordinary labors
   and recreations. * * * * So that Jerome says, of the place where he
   lived, you could not go into the field, but you might hear the plowman
   at his hallelujahs, the mower at his hymns, and the vine-dresser
   singing David's Psalms." [4]

   I can not answer for an exact agreement of my doctrine with that of
   Calvin. It must be sufficient that he recognizes the valid possibility
   of a regenerate character, existing long before it is formally
   developed, and the propriety of infant baptism as the initiatory rite
   of membership. He says:--

   "Christ was sanctified from his earliest infancy, that he might
   sanctify in himself all his elect But how, it is inquired, are infants
   regenerated who have no knowledge either of good or evil? We reply that
   the work of God is not yet without existence because it is not observed
   or understood by us. Now it is certain that some infants are saved, and
   that they are previously regenerated by the Lord is beyond all doubt
   They are baptized into future repentance and faith; for though these
   graces have not yet been formed in them, the seeds of both are
   nevertheless implanted in their hearts by the secret operations of the
   Spirit." [5]

   The mercurial mind of Baxter penetrates directly into all the
   subtleties of the question, asserting the organic unity of children who
   stand accepted in the covenant of their fathers; showing how regenerate
   character is to begin, seminally, in the children of them that believe,
   and get the start of sin by a kind of gracious anticipation; and so
   that, in this view, nurture and growth are God's way of unfolding grace
   in the church, as preaching and conversion are his method of grace with
   them that are without. Which three points are successively asserted in
   the following passages:--

   "Q.--Why then are they baptized who can not covenant?

   "A.--As children are made sinners and miserable by the parents, without
   any act of their own, so they are delivered out of it by the free grace
   of Christ, upon a condition performed by their parents. Else they who
   are visibly born in sin and misery should have no certain or visible
   way of remedy. Nature maketh them, as it were, parts of their parents,
   or so near as causeth their sin and misery. And this nearness supposed,
   God, by his free grace, hath put it in the power of the parents to
   accept for them the blessings of the covenant, and to enter them into
   the covenant of God, the parents' will being instead of their own, who
   have yet no will to choose for themselves." [6]

   "Of those baptized in infancy, some do betimes receive the secret seeds
   of grace, which, by the blessings of a holy education, is stirring in
   them according to their capacity, and working them to God by actual
   desires, and working them from all known sill, and entertaining further
   grace, and turning them into actual acquaintance with Christ, as soon
   as they arrive at full natural capacity, so that they never were actual
   ungodly persons." [7]

   "Ungodly parents do serve the devil so effectually, in the first
   impressions on their children's minds, that it is more than magistrates
   and ministers and all reforming means can afterwards do to recover them
   from that sin to God. Whereas, if you would first engage their hearts
   to God by a religious education, piety would then have all those
   advantages that sin hath now. (Prov. xxii. 6.) The language which you
   teach them to speak when they are children, they will use all their
   life after, if they live with those that use it. And so the opinions
   which they first receive, and the customs which they are used to at
   first are very hardly changed afterwards. I doubt not to affirm, that a
   godly education is God's first and ordinary appointed means, for the
   begetting of actual faith and other graces in the children of
   believers. Many have received grace before; but they can not sooner
   have actual faith, repentance, love, or any grace than they may have
   reason itself, in act and exercise. And the preaching of the word by
   public ministers, is not the first ordinary means of grace, to any but
   those that were graceless till they come to hear such preaching; that
   is, to those on whom the first appointed means hath been neglected or
   proved vain; * * * * therefore it is apparent that the ordinary
   appointed means for the first actual grace, is parents' godly
   instruction and education of their children. And public preaching is
   appointed for the conversion of those only that have missed the
   blessing of the first appointed means." [8]

   Our New England fathers, coming out as they did from a mode of church
   economy which made Christian piety itself to be scarcely more than
   baptism, and passing through great struggles to settle a scheme of
   church order that should recognize the strict individuality of persons,
   and the essential personality of spiritual regeneration, fell off for a
   time, as they naturally might, into a denial of the great underlying
   principles and facts on which the membership of baptized children in
   the church must ever be rested. In the Cambridge Platform of 1649, they
   asserted a view of membership, by which it was to be rigidly confined
   to such as appear to be renewed persons. Meantime none were allowed to
   be qualified as voters in the commonwealth, except in the Hartford and
   Providence colonies, who were not members of the church--the same
   principle with which they had been familiar in England. The result was,
   under their individualizing scheme of membership, that they began to
   find, as soon as their sons were grown to manhood, that many of them,
   even though baptized, were, in fact, aliens in the state. They could
   not vote in the state, and, having no pretense of faith, could not
   baptize their children, not being in the church themselves. Another
   synod was convened A.D. 1662, to find some way of relieving these
   difficulties. And they hit upon the rather strange expedient of a
   half-membership, allowing all baptized persons who live reputably, and
   give a speculative assent to the gospel, to be so far members that they
   may be voters and have their children baptized. This decision was
   stoutly opposed by some of the ablest men in the synod, and great
   debates followed. And yet as the facts were reported by Cotton Mather,
   these three positions were' asserted and agreed to on all hands--even
   though the scheme adopted had no systematic and practical agreement
   with them, or ground of reason in them.

   1. That the children of Christian parents, trained in a Christian way,
   often grow up as spiritually renewed persons, and must indeed be
   accounted true disciples of Christ, until some evidence conclusive to
   the contrary is given by their conduct.

   "Children of the covenant have frequently the beginning of grace
   wrought in them in younger years, as Scripture and experience show.
   Instance Joseph, Samuel, David, Solomon, Abijah, Josiah, Daniel, John
   Baptist, Timothy. Hence this sort of persons, [baptized persons]
   showing nothing to the contrary, art, in charity, or to ecclesiastical
   reputation, visible believers." [9]

   2. That baptism supposes an initial state of piety, or some right
   beginning, in which the child is prepared unto good, by causes prior to
   his own will.

   "We are to distinguish between faith and the hopeful beginning of it,
   the charitable judgment whereof runs upon a great latitude, and faith
   in the special exercise of it, unto the visible discovery whereof, more
   experienced operations are to be inquired after. The words of Dr. Ames
   are: 'Children are not to be admitted to partake of all church
   privileges, till first increase of faith do appear, but from those
   which belong to the beginning of faith and entrance into the church
   they are not to be excluded.'" [10]

   3. That there is a kind of individualism which runs only to evil; that
   the church is designed to be an organic, vital, grace-giving power, and
   thus a nursery of spiritual life to its children.

   "The way of the Anabaptists, to admit none to membership and baptism
   but adult professors, is the straitest way; one would think it should
   be a way of great purity; but experience hath shewed that it has been
   an inlet unto great corruption. If we do not keep in the way of a
   converting, grace-giving covenant, and keep persons under those church
   dispensations wherein grace is given, the church will die of a
   lingering though not violent death. The Lord hath not set up churches
   only that a few old Christians may keep one another warm while they
   live, and then carry away the church with them when they die; no, but
   that they might with all care, and with all the obligations and
   advantages to that care that may be, nurse still successively another
   generation of subjects to our Lord, that may stand up ill his kingdom
   when they are gone." [11]

   Under this half-way covenant, and probably in part because of it,
   practical religion fell into a state of great debility. The churches
   lost their spirituality, and had well nigh lost the idea of spiritual
   life itself; when at length the Great Revival, under Whitefield and
   Edwards, inaugurated and brought up to its highest intensity the new
   era of individualism--the same overwrought, misapplied scheme of
   personal experience in religion, which has continued with some
   modifications to the present day. It is a religion that begins
   explosively, raises high frames, carries little or no expansion, and
   after the campaign is over, subsides into a torpor. Considered as a
   distinct era, introduced by Edwards, and extended and caricatured by
   his cotemporaries, it has one great merit, and one great defect. The
   merit is that it displaced an era of dead formality, and brought in the
   demand of a truly supernatural experience. The defect is, that it has
   cast a type of religious individualism, intense beyond any former
   example. It makes nothing of the family, and the church, and the
   organic powers God has constituted as vehicles of grace. It takes every
   man as if he had existed alone; presumes that he is unreconciled to God
   until he has undergone some sudden and explosive experience in adult
   years, or after the age of reason; demands that experience. and only
   when it is reached, allows the subject to be an heir of life. Then, on
   the other side, or that of the Spirit of God, the very act or ictus by
   which the change is wrought is isolated or individualized, so as to
   stand in no connection with any other of God's means or causes--an
   epiphany, in which God leaps from the stars, or some place above, to do
   a work apart from all system, or connection with his other works.
   Religion is thus a kind of transcendental matter, which belongs on the
   outside of life, and has no part in the laws by which life is
   organized--a miraculous epidemic, a fire-ball shot from the moon,
   something holy, because it is from God, but so extraordinary, so out of
   place, that it can not suffer any vital connection with the ties, and
   causes, and forms, and habits, which constitute the frame of our
   history. Hence the desultory, hard, violent, and often extravagant or
   erratic character it manifests. Hlence, in part, the dreary years of
   decay and darkness, that interspace our months of excitement and
   victory.

   Even Edwards himself, fifteen years after the Great Revival, began to
   be oppressed with sorrowful convictions of some great defect in the
   matter and mode of it, confessing his doubt whether "the greater part
   of supposed converts give reason, by their conversation, to suppose
   that they continue converts;" protesting, also, his special confidence
   in the fruits of family religion in terms like these--

   "Every Christian family ought to be, as it were, a little church,
   consecrated to Christ, and wholly influenced and governed by his rules.
   And family education and order are some of the chief means of grace. If
   these fail, all other means are likely to prove ineffectual." [12]

   Dr. Hopkins, a pupil of Edwards, had probably been turned by
   suggestions from him, to a consideration of the importance of family
   nurture and piety, as connected with the propagation of religion; and,
   as if to supply some defect in this direction, he occupied sixty pages
   in his System of Divinity, with a careful discussion of the "nature and
   design of infant baptism." In this article, he goes even beyond the
   notion of a presumptive piety in the children baptized, and says:--"The
   church receive and look upon them as holy, and those who shall be
   saved. So they are as visibly holy, or as really holy, in their view,
   as their parents are." [13]

   How far his theory of conversion would compel him to isolate the act of
   God by which the spiritual renovation of a soul is wrought, I will not
   undertake to decide. Enough, that he asserts an organic connection of
   character between parents and children, as effectual for good as for
   evil; nay, that they may as truly, and in the same sense, transmit
   holiness as they transmit existence. Thus, after asserting, not more
   clearly or decidedly than I have done, the impossibility that parents
   should spiritually renew their children, considered as acting by
   themselves, he says:

   "But it does not follow from this, that God has not so constituted the
   covenant of grace, that holiness shall be communicated, by Him, to the
   children, in consequence of the faithful endeavors of their parents; so
   that, in this sense, and by virtue of such a constitution, they do by
   their faithful endeavors convey saving blessings to their children. In
   this way they give existence to their children. God produces their
   existence by his own Almighty energy; but, by the constitution he has
   established, they receive their existence from their parents, or by
   their means. By an established constitution, parents convey moral
   depravity to their children. And if God has been pleased to make a
   constitution and appoint a way, in his covenant of grace with man, by
   which pious parents may convey and communicate moral rectitude or
   holiness to their children, they, by using the appointed means, do it
   as really and effectually as they communicate existence to them. In
   this sense, therefore, they may convey and give holiness and salvation
   to their children." [14]

   Dr. Witherspoon, a cotemporary of Dr. Hopkins, held opinions on this
   subject that were in a high degree coincident, though presented in a
   more popular and less doctrinal shape. He says:--

   "I will not enlarge on some refined remarks of persons as distinguished
   for learning as piety, some of whom have supposed that they [children]
   are capable of receiving impressions of desire and aversion, and even
   of moral temper, particularly of love or hatred, its the first year of
   their lives. * * * When the gospel comes to a people that have long
   sitten in darkness, there may be numerous converts of all ages; but
   when the gospel has long been preached, in plenty and purity, andl
   ordinances regularly administered, few but those who are called in
   early life are called at all. A very judicious and pious writer,
   Richard Baxter, is of opinion that in a regular state of the church,
   and a tolerable measure of faithfulness and purity in its officers,
   family instruction and government are the usual means of conversion,
   public ordinances of edification. This seems agreeable to the language
   of Scripture; for we are told that God hath set in the church apostles,
   prophets, evangelists, pastors and teachers, (not for converting
   sinners, but) for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
   ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ." [15]

   From all these citations, which could be multiplied without limit, it
   will be seen that the children of Christian parents have been looked
   upon as being heirs of the parental faith, and presumptively included
   in that faith; and so, either with or without a distinct assertion of
   the proper church membership of children, such opinions have been held
   in all ages respecting them, as make the denial of their membership a
   clear impropriety and even a kind of offense against nature.

   It is hardly necessary to add, in closing this subject, that if
   children baptized are so far accepted as members of the Christian
   church, it must be a great fault and a most hurtful dereliction of duty
   that nothing is practically made of this membership, and that really it
   passes for a thing of no significance. The rite is appointed because it
   has a meaning and a value, and then, when it is passed, it is treated
   in a way that even indicates the possible absurdity of it. That the
   children will see any thing in such a mode of practice is impossible.
   And it requires but the smallest possible perception, to see that the
   rite will, in this manner, be regularly sinking into discredit, till it
   is quite done away, and the value it might have in the church is lost.
   To accomplish all that is needed to give full effect to the rite--

   Baptized children ought to be enrolled by name in the catalogue of each
   church, as composing a distinct class of candidate, or
   catechumen-members; and to see that they are held in expectancy, thus,
   by the church, as presumptively one with them in the faith they
   profess.

   Then, when they come forward to acknowledge their baptism, and assume
   the covenant in their own choice, they ought not to be received as
   converts from the world, as if they were heathens coming into the fold,
   but there should be a distinction preserved, such as makes due account
   of their previous qualified membership; a form of assumption tendered
   in place of a confession--something answering to the Lutheran
   confirmation, passed without a bishop's hands.

   Children, as soon as they are well out of their infancy, ought to be
   taken also to the stated meetings of fellowship and prayer, drawn into
   all the moods of worship, praise, supplication, reproof, as being
   rightfully concerned in them, on the score of their membership. There
   ought to be a great deal made of singing too in such meetings, that
   they may join their voices and play into expression their own tribute
   of feeling and Christian sentiment

   Whenever there are orphan children, that have been baptized, the church
   ought to look after them, as being members; see, if possible, that they
   are not neglected, but trained up in a Christian manner; provided, if
   need be, with a godly fatherhood and motherhood in the church itself;
   led into the church and out into the world, as disciples beloved
   according to their years.

   Meantime, it is a matter of prime significance that the Christian
   father and mother should live so as to indicate a sense of their
   privilege and responsibility; even as Abraham did when he sojourned in
   the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tents with
   Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise. It is one thing to
   live for a family of children, as if they were going possibly to be
   converted, and a very different to live for them as church members,
   training them into their holy profession; one thing to have them about
   as strangers to the covenant of promise, and another to have them about
   as heirs of the same promise, growing up into it, to fulfill the seal
   of faith already upon them. One great reason why the children of
   Christian parents turn out so badly is, that they are taken to be the
   world, and the manner and spirit of the house are brought down to be of
   the world too, and partly for their sake. Take them as disciples of
   Jesus, to be carefully trained for Him; prepared to no mere worldly
   tastes, and fashions, and pleasures, but kept in purity, saved from the
   world, and led forth under all tender examples of obedience and godly
   living; and it will be strange if that nurture of the Lord does not
   show them growing up in the faith, to be sons and daughters, indeed, of
   the Lord Almighty.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3] Neander's Church History, Torrey's translation, pp. 311, 312.

   [4] Primitive Christianity, pp. 173, 174.

   [5] Ins. cap. xvi.  17, 18, 20.

   [6] Teacher of Householders, fol., vol. ii., p. 135.

   [7] Confirmation, fol., vol. iv., p. 267.

   [8] Christian Directory, vol. ii., cap. 6,  4, fol. p. 516.

   [9] Magnalia, book v., fol. p. 72.

   [10] Magnalia, book v., fol. p 77.

   [11] Magnalia, book v., fol. p. 81. 187

   [12] Vol. i., p. 90.

   [13] Vol. ii. p. 319.

   [14] Pages 334, 335.

   [15] Witherspoon, vol. ii., pp. 395, 397.
     __________________________________________________________________

VII.
THE OUT-POPULATING POWER OF THE CHRISTIAN STOCK.

   "And did he not make one? Yet had he the residue of the Spirit. And
   wherefore one? That he might have a godly seed."--Malachi, ii. 15.

   THE prophet is enforcing here a strict observance of marriage. And he
   adverts, in his argument, to the single and sole state of the first
   human pair, as a standing proof against polygamy, inconstancy, and all
   similar abuses of the marriage state. God was not spent, he says, in
   creating a single man, Adam, and a single woman, Eve, but he had such a
   residue, or overplus of creative energy left, that he could have
   created millions if he would. Wherefore then did he cease, producing
   only just one man and woman, and no more? The answer is--That he might
   have a godly seed. In that lies the reason, he declares, of God's
   economy in this family institution. We perceive, accordingly,

   That God is, from the first, looking for a godly seed; or, what is
   nowise different, inserting such laws of population that piety itself
   shall finally over-populate the world.

   To be more explicit, there are two principal modes by which the kingdom
   of God among men may be, and is to be extended. One is by the process
   of conversion. and the other by that of family propagation; one by
   gaining over to the side of faith and piety, the other by the
   populating force of faith and piety themselves. The former is the grand
   idea that has taken possession of the churches of our times--they are
   going to convert the world. They have taken hold of the promise, which
   so many of the prophets have given out, of a time when the reign of
   Christ shall be universal, extending to all nations ant peoples; and
   the expectation is that, by preaching Christ to all the nations, they
   will finally convert them and bring them over into the gospel fold.
   Meantime very much less, or almost nothing, is made of the other
   method, viz: that of Christian population. Indeed, as we are now
   looking at religion, or religious character and experience, we can
   hardly find a place for any such thought as a possible reproduction
   thus of parental character -and grace in children. They must come in by
   choice, on their own account; they must be converted over from an
   outside life that has grown to maturity in sin. Are they not
   individuals, and how are they to be initiated into any thing good by
   inheritance and before choice? It is as if they were all so many
   Melchisedecs in their religious nature, only not righteous at
   all--without father, without mother, without descent. Descent brings
   them nothing. Born of faith, and bosomed in it, and nurtured by it
   still, there is yet to be no faith begotten in them, nor so much as a
   contagion even of faith to be caught in their garments.

   What I propose, at the present time, is to restore, if possible, a
   juster impression of this great subject; to show that conversion over
   to the church is not the only way of increase; that God ordains a law
   of population in it as truly as he does in an earthly kingdom, or
   colony, and by this increase from within, quite as much as by
   conversion from without, designs to give it, finally, the complete
   dominion promised.

   Nor let any one be repelled from this truth, or set against it, by the
   prejudice that piety is and must be a matter of individual choice. The
   same is true of sin. Many of us have no difficulty in saying that
   mankind are born sinners. They may just as truly and properly be born
   saints--it requires the self-active power to be just as far developed
   to commit sin, as it does to choose obedience. This individual capacity
   of will and choice is one that matures at no particular tick of the
   clock, but it comes along out of incipiencies, grows by imperceptible
   increments, and takes on a character, in good or evil, or a mixed
   character in both, so imperceptibly and gradually, that it seems to be,
   in some sense, prefashioned by what the birth and nurture have
   communicated. We may fitly enough call this character a propagated
   quality--in strictest metaphysical definition, it is not; in sturdiest
   fact of history, or practical life, it is.

   Nor let any one be diverted from the truth I am going to assert, by
   imagining that a propagated piety is, of course, a piety without
   regeneration, dispensing with what Christ himself declared to be the
   indispensable need of every human creature. For aught that appears,
   regeneration may, in some initial and profoundly real sense, be the
   twin element of propagation itself. The parentage may, in other words,
   be so thoroughly wrought in by the Spirit of God, as to communicate the
   seeds or incipiencies of a godly, just as it communicates the seeds of
   a depravated and disordered, character. In one view, the child will be
   regenerate when he is born; in another view, he will not be, till the
   godly life is developed in his own personal choice and liberty.

   Dismissing these, and other like prepossessions, let us go on to
   examine some of the evidences by which this doctrine of church
   population is to be substantiated.

   1. I name, as an evidence, the very important fact that in the matter
   of infant baptism and infant church membership, grounded as they are in
   the assumption that a believing parentage sanctifies the offspring, God
   is seen to frame the order of church economy, so as to bring in the law
   of increase, or family propagation; looking to the populating principle
   for growth, just as the founder of a new colony, on some foreign shore,
   would look. He declares that parents are to be parents in the Lord, and
   children to grow up in the nurture of the Lord. The whole scheme of
   organic unity in the family and of family grace in the church, is just
   what it should be, if the design were to propagate religion, not by
   conversions only, but quite as much, or more, by the populating force
   embodied in it--just that force which; in all states and communities,
   is known to be the most majestic and silently creative force in their
   history.

   2. It is a matter of consequence to observe, that the Abrahamic order
   and covenant stood upon this footing, formally proposing and promising
   to make the father of the faithful a blessing to mankind, by and
   through the multitude of his offspring. "Look now," says the word of
   promise, "toward heaven and tell the stars, if thou be able to number
   them. So shall thy seed be." Again, "I will make thee a father of many
   nations." And again, "All the nations of the earth shall be blessed in
   him." Neither was it to be the only blessing, that Jesus, the Saviour
   of mankind, was to be born of this honored family. "I will make thee
   exceeding fruitful," was the form of the promise; and the blessing, as
   we may see, by all the modes of expression used, was to turn as much on
   the wonderful populousness of the stock, overspreading the world, as it
   was, on the new-creating grace to be unfolded in it. For if it be
   matter of debate, in what precise manner the Christian church has
   connection with this more ancient and apparently mere family bond,
   there is certainly no doubt in the mind of the great Christian apostle,
   that there is a real and valid connection of some kind, such that the
   promise passes and spreads, and is to get its fulfillment, only when
   the godly seed has filled the world. The spread of Christianity is, in
   his view, the blessing of Abraham come on the Gentiles, through Jesus
   Christ. These Gentile converts, too, he calls the seed of Abraham--"And
   if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs according to
   the promise." He looks, you will perceive, on the Gentile converts as
   being grafted in upon the ancient stock; which also he expressly says,
   in another place, counting them to be so unified with Abraham, as to be
   the outgrowth of his person. Just as the proselytes were taken to be
   sons and daughters of Abraham, naturalized into his stock, so are these
   converts to become the channel of his over-populating force, till such
   time as the natural branches, broken off, are grafted in again. And, in
   this view, it is that the Gentile converts are called "a seed," that
   being the word that contemplates the fact of their multiplication as a
   family of God.

   3. It is an argument which ought to be convincing, that the universal
   spread of the gospel, and the universal reign of Christian truth--that
   which prophets and apostles promise, and which we, in these last times,
   have taken up as our fondest, most impelling Christian hope--plainly
   enough never can be compassed by the process of adult conversions, but
   must finally be reached, if reached at all, by the populating forces of
   a family grace in the church. We expect that, in that day, all flesh
   shall see the salvation of God, and that every thing human will be
   regenerated by it; that the glory of God will cover the earth like a
   baptism of water--even as the waters cover the sea. These are to be the
   times of the restitution of all things. God, we believe, will put his
   laws now in the mind, and write them on the heart, and "all shall know
   him from the least to the greatest." I do not care to press these
   epithets least and greatest--perhaps there is no reference to children
   in them. It would scarcely make the text more significant if there
   were; for this universal triumph of the word, in which we all believe,
   this imprinting of it on men's hearts, all over the world in such
   manner as to make the day of glory--that great day of light which
   figures so grandly in the visions of God's prophets and apostles, and
   is promised by Christ himself--such a day, I say, can plainly enough
   never be reached, as long as the children of the world grow up in sin,
   as we now assume to be the fact, still to be called and prayed for as
   now and preached into the kingdom. When the little child shall lead
   forth in pairs the wolf and the lamb, the leopard and the kid, the calf
   and the young lion; when the sucking child shall play on the hole of
   the asp unstung, and the weaned child shall put his hand unbitten on
   the cockatrice's den; we not only take hold of it as the prophet's
   meaning that there is to be a great universal mitigation of the
   ferocities of appetite, and prey, and passion, in the world, but that
   the little ones are to have their part in the joy, and be raised in
   dominion by that all-renewing grace which has now restored and
   imparadised the world. Otherwise our day of glory would be such a kind
   of jubilee as shows the adult soils only of the race to be gathered
   into the kingdom, while the poor, unripe sinners of childhood, a full
   fourth in the total number, are in no sense, in it, but are waiting
   their conversion-time on the outside! This is not our millennial day;
   we have no such hope.

   We conceive that Christ will then overspread all souls with his glory,
   and that children, filled according to their age and measure with the
   divine motions of grace, will be unfolding the heavenly beauty, as they
   advance in years, even as the flowers unfold their colors in the sun.
   These colors no one sees in the root, and the clear, transparent sap it
   circulates, and yet the color ii there. Just so will God, in that great
   day of grace, bring out of infancy and childhood, sanctifyingly touched
   by his Spirit, what creates them children of God, as truly as their
   parents, though too subtle to be seen, or defined, till it has blushed
   into color, in the sunlight of their intelligence in the truth. Such a
   day of glory then contemplates a great in-birth of sanctification, or
   renewing life. Conversions from without are to have their part in
   preparing it, but the consummation hoped for is even impossible, as
   regards a third or fourth part of the race, save as it is reached by a
   populating process which enters them into life itself, through the gate
   of a sanctified infancy and childhood.

   4. Consider a very important fact in human physiology which goes far to
   explain, or take away the strangeness and seeming extravagance of the
   truth I am endeavoring to establish, viz., that qualities of education,
   habit, feeling, and character, have a tendency always to grow in, by
   long continuance, and become thoroughly inbred in the stock. We meet
   humble analogies of this fact in the domestic animals. The operations
   to which they are trained, and in which they become naturalized by
   habit, become predispositions, in a degree, in their offspring; and
   they, in their turn, are as much more easily trained on that account.
   The next generation are trained still more easily, till what was first
   made habitual, finally becomes functional in the stock, and almost no
   training is wanted. That which was inculcated by practice passes into a
   tendency, and descends as a natural gift, or endowment. The same thing
   is observable, on a large scale, in the families of mankind. A savage
   race is a race bred into low living, and a faithless, bloody character.
   The instinct of law, society, and order is substituted, finally, by the
   overgrown instinct of prey, and the race is lost to any real capacity
   of social regeneration; unless they can somehow be kept in ward, and a
   process of training, long enough to breed in what has been lost A race
   of slaves becomes a physiologically servile race in the same way. And
   so it is, in part, that civilization descends from one generation to
   another. It is not merely that laws, social modes, and
   instrumentalities of education descend, and that so the new sprung
   generations are fashioned after birth, by the forms and principles and
   causes into which they have been set, but it is that the very type of
   the inborn quality is a civilized type. The civilization is, in great
   part, an inbred civility. There is a something functional in them,
   which is itself configured to the state of art, order, law, and
   property.

   The Jewish race are a striking and sad proof of the manner in which any
   given mode of life may, or rather must, become a functional property in
   the offspring. The old Jewish stock of the Scripture times, whatever
   faults they may have had, certainly were not marked by any such
   miserably sordid, usurious, garbage-vending propensity, as now
   distinguishes the race. But the cruelties they have suffered under
   Christian governments, shut up in the Jews' quarter of the great
   cities, dealing in old clothes and other mean articles for their gains,
   hiding these in the shape of gold and jewels in the crevices of their
   cellars, to prevent seizure by the emissaries of the governments, and
   disguising their prosperity itself by the squalid dress of their
   persons--these, continued from age to age, have finally bred in the
   character we so commonly speak of with contempt. Our children, treated
   as they have been for so many generations, would finally reveal the
   marks of their wrongs in the same sordid, miserly instincts.

   Now if it be true that what gets power in any race, by a habit or a
   process of culture, tends by a fixed law of nature to become a
   propagated quality, and pass by descent as a property inbred in the
   stock; if in this way whole races of men are cultivated into properties
   that are peculiar--off into a savage character, down into a servile or
   a mercenary, up into civilization or a high social state--what is to be
   the effect of a thoroughly Christian fatherhood and motherhood,
   continued for a long time in the successive generations of a family?
   What can it be but a general mitigation of the bad points of the stock,
   and a more and more completely inbred piety. The children of such a
   stock are born, not of the flesh only, or the mere natural life of
   their parentage, but they are born, in a sense most emphatic, of the
   Spirit also; for this parentage is differed, as we are supposing, age
   by age, from its own mere nature in Adam, by the inhabiting grace of a
   supernatural salvation. Physiologically speaking, they are tempered by
   this grace, and it is all the while tending to become, in some sense,
   an inbred quality. Hence the very frequent remark--"How great a
   privilege and order of nobility to be descended of a pious ancestry!"
   It is the blessing that is to descend to the thousandth generation of
   them that love God and keep his commandments. In this view it is to be
   expected, as the life of Christian piety becomes more extended in the
   earth, and the Spirit of God obtains a living power in the successive
   generations, more and more complete, that finally the race itself will
   be so thoroughly regenerated as to have a genuinely populating power in
   faith and godliness. By a kind of ante-natal and post-natal nurture
   combined, the new-born generations will be started into Christian
   piety, and the world itself over-populated and taken possession of by a
   truly sanctified stock. This I conceive to be the expectation of
   Christianity. Not that the bad heritage of depravity will cease, but
   that the second Adam will get into power with the first, and be entered
   seminally into the same great process of propagated life. And this
   fulfills that primal desire of the world's Creator and Father, of which
   the prophet speaks--"That he might have a godly seed."

   And let no one be offended by this, as if it supposed a possible
   in-growth and propagation of piety, by mere natural laws and
   conditions. What higher ground of supernaturalism can be taken, than
   that which supposes a capacity in the Incarnate Word, and Sanctifying
   Spirit, to penetrate our fallen nature, at a point so deep as to cover
   the whole spread of the fall, and be a grace of life, traveling outward
   from the earliest, moss latent germs of our human development. It is
   only saying, with a meaning--"My substance was not hid from Thee, when
   I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
   earth." Or, in still another view, it is only conceiving that those
   sporadic cases of sanctification from the womb, of which the Scripture
   speaks, such as that of Samuel, Jeremiah, and John, are to finally
   become the ordinary and common fact of family development.

   In such cases, the faith or piety of a single pair, or possibly of the
   mother alone, begets a heavenly mold in the predispositions of the
   offspring, so that, as it is born of sin, it is also born of a heavenly
   grace. If then we suppose the heavenly grace to have such power, in the
   long continuing process of ages, as to finally work the general stock
   of parentage into its own heavenly mold, far enough to prepare a
   sanctified offspring for the world, what higher, grander fact of
   Christian supernaturalism could be asserted? Nor is it any thing more
   of a novelty than to say, that "where sin abounded, grace did much more
   abound." The conception is one that simply fulfills what Baxter,
   Hopkins, and others, were apparently struggling after, [16] when
   contriving how to let the grace of God in our salvation, match itself
   by the hereditary damage, or depravation, that descends upon us from
   our parentage, and the organic unity of our nature as a race. And
   probably enough they were put upon this mode of thought, by the
   familiar passage of Paul just referred to.

   Christianity then has a power, as we discover, to prepare a godly seed.
   It not only takes hold of the world by its converting efficacy, but it
   has a silent force that is much stronger and more reliable; it moves,
   by a kind of destiny, in causes back of all the eccentric and casual
   operations of mere individual choice, preparing, by a gradual growing
   in of grace, to become the great populating motherhood of the world. In
   this conviction, we shall be strengthened--

   5. By the well known fact, that the populating power of any race, or
   stock, is increased according to the degree of personal and religious
   character to which it has attained. Good principles and habits,
   intellectual culture, domestic virtue, industry, order, law, faith--all
   these go immediately to enhance the rate and capacity of population.
   They make a race powerful, not in the mere military sense, but in one
   that, by century-long reaches of populating force, lives down silently
   every mere martial competitor. Any people that is physiologically
   advanced in culture, though it be only in a degree, beyond another
   which is mingled with it on strictly equal terms, is sure to live down
   and finally live out its inferior. Nothing can save the inferior race
   but a ready and pliant assimilation.

   The promise to Abraham depended, doubtless, on this fact for its
   fulfillment. God was to make his family fruitful, above others, by
   imparting Himself to it, and so infusing a higher tone of personal
   life. Hence also the grand religious fact that this race unfolded a
   populating power so remarkable. Going down into Egypt, as a starving
   family, it begins to be evident in about four hundred years, that they
   are overpopulating the great kingdom of Egypt itself. "The children of
   Israel were fruitful and increased abundantly, and multiplied and waxed
   exceeding mighty, and the land was filled with them." Till finally the
   jealousy of the throne was awakened, and the king began to say--"Behold
   the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we!"

   Afterwards little Palestine itself was like a swarm of bees; building
   great cities, raising great armies, and displaying all the tokens, age
   upon age, of a great and populous empire. So great was the fruitfulness
   of the stock, compared with other nations of the time, owing to the
   higher personality unfolded in them, by their only partial and very
   crude training, in a monotheistic religion.

   And again, at a still later time, when the nation itself is
   dismembered, and thousands of the people are driven off into captivity,
   we find that when the great king of Persia had given out an edict of
   extermination against them, and would like to recall it but can not,
   because of the absurd maxim that what the king has decreed must not be
   changed, he has only to publish another decree, that they shall have it
   as their right to stand for their lives, and that is enough to insure
   their complete immunity. "They gathered themselves together in their
   cities, and throughout all the provinces, and no man could withstand
   them, for the fear of them fell upon all people." In which we may see
   how this captive race had multiplied and spread themselves, in this
   incredibly short time, through all the great kingdom of the
   Medo-Persian kings.

   Or we may take a more modern illustration, drawn from the comparative
   history of the Christian and Mohammedan races. The Christian
   development begins at an older date, and the Mohammedan at a later. One
   is a propagation by moral and religious influences, at least in part;
   the other a propagation by military force. Both have religious ideas
   and aims, but the main distinction is that one is taken hold of by
   religion as being a contribution to the free personal nature of souls;
   and the other is taken hold of by a religion whose grip is the strong
   grip of fate. For a time, this latter spread like a fire in the forest,
   propagated by the terrible sword of predestination, and it even seemed
   about to override the world. But it by and by began to appear, that one
   religion was creating and the other uncreating manhood; one toning up a
   great and powerful character, and the other toning down, steeping in
   lethargy, the races it began to inspire; till finally we can now see as
   distinctly as possible, that one is pouring on great tides of
   population, creating a great civilization, and great and powerful
   nations; the other, falling away into a feeble, half-depopulated,
   always decaying state, that augurs final extinction at no distant
   period. Now the fact is that these two great religions of the world had
   each, in itself, its own law of population from the beginning, and it
   was absolutely certain, whether it could be seen or not, that
   Christianity would finally live down Mohammedanism, and completely
   expurgate the world of it. The campaigning centuries of European
   chivalry, pressing it with crusade after crusade, could not bring it
   under; but the majestic populating force of Christian faith and nurture
   can even push it out of the world, as in the silence of a dew-fall.

   What a lesson also could be derived, in the same manner, from a
   comparison of the populating forces of the Puritan stock in this
   country, and of the inferior, superstitious, half Christian stock and
   nurture of the South American states. And the reason of the difference
   is that Christianity, having a larger, fuller, more new-creating force
   in one, gives it a populating force as much superior.

   How this advantage accrues, and is, at some future time, to be more
   impressively revealed than now, it is not difficult to see. Let the
   children of Christian parents grow up, all, as partakers in their
   grace, which is the true Christian idea, and the law of family increase
   they are in, is, by the supposition, so far brought into the church,
   and made operative there. And then comes in also the additional fact,
   that there are causes and conditions of increase now operative in the
   church which exist nowhere else.

   Here, for example, there will be a stronger tide of health than
   elsewhere. In the world without, multitudes are perishing continually
   by vice and extravagance, and, when they do not perish themselves, they
   are always entailing the effects of their profligacy on the
   half-endowed constitution of their children. Meantime, in the truly
   Christian life, there is a good keeping of temperance, a steady sway of
   the passions, a robust equability and courage, and the whole domain of
   the soul is kept more closely to God's order; which again is the way of
   health, and implies a higher law of increase.

   Wealth, again, will be unfolded more rapidly under the condition of
   Christian living than elsewhere; and wealth enough to yield a generous
   supply of the common wants of life, is another cause that favors
   population. True piety is itself a principle of industry and
   application to business. It subordinates the love of show and all the
   tendencies to extravagance. It rules those licentious passions that war
   with order and economy. It generates a faithful character, which is the
   basis of credit, as credit, of prosperity. Hence it is that upon the
   rocky, stubborn soil, under the harsh and frowning skies of our New
   England, we behold so much of high prosperity, so much of physical
   well-being, and ornament. And the wealth created is diffused about as
   evenly as the piety. A true Christian society has mines opened, thus,
   in its own habits and principles. And the wealth accruing is power in
   every direction, power in production, enterprise, education,
   colonization, influence, and consequent popular increase.

   There will also be more talent unfolded in a Christian people, and
   talent also takes the helm of causes everywhere. Christian piety is
   itself a kind of holy development, enlarging every way the soul's
   dimensions. It will also be found that Christian families abound with
   influences, specially favorable to the awakening of the intellectual
   principle in childhood. Religion itself is thoughtful. It carries the
   child's mind over directly to unknown worlds, fills the understanding
   with the sublimest questions, and sends the imagination abroad to
   occupy itself where angels' wings would tire. The child of a Christian
   family is thus unsensed, at the earliest moment, and put into mental
   action; this, too, under the healthy and genial influence of Christian
   principle. Every believing soul, too, is exalted and empowered by union
   to God. His judgment is clarified, his reason put in harmony with
   truth, his emotions swelled in volume, his imagination fired by the
   object of his faith. The church, in short, is God's university, and it
   lies in her foundation as a school of spiritual life, to energize all
   capacity, and make her sons a talented and powerful race.

   Here, too, are the great truths, and all the grandest, most fruitful
   ideas of existence. Here will spring up science, discovery, invention.
   The great books will be born here, and the highest, noblest, most
   quickening character will here be fashioned. Popular liberties and the
   rights of persons will here be asserted. Commerce will go forth hence,
   to act the preluding of the Christian love, in the universal fellowship
   of trade. And so we see, by this rapid glance along the inventories of
   Christian society, that all manner of causes are included in it, that
   will go to fine the organization, raise the robustness, swell the
   volume, multiply the means, magnify the power of the Christian body. It
   stands among the other bodies and religions, just as any advanced race,
   the Saxon for example, stands among the feebler, wilder races, like the
   Aborigines of our continent; having so much power of every kind that it
   puts them in shadow, weakens them, lives them down, rolling its
   over-populating tides across them, and sweeping them away, as by a kind
   of doom. Just so there is, in the Christian church, a grand law of
   increase by which it is rolling out and spreading over the world.
   Whether the feebler and more abject races are going to be regenerated
   and raised up, is already very much of a question. What if it should be
   God's plan to people the world with better and finer material? Certain
   it is, whatever expectations we may indulge, that there is a tremendous
   overbearing surge of power in the Christian nations, which, if the
   others are not speedily raised to some vastly higher capacity, will
   inevitably submerge and bury them forever. These great populations of
   christendom--what are they doing, but throwing out their colonies on
   every side, and populating themselves, if I may so speak, into the
   possession of all countries and climes? By this doom of increase, the
   stone that was cut out without hands, shows itself to be a very
   peculiar stone, viz: a growing stone, that is fast becoming a great
   mountain, and preparing, as the vision shows, to fill the whole earth.

   We are not, of course, to suspend our efforts to convert the heathen
   nations--we shall never become a thoroughly regenerate stock, save as
   we are trained up into such eminence, by our works of mercy to mankind.
   It is for God to say what races are to be finally submerged and lost,
   and not for us. Meantime, we are to gain over and save as many as
   possible by conversion, and so to hasten the day of promise. And what
   feebler and more pitiful conceit could we fall into, than to assume
   that we have the grand, over-populating grace in our own stock, and sit
   down thus to see it accomplish by mere propagation, that which of
   itself supposes a glorious inbred habit of faith, and sacrifice, and
   heavenly charity. I only say that, when we set ourselves to the great
   work of converting the world, we are to see that we do not miscondition
   the state of childhood, and throw quite away from us, meantime, all the
   mighty advantages that God designs to give us, in this other manner;
   viz., in the religious nurture and growth of the godly seed.

   Once more, it is a consideration that will have great weight with all
   deeply thoughtful persons, that the vindication of God in sin,
   suffering, punishment, and all evil pertaining to the race, probably
   depends, to a great degree, on just the truth I am here endeavoring to
   establish. How constantly is the question raised, why God, as an
   infinitely good and gracious Father, should put on foot such a scheme
   of existence as this; one that unites such oppressive disadvantages,
   and is to be such a losing concern? We begin life, it is said, with
   constitutions depravated and poisoned, and come thus into choice with
   predispositions that are damaged even beforehand. Idolatry, darkness,
   and guilt, overspread tie world, in this manner, from age to age, and
   the vast majorities of the race, rotting away thus into death under
   sin, are being all the while precipitated into a wretched eternity,
   which is their end; for they go hence in a state visibly disqualified
   for the enjoyment, either of themselves, or of God. The picture is a
   very dark one, though I feel a decided confidence that every single
   part of God's counsel in it can be sufficiently vindicated. But this is
   not a matter in the compass of my present inquiry, except so far as the
   general difficulty is relieved by the possibility and prospect of great
   future advantages that are to accrue, in the fact of a grand
   over-populating righteousness, which is finally to change the aspect of
   the whole question. We are not to assume, with many, that the world is
   now just upon its close, but to look upon it as barely having opened
   its first chapter of history. Its real value, and what is really to
   come of it, probably does not even yet begin to appear. When its
   propagations cease to be mere propagations of evil, or of moral damage
   and disaster, and become propagations of sanctified life, and ages of
   life; when the numbers, talents, comforts, powers of the immense godly
   populations are increased to more than a hundred fold what they now
   are; and when, at some incomputable distance of time, whose rate of
   approach is only hinted by the geologic ages of the planet, they look
   back upon us as cotemporaries almost of Adam and forward through ages
   of blessing just begun, beholding so many worlds-full of regenerated
   mind and character, pouring in from hence to over people, as it were,
   eternity itself; they will certainly have a very different opinion of
   the scheme of existence from that which we most naturally take up now.
   Then it will be confessed that the nurture of the Lord has meaning and
   force enough to change the aspect of every thing in God's plan. Our
   scheme of propagated and derivative life is no longer a scheme of
   disadvantage, but a mode of induction that gives to every soul the
   noblest, safest beginning possible. On the other hand, if we cling to
   the present way and state as the measure of all highest possibilities,
   and expect to go on converting over, out of heathenism and death, the
   sturdy, grownup aliens of depravity, it will be a most
   difficult--always growing more and more difficult--thing to vindicate
   the ways of God in what he has put upon the world. Shall we miss, and
   give it to the future ages to miss, a vindication of God's way so
   inspiring ill itself and so often promised in his word?

   Having reached this closing point or consummation of the doctrine of
   nurture, we are able, I think, to see something of the dignity there is
   in it. How trivial, unnatural, weak, and, at the same time, violent, in
   comparison, is that overdone scheme of individualism, which knows the
   race only as mere units of will and personal action; dissolves even
   families into monads; makes no account of organic relations and uses;
   and expects the world to be finally subdued by adult conversions, when
   growing up still, as before, in all the younger tiers of life, toward a
   mere convertible state of adult ungodliness. Such a scheme gives a most
   ungenial and forlorn aspect to the family. It makes the church a mere
   gathering in of adult atoms, to be in creased only by the gathering in
   of other and more numerous adult atoms. It very nearly makes the scheme
   of existence itself an abortion; finding no great law of propagative
   good and mercy in it, and taking quite away the possibility and
   prospect of that sublime vindication of God which is finally to be
   developed, and by which God's way in the creation is to be finally
   crowned with all highest honors of counsel and beneficence. Opposite to
   this, we have seen how it is God's plan, by ties of organic unity and
   nurture, to let one generation extend itself into and over another, in
   the order of grace, just as it does in the order of nature; to let us
   expect the growing up of children in the Lord, even as their parents
   are to be parents in the Lord, and are set to bring them up in the
   nurture of the Lord; on this ground of anticipation, permitting us to
   apply the seal of our faith to them, as being incipiently in the
   quickening of our faith, even before they have intelligence to act it,
   and consciously choose it; so accepting them to be members of the
   church, as being presumptively in the life of the church; in this
   manner incorporating in the church a great law of grace and sanctifying
   power, by which finally the salvation will become an inbred life and
   populating force, mighty enough to overlive, and finally to completely
   people the world. And this is what we call the day of glory. It lies,
   to a great degree, in the scheme of Christian nurture itself, and is
   possible only as a consummation of that scheme. If I rightly conceive
   the gospel work and plan, this is the regeneration [palingennesia]
   which our Lord promises, viz.: that he will reclaim and re-sanctify the
   great principle of reproductive order and life, and people, at last,
   the world with a godly seed.

   The church, as being made up of souls that are born of the Spirit, is a
   new supernatural order thus in humanity; a spiritual nation, we may
   conceive, that was founded by a colony from the skies. It alights upon
   our globe as its chartered territory. Can it overspread the whole
   planet and take possession? We see that it can unfold more of health,
   wealth, talent, than the present living races of inhabitants. It has
   within itself a stronger law of population, as well as a mighty power
   to win over and assimilate the nations. Its people have more truth,
   beauty, weight of character to exalt their predominance. And, what is
   more, God is in them by his all-informing, all-energizing Spirit, to be
   Himself unfolded in their history, and make it powerful. Not to believe
   that the Heavenly Colony, thus constituted and endowed, will finally
   overspread and fill the world, is to deny causes their effects, and to
   quite invert the natural order of strength and weakness. God, too, has
   testified in regard to this branch of his planting--"They shall inherit
   the land."

   It is very obvious that this general view of Christian nurture and its
   effects is one that, becoming really installed in our faith, and the
   aims of our piety, would induce important modifications in our
   Christian practice, and change, to a considerable degree, the modes of
   our religious demonstration. Our over-intense individualism carries
   with it an immense loss of feeling, affection, sentiment, which hardens
   the aspect of every thing, and dries away the sweet charities and
   tender affections that would grace the older generations of souls, when
   conceiving that the younger live in them, and are somehow folded in
   their personality. We not only lose our children under this atomizing
   scheme of piety, which is a loss we can not afford, but a certain
   misproportion is induced, which distempers all our efforts and
   demonstrations.

   One principal reason why we are so often deficient in character, or
   outward beauty, is, that piety begins too late in life, having thus to
   maintain a perpetual and unequal war with previous habit. If it was not
   true of Paul, it is yet too generally true, that one born out of due
   time will be found out of due time, more often than he should be,
   afterwards--unequal, inconsistent with himself, acting the old man
   instead of the new. Having the old habit to war with, it is often too
   strong for him. To make a graceful and complete Christian character, it
   needs itself to be the habit of existence; not a grape grafted on a
   bramble. And this, it will be seen, requires a Christian childhood in
   the subject. Having this, the gracious or supernatural character
   becomes itself more nearly natural, and possesses the peculiar charm of
   naturalness, which is necessary to the highest moral beauty.

   It results also from our mistaken views of Christian training, that we
   fall into a notion of religion that is mechanical. We thrust our
   children out of the covenant first and insist. in spite of it, that
   they shall grow up in the same spiritual state as if their father and
   mother were heathens. Then we go out, at least on certain occasions, to
   convert them back, as if they actually were heathens. Our only idea of
   increase is of that which accrues by means of a certain abrupt
   technical experience. Led away thus from all thought of internal growth
   in the church, efforts to secure conversions take an external
   character, becoming gospel campaigns. Accretion displaces growth. The
   church is gathered as a foundling hospital; and lest it should not be
   such, its own children are reduced to foundlings. Immediate repentance
   proclaimed, insisted on, and realized in an abrupt change, proper only
   to those who are indeed aliens and enemies, is the only hope or inlet
   of the church. We can not understand how the spiritual nation should
   grow and populate, and become powerful within itself.

   Piety becomes inconstant, and revivals of religion take an exaggerated
   character from the same causes. If all Christian success is measured by
   the count of technical conversions from without, then it follows that
   nothing is done when conversions cease to be counted The harvest closes
   not with feasting, but with famine Despair cuts off Christian motive.
   The tide is spent; let us anchor during the ebb. It is well indeed to
   live very piously in the families; still, there is nothing depending on
   it. The children will be good subjects enough for conversion without.
   The piety of the church is thus made to be desultory and irregular by
   system. The idea of conquest displaces the idea of growth. Whereas, if
   it were understood that Christian education or training in the
   families, is to be itself a process of domestic conversion; that as a
   child weeps under a frown and smiles at the command of a smile, so
   spiritual influences may be streaming into his being from the handling
   of the nursery and the whole manner and temperament of the house,
   producing what will ever after be fundamental impressions of his being;
   then the hearth, the table, the society and affections of the house,
   would all feel the presence of a practical religious motive. The homes
   would be Christian, the families abodes of piety.

   Here too is the greatest impediment to a true missionary spirit. The
   habit of conquest runs to dissipation and irregularity. It is as if a
   nation, forgetting its own internal resources, were scouring the seas,
   and trooping up and down the world, in pursuit of prize-money and
   plunder, forsaking the loom and the plow, and all the regular growths
   of industry. Whereas, if the church were unfolding the riches of the
   covenant at her firesides and tables; if the children were identified
   with religion from the first, and grew up iin a Christian love of man,
   the missionary spirit would not throw itself up in irregular jets, but
   would flow as a river. We suffer also greatly and even produce a
   somewhat painful evidence of mistake, in our endeavor to be always
   operating by an immediate influence of the Holy Spirit, when we make
   his mediate influence a matter of little account. For there is, I
   apprehend, a certain fixed relation between those exertions of
   spiritual influence which are immediate, and those which flow mediately
   from the church; else why has not the Spirit left the church behind,
   and poured itself, as a rushing, mighty wind, into the bosom of the
   whole world in a day? There needed to be an objective influence, as
   well as one internal; else the subject of the Spirit would not know or
   guess to what his internal motions are attributable, and might deem
   them only nervous or hysteric effects; or possibly, if a heathen, the
   work of some enchanter or demon. When the church, therefore, grows arid
   manifests the work of God by the beauty of her life, and the heavenly
   energy of her spirit, when the sanctification she speaks of visibly
   strikes through--through the body, through the manners and works, into
   the family state, into the community-that is the mediate influence
   necessary to another which is immediate. Looking on her demonstrations,
   the observer is not only impressed and drawn by the assimilating power
   of her character, but he distinguishes in her the type and form of that
   into which he is himself to be wrought, and so he is ready for the
   intelligent reception of the Spirit in himself. If now there is this
   fixed relation between God's mediate and immediate agency in souls. how
   great is the mistake, when we virtually assume, in our efforts and
   expectations, that he will come upon souls, only as the lightning is
   bolted from the sky. How desultory and irruptive is the grace he
   ministers, how little respective of the work he has already begun in
   others, whom he might employ to be the medium of his power! On the
   other hand, if we are right in this view--if there is a fixed relation
   between the mediate and immediate influences of the Spirit--such that
   one measures the other, (and we could urge many additional reasons for
   the opinion,) then are we brought fairly out upon the sublime
   conclusion, that the growth or progress of Christian piety in the
   church, if it shall take place, offers the expectation of a
   correspondent progress in the development of those spiritual influences
   that are immediate. The mediate and immediate are both identical at the
   root. If therefore the church unfolds her piety as a divine life, which
   is one, the divine life will display its activity as much more potently
   and victoriously without, which is the other. And as the kingdom of
   heaven, which was at first as a grain of mustard seed, advances in the
   last days toward the stature of a tree, the more it may advance; for
   the Holy Spirit will pour himself into the world, as much more freely
   and powerfully. Grant, O God! that we may not disappoint ourselves of a
   hope so glorious, by attempts to extend thy church without that holy
   growth of piety, on which our success depends! Pour thyself n thy
   fullness and as a gale of purity, into our bosom! Expel all schemes
   that are not begun in Thee! Let there be good desires in us, that our
   works may be good! And that Thou mayest do thy will in the earth do it
   in us perfectly!
     __________________________________________________________________

   [16] See quotations from these writers in the last Discourse.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                               PART II.-THE MODE.
     __________________________________________________________________

I. WHEN AND WHERE THE NURTURE BEGINS.

   "When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee which
   dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am
   persuaded that in thee also."--2 Timothy, i. 5.

   THIS faith of Timothy, which is but another name for the grace of life
   in his character, the apostle speaks of here, it will be seen, as a
   kind of personal hereditament, or heir-loom in the family. He does not
   mean to say, as I understand him, that it is literally such, or in what
   sense, and how far, it is such. He only recognizes a godly parentage,
   doing godly things in him and for him, for one, two, three, or he knows
   not how many, generations back. He regards his young friend as born of
   godliness, nurtured and trained by godliness, and indulges a certain
   pleasant conviction that his present, full developed faith in Jesus,
   was a seed somehow planted in him by the believing motherhoods of the
   past, and began to live and grow in him, thus, long before he knew it
   himself, or others observed it in him. So by a short method, which
   includes and covers all, the apostle calls it his heir-loom;
   complimenting his godly motherhood in the figure, and testifying the
   greater confidence in his piety, that it was so near to being the
   inborn nobility of his Christian stock.

   I use the text, accordingly, not to draw some definite conclusion or
   truth, from the evidently well understood indefiniteness of the terms
   of it, but simply to head a discussion of the question, when and where,
   at what point, and how early, does the office of a genuine nurture
   begin?

   Having settled our conceptions of the scheme, or doctrinal import, of
   Christian nurture, finding what place it has, and is to have, in the
   Christian plan, we are come now to a matter farther in advance, and, in
   one view, more practical, viz: to a consideration of the modes and
   means, by which the true idea of a godly nurture may be realized in the
   training of families. And here it becomes our first endeavor to
   rectify, or expel a whole set of false impressions, that have grown up
   round the gate of responsibility itself, turning off, and pushing aside
   all due concern, till the time of greatest facility and advantage is
   quite gone by. The very common impression is that nothing is to be done
   for the religious character of children, till they are old enough to
   form religious judgments, put forth religious choices, take the meaning
   of the Christian truths, and perceive what is in them as related to the
   wants of sin, consciously felt and reflected on. There could not be a
   more sad or, in fact, more desolating mistake, in any matter, either of
   duty or of privilege. And it is the more wonderful, the closer in
   appearance to real fatuity, that it holds its ground so firmly, where
   all the tenderest pressures of affection might be expected to force it
   aside, and clear the field of its really cruel usurpations.

   In discussing the question proposed, I should not properly cover the
   whole ground of it, and could not really be said to answer it, if I did
   not--

   1. Bring into view the very important, but rather delicate fact,
   suggested or distinctly alluded to in the apostle's words, that there
   is even a kind of ante-natal nurture which must be taken note of, as
   having much to do with the religious preparations or inductive mercies
   of childhood. We are physiologically connected and set forth in our
   beginnings, and it is a matter of immense consequence to our character,
   what the connection is. In our birth, we not only begin to breathe and
   circulate blood, but it is a question hugely significant whose the
   blood may be. For in this we have whole rivers of predispositions, good
   or bad, set running in us--as much more powerful to shape our future
   than all tuitional and regulative influences that come after, as they
   are earlier in their beginning, deeper in their insertion, and more
   constant in their operation. It is a great mistake to suppose that men
   and women, such as are to be fathers and mothers, are affected only in
   their souls by religious experience, and not in their bodies. On mere
   physiological principles it can not be true, for the mind must temper
   the body to its own states and changes. Living, therefore, in the peace
   and purity, holding the equilibrium, flowing in the liberty, reigning
   in the confidence, of a genuine sanctification, the subjects of such
   grace are penetrated bodily, all through, by the work of the Spirit in
   their life. Their appetite are more nearly in heaven's order, their
   passions more tempered by reason, their irritabilities more sweetened
   and calmed, and so far they are entered bodily into the condition of
   health. Where the constitution was poisoned originally by descent, or
   has since been broken down by excess and abuse, it may not be wholly
   restored in this life. I do not suppose that it will; but, since the
   soul is acting itself always into and through the body, when it becomes
   a temple of the Spirit the body must also, just as the Scriptures
   explicitly teach, be undergoing, with the soul, a remedial process in
   its tempers and humors, and prospering in heaven's order, even as the
   soul prospereth. This being true, it is impossible, on mere
   physiological principles, that the children of a truly sanctified
   parentage should not be advantaged by the grace out of which they are
   born. And, if the godly character has been kept up in a long line of
   ancestry, corrupted by no vicious or untoward intermarriages, the
   advantage must be still greater and more positive. Even temporary
   changes in the Christian state of character and attainment, will have
   their effect; how much more the godly keeping of a thoroughly and
   evenly sanctified life; how much more such a keeping of inbred grace
   and faith, in a long line of godly ancestors.

   I might even state the case more strongly, bringing into the comparison
   a godly and a vicious parentage. Take a parentage that has in it all
   the dyspeptic woes of gluttony and self-indulgence, one that is stung
   and maddened by the fiery pains of intemperance, one that is poisoned
   and imbruted by the excesses of lust, one that is broken by domestic
   wrongs or exasperated by domestic quarrels, one that is fevered by
   ambitions, one that is soured by the morbid humors of envy and
   defeat--lengthen out the catalogue, take in all the sins, which, in
   some true sense, are also vices and have their effect on the body, how
   is it possible, on any principle of rational physiology, that the
   children who are sprung of this distempered heritage, should be as pure
   in their affinities, as close to the order of truth, as ready for the
   occupany of all good thoughts, as well governed before all government,
   as ductile in a word to God, as they that are born of a glorious
   lineage in faith and prayer and God's indwelling peace. Nothing could
   be more improbable antecedently, or farther off from the actual fact
   afterward. On the contrary, it is a most dismal and hard lot, as every
   one knows, to be in the succession of a bad, or vicious parentage. No
   heritage of wealth could repay, or more than a little soften, the
   bitterness of it.

   It is somewhat difficult to investigate the facts of this subject,
   because of the complexities induced by unpropitious and exceptional
   marriages. But when such marriages are reduced by the more general, and
   finally universal, spread of Christian piety, and when the pitch of
   Christian sanctification is raised, as it will be, by the fuller
   inspiration from God, breaking into his saints all over the world, it
   will be found that children are born as much closer to God, and with
   predispositions that waft them as much more certainly into the ways of
   duty and piety. It will be as if the faith-power of the past were
   descending into the present, flowing on down the future, and the
   general account of the world will be, that, as it has been corrupted,
   so also it is in some equally true sense, regenerated from the womb.
   Precisely that which is named in Scripture, as the fact extraordinary,
   will become at last the ordinary and even the universal fact.

   Here, then, is the real and true beginning of a godly nurture. The
   child is not to have the sad entail of any sensuality, or excess, or
   distempered passion upon him. The heritage of love, peace, order,
   continence and holy courage is to be his. He is not to be morally
   weakened beforehand, in the womb of folly, by the frivolous, worldly,
   ambitious expectations of parents-to-be, concentrating all their
   nonsense in him. His affinities are to be raised by the godly
   expectations, rather, and prayers that go before; by the steady and
   good aims of their industry, by the great impulse of their faith, by
   the brightness of their hope, by the sweet continence of their
   religiously pure love in Christ. Born, thus, of a parentage that is
   ordered in all righteousness, and maintains the right use of every
   thing, especially the right use of nature and marriage, the child will
   have just so much of heaven's life and order in him beforehand, as have
   become fixed properties in the type of his parentage; and by this
   ante-natal nurture, will be set off in a way of noblest advantage, as
   respects all safety and success, in the grand experiment he has come
   into the world to make.

   Having called your attention to this very important but strangely
   disregarded chapter, in the economy of Christian nurture, I leave it to
   be more fully and circumstantially developed by your own thoughtful
   consideration; for it is a matter which will open itself readily, and
   prove itself by striking and continually recurring facts to such as
   have it in their hearts to watch for the truth and the duties it
   requires. We pass now--

   2. To that which is the common field of inquiry, and here we raise
   again the question, where and how early does the work of nurture begin?
   here to set forth and maintain still another answer, which antedates
   the common impression, about as decidedly as the one just given. The
   true, and only true answer is, that the nurture of the soul and
   character is to begin just when the nurture of the body begins. It is
   first to be infantile nurture--as such, Christian; then to be a child's
   nurture; then to be a youth's nurture--advancing by imperceptible
   gradations, if possible, according to the gradations and stages of the
   growth, or progress toward maturity.

   There is, of course, no absolute classification to be made here,
   because there are no absolute lines of distinction. A kind of proximate
   and partly ideal distinction may be made, and I make it simply to serve
   the convenience of my subject--otherwise impossible to be handled, so
   as to secure any right practical conviction respecting it. It is the
   distinction between the age of impressions and the age of tuitional
   influences; or between the age of existence in the will of the parent,
   and the age of will and personal choice in the child. If the
   distinction were laid, between the age previous to language and the age
   of language, it would amount to nearly the same thing; for the time of
   personal and responsible choice depends on the measure of intelligence
   attained to, and the measure of intelligence is well represented,
   outwardly, by the degree of development in language. Of course it will
   be understood that we speak, in this distinction, of that which is not
   sharply defined, and is passed at no precise date or age. The
   transition is gradual, and it will even be doubtful, when it is passed.
   No one can say just where a given child passes out of the field of mere
   impression into the field of responsible action. It will be doubtful,
   in about the same degree, when it can be said to have come into the
   power of language. We do not even know that there is not some
   infinitesimal development of will in the child's first cry, and some
   instinct of language struggling in that cry. Our object in the
   distinction is not to assume any thing in respect to such matters, but
   simply to accommodate our own ignorance, by raising a distribution that
   enables us to speak of times and characteristics truly enough to serve
   the conditions of general accuracy, and to assist, in that manner, the
   purposes of our discussion.

   Now the very common assumption is that, in what we have called the age
   of impressions, there is really nothing done, or to be done, for the
   religious character. The lack of all genuine apprehensions, in respect
   to this matter, among people otherwise intelligent and awake, is really
   wonderful; it amounts even to a kind of coarseness. Full of all
   fondness, and all highest expectation respecting their children, and
   having also many Christian desires for their welfare, they seem never
   to have brought their minds down close enough to the soul of infancy,
   to imagine that any thing of consequence is going on with it. What can
   they do, till they can speak to it? what can it do, till it speaks? As
   if there were no process going on to bring it forward into language; or
   as if that process had itself nothing to do with the bringing on of
   intelligence, and no deep, seminal working toward a character,
   unfolding and to be unfolded in it. The child, in other words, is to
   come into intelligence through perfect unintelligence! to get the power
   of words out of words themselves, and without any experience whereby
   their meaning is developed! to be taught responsibility under moral and
   religious ideas, when the experience has unfolded no such ideas! In
   this first stage, therefore, which I have called the stage of
   impressions, how very commonly will it be found that the parents, even
   Christian parents, discharge themselves, in the most innocently
   unthinking way possible, of so much as a conception of responsibility.
   The child can not talk, what then can it know? So they dress it in all
   fineries, practice it in shows and swells and all the petty airs of
   foppery and brave assumption, act it into looks and manners not fit to
   be acted anywhere, provoking the repetition of its bad tricks by
   laughing at them, indulging freely every sort of temper towards it, or,
   it may be, filling the house with a din of scolding between the
   parents--all this in simple security, as if their child were only a
   thing, or an ape! What hurt can the simple creature get from any thing
   done before it, toward it, or upon it, when it can talk of nothing, and
   will not so much as remember any thing it has seen or heard? Doubtless
   there is a wise care to be had of it, when it is old enough to be
   taught and commanded, but till then there is nothing to be done, but
   simply to foster the plaything kindly, enjoy it freely, or abuse it
   pettishly, at pleasure!

   Just contrary to this, I suspect, and I think it can also be shown by
   sufficient evidence, that more is done to affect, or fix, the moral and
   religious character of children, before the age of language than after;
   that the age of impressions, when parents are commonly waiting, in idle
   security, or trifling away their time in mischievous indiscretions, or
   giving up their children to the chance of such keeping as nurses and
   attendants may exercise, is in fact their golden opportunity; when more
   is likely to be done for their advantage or damage, than in all the
   instruction and discipline of their minority afterward.

   And something like this I think we should augur beforehand, from the
   peculiar, full-born intensity of the maternal affection, at the moment
   when it first embraces the newly arrived object. It scarcely appears to
   grow, never to grow tender and self-sacrificing in its care. It turns
   itself to its charge, with a love that is boundless and fathomless, at
   the first. As if just then and there, some highest and most sacred
   office of motherhood were required to begin. Is it only that the child
   demands her physical nurture and carefulness? That is not the answer of
   her consciousness. Her maternity scorns all comparison with that of the
   mere animals. Her love, as she herself feels, looks through the body
   into the inborn personality of her child,--the man or woman to be. Nay,
   more than that, if she could sound her consciousness deeply enough, she
   would find a certain religiousness in it, measurable by no scale of
   mere earthly and temporal love. Here springs the secret of her
   maternity, and its semi-divine proportions. It is the call and
   equipment of God, for a work on the impressional and plastic age of a
   soul. Christianized as it should be, and wrought in by the grace of the
   Spirit, the minuteness of its care, its gentleness, its patience, its
   almost divine faithfulness, are prepared for the shaping of a soul's
   immortality. And, to make the work a sure one, the intrusted soul is
   allowed to have no will as yet of its own, that this motherhood may
   more certainly plant the angel in the man, uniting him to all heavenly
   goodness by predispositions from itself, before he is united, as he
   will be, by choices of his own. Nothing but this explains and measures
   the wonderful proportions of maternity.

   It will be seen at once, and will readily be taken as a confirmation of
   the transcendent importance of what is done, or possible to be done,
   for children, in their impressional and plastic age, that whatever is
   impressed or inserted here, at this early point, must be profoundly
   seminal, as regards all the future developments of the character. And
   though it can not, by the supposition. amount to character, in the
   responsible sense of that term, it may be the seed, in some very
   important sense, of all the future character to be unfolded; just as we
   familiarly think of sin itself, as a character in blame when the will
   is ripe, though prepared, in still another view, by the seminal damages
   and misaffections derived from sinning ancestors. So when a child,
   during the whole period of impressions, or passive recipiencies,
   previous to the development of his responsible will, lives in the life
   and feeling of his parents, and they in the molds of the Spirit, they
   will, of course, be shaping themselves in him, or him in themselves,
   and the effects wrought in him will be preparations of what he will
   by-and-by do from himself; seeds, in that manner possibly, even of a
   regenerate life and character.

   That we may conceive this matter more adequately and exactly, consider,
   a moment, that whole contour of dispositions, affections, tempers,
   affinities, aspirations, which come into power in a soul after the will
   is set fast in a life of duty and devotion. These things, we conceive,
   follow in a sense the will, and then become in turn a new element about
   the will--a new heart, as we say, prompting to new acts and a continued
   life of new obedience. Now what I would affirm is, that just this same
   contour of dispositions and affinities may be prepared under, and come
   after, the will of the parents, when the child is living in their will,
   and be ready as a new element, or new heart, to prompt the child's
   will, or put it forward in the choice of all duty, whenever it is so
   matured as to choose for itself. Of course these regenerated
   dispositions and affinities, this general disposedness to good, which
   we call a new heart, supposes a work of the Spirit; and, if the parents
   live in the Spirit as they ought, they will have the Spirit for the
   child as truly as for themselves, and the child will be grown, so to
   speak, in the molds of the Spirit, even from his infancy.

   This will be yet more probable, if we glance at some of the particular
   facts and conditions involved. Thus if we speak of impressions, or the
   age of impressions, and of that as an age prior to language, what kind
   of religious impressions can be raised in a soul, it may be asked, when
   the child is not far enough developed in language to be taught any
   thing about God, or Christ, or itself, that belongs to intelligence?
   And the sufficient answer must be, that language itself has no meaning
   till rudimental impressions are first begotten in the life of
   experience, to give it a meaning. Words are useful to propagate
   meanings, or to farther develop and combine meanings, but a child would
   never know the meaning of any word in a language, just by hearing the
   sound of it in his ears. He must learn to put the meaning into it, by
   having found that meaning in his impressions, and then the word becomes
   significant. And it requires a certain wakefulness and capacity of
   intelligent apprehension, to receive or take up such impressions. Thus
   a dog would never get hold of any religious impression at the family
   prayers, all his lifetime: but a child will be fast gathering up, out
   of his little life and experience, impressional states and
   associations, that give meanings to the words of prayer, as they, in
   turn, give meanings to the facts of his experience. All language
   supposes impressions first made. The word light does not signify any
   thing, till the eye has taken the impression of light. The word love is
   unmeaning, to one who has not loved and received love. The word God,
   raises no conception of God, till the idea of such a being has been
   somehow generated and associated with that particular sound. How far
   off is it then from all sound apprehensions of fact, to imagine that
   nothing religious can be done for a child till after he is far enough
   developed in language to be taught; when in fact he could not be thus
   developed in language at all, if the meanings of language were not
   somehow started in him by the impressions derived from his experience.

   Observe, again, how very quick the child's eye is, in the passive age
   of infancy, to catch impressions, and receive the meaning of looks,
   voices, and motions. It peruses all faces, and colors, and sounds.
   Every sentiment that looks into its eyes, looks back out of its eyes,
   and plays in miniature on its countenance. The tear that steals down
   the cheek of a mother's suppressed grief, gathers the little infantile
   face into a responsive sob. With a kind of wondering silence, which is
   next thing to adoration, it studies the mother in her prayer, and looks
   up piously with her, in that exploring watch, that signifies unspoken
   prayer. If the child is handled fretfully, scolded, jerked or simply
   laid aside unaffectionately, in no warmth of motherly gentleness, it
   feels the sting of just that which is felt towards it; and so it is
   angered by anger, irritated by irritation, fretted by fretfulness;
   having thus impressed, just that kind of impatience or ill-nature,
   which is felt towards it, and growing faithfully into the bad mold
   offered, as by a fixed law. There is great importance, in this manner,
   even in the handling of infancy. If it is unchristian, it will beget
   unchristian states, or impressions. If it is gentle, even, patient and
   loving, it prepares a mood and temper like its own. There is scarcely
   room. to doubt, that all most crabbed, hateful, resentful, passionate,
   ill-natured characters; all most even, lovely, firm and true, are
   prepared, in a great degree, by the handling of the nursery. To these
   and all such modes of feeling and treatment as make up the element of
   the infant's life, it is passive as wax to the seal. So that if we
   consider how small a speck, falling into the nucleus of a crystal, may
   disturb its form; or, how even a mote of foreign matter present in the
   quickening egg, will suffice to produce a deformity; considering, also,
   on the other hand, what nice conditions of repose, in one case, and
   what accurately modulated supplies of heat in the other, are necessary
   to a perfect product; then only do we begin to imagine what work is
   going on, in the soul of a child, in this first chapter of life, the
   age of impressions.

   It must also greatly affect our judgments on this point, to observe
   that, when this first age of impressions is gone by, there is, after
   that, no such thing any more as a possibility of absolute control. Thus
   far the child has been more a candidate for personality than a person.
   He has been as a seed forming in the capsule of the parent-stem,
   getting every thing from that stem, and fashioned, in its kind, by the
   fashioning kind of that. But now, having been gradually and
   imperceptibly ripened, as the seed separates and falls off, to be
   another and complete form of life in itself, so the child comes out, in
   his own power, a complete person, able to choose responsibly for
   himself. Now he is no more in the power of the parent, as before; the
   dominion of the older life is supplanted, by the self-asserting
   competency of the younger; what can the old stalk do upon the seed that
   is already ripe? The transition here is very gradual, it is true,
   covering even a space of years; and something may be done for the
   child's character by instruction, by the skillful management of
   motives, and the tender solicitudes of parental watching and prayer;
   but less and less, of course, the older the child becomes, and the more
   completely his personal responsibility is developed. But how very
   fearful the change, and how much it means, that the child, once plastic
   and passive to the will of the parent, has gotten by the point of
   absolute disposability, and is never again to be properly in that will!
   The perilous power of self-care and self-assertion has come, and what
   is to be the result? And how much does it signify to the parent, when
   he feels his power to be thus growing difficult, weak, doubtful, or
   finally quite ended! What a conception it is, that he once had his
   child in absolute direction, and the fashioning of his own superior
   will, to dress, to feed, to handle, to play himself into his
   sentiments, be the disposition of his dispositions, the temper of his
   tempers. Was there not something great to be done then, when the
   advantage was so great--now to be done no more? It will be difficult to
   shake off that impression; impossible to a really thoughtful Christian
   soul. And if the will, now matured and gone over into complete
   self-assertion, rushes into all wildness and profligacy, unrestrained
   and unrestrainable, the recollection of a time when it was restrainable
   and could have been molded, even as wax itself, will return with
   inevitable certainty upon the parents, and taunt, O how bitterly, the
   neglectfulness and lightness, by which they cast their opportunity
   away!

   I bring into view accordingly, just here, a consideration that goes
   farther to establish the position I am asserting, than any other, and
   one that is naturally suggested by the topic just adverted to. We call
   this first chapter of life the age of impressions; we speak of the
   child as being in a sense passive and plastic, living in the will of
   the parents, having no will developed for responsible action. It might
   be imagined from the use of such terms, that the infant or very young
   child has no will at all. But that is not any true conception. It has
   no responsible will, because it is not acquainted, as yet, with those
   laws and limits and conditions of choice that make it responsible.
   Nevertheless it has will, blind will, as strongly developed as any
   other faculty, and sometimes even most strongly of all. The
   manifestations of it are sometimes even frightful. And precisely this
   it is which makes the age of impressions, the age prior to language and
   responsible choice, most profoundly critical in its importance. It is
   the age in which the will-power of the soul is to be tamed or
   subordinated to a higher control; that of obedience to parents, that of
   duty and religion. And, in this view, it is that every thing most
   important to the religious character turns just here. Is this infant
   child to fill the universe with his complete and total self-assertion,
   owning no superior, or is he to learn the self-submission of
   allegiance, obedience, duty to God? Is he to become a demon let loose
   in God's eternity, or an angel and free prince of the realm?

   That he may be this, he is now given, will and all, as wax, to the wise
   molding-power of control. Beginning, then, to lift his will in mutiny,
   and swell in self-asserting obstinacy, refusing to go or come, or
   stand, or withhold in this or that, let there be no fight begun, or
   issue made with him, as if it were the true thing now to break his
   will, or drive him out of it by mere terrors and pains. This
   willfulness, or obstinacy, is not so purely bad, or evil, as it seems.
   It is partly his feeling of himself and you, in which he is getting
   hold of the conditions of authority, and feeling out his limitations.
   No, this breaking of a child's will to which many well-meaning parents
   set themselves, with such instant, almost passionate resolution, is the
   way they take to make him a coward, or a thief, or a hypocrite, or a
   mean-spirited and driveling sycophant-nothing in fact is more dreadful
   to thought than this breaking of a will, when it breaks, as it often
   does, the personality itself, and all highest, noblest firmness of
   manhood. The true problem is different; it is not to break, but to bend
   rather, to draw the will down, or away from self assertion toward
   self-devotion, to teach it the way of submitting to wise limitations,
   and raise it into the great and glorious liberties of a state of
   loyalty to God. See then how it is to be done. The child has no force
   however stout he is in his will. Take him up then, when the fit is upon
   him, carry him, stand him on his feet, set him here or there, do just
   that in him which he refuses to do in himself--all this gently and
   kindly, as if he were capable of maintaining no issue at all. Do it
   again and again, as often as may be necessary. By and by, he will begin
   to perceive that his obstinacy is but the bluster of his weakness; till
   finally, as the sense of limitation comes up into a sense of law and
   duty, he will be found to have learned, even beforehand, the folly of
   mere self-assertion. And when he has reached this point of felt
   obligation to obedience, it will no longer break him down to enforce
   his compliance, but it will even exalt into greater dignity and
   capacity, that sublime power of self-government, by which his manhood
   is to be most distinguished.

   By a different treatment at the point or crisis just named, that is by
   raising an issue to be driven straight through by terror and storm, one
   of two results almost equally bad were likely to follow; the child
   would either have been quite broken down by fear, the lowest of all
   possible motives when separated from moral convictions, or else would
   have been made a hundred fold more obstinate by his triumph. Nature
   provided for his easy subjugation, by putting him in the hands of a
   superior strength, which could manage him without any fight of
   enforcement--to have him schooled and tempered to a customary
   self-surrender which takes nothing from his natural force and
   manliness. And so is accomplished what, in one view, is the great
   problem of life; that on which all duty and allegiance to Gods in the
   state even of conversion, depends.

   It only remains to add that we are not to assume the comparative
   unimportance of what is done upon a child, in his age of impressions,
   because there is really no character of virtue or vice, of blame or
   praise, developed in that age. Be it so--it is so by the supposition.
   But the power, the root, the seed, is implanted nevertheless, in most
   cases, of what he will be. Not in every case, but often, the seed of a
   regenerate life is implanted--that which makes the child a Christian in
   God's view, as certainly as if he were already out in the testimony and
   formal profession of his faith. I was just now speaking of the dreadful
   power of will or willfulness, some times manifested even in this first
   age, that we have called the age of impressions, and of the ways in
   which, by one kind of mismanagement or another, the character may be
   turned to vices that are as opposite, as the vices of meanness and the
   crimes of violence and blood. So it will be found that almost every
   sort of mismanagement, or neglect, plants some seed of vice and misery
   that grows out afterwards into a character in its own kind. Thus the
   child by a continual worry of his little life, under abusive words, and
   harsh, flashy tempers, grows to be a bed of nettles in all his personal
   tempers, and will so be prepared to break out, in the age of choice,
   into almost any vice of ill-nature. A child can be pampered in feeding,
   so as to become, in a sense, all body; so that, when he comes into
   choice and responsible action, he is already a confirmed sensualist,
   showing it in the lines of his face, even before it appears in his
   tastes, habits and vices. Thus we have a way of wondering that the
   children of this or that family should turn out so poorly, but the real
   fact is, probably, if we knew it, that what we call their turning out,
   is only their growing out, in just that which was first grown in, by
   the mismanagement of their infancy and childhood. What they took in as
   impression, or contagion, is developed by choice--not at once, perhaps,
   but finally, after the poison has had time to work. And in just the
   same way, doubtless, it may be true, in multitudes of Christian
   conversions, that what appear to be such to others, and also to the
   subjects themselves, are only the restored activity and more fully
   developed results of some predispositional state, or initially
   sanctified property, in the tempers and subtle affinities of their
   childhood. They are now born into that by the assent of their own will,
   which they were in before, without their will. What they do not
   remember still remembers them, and now claims a right in them. What was
   before unconscious, flames out into consciousness, and they break forth
   into praise and thanksgiving, in that which, long ago, took them
   initially, and touched them softly without thanks. For there is such a
   thing as a seed of character in religion, preceding all religious
   development. Even as Calvin, speaking of the regenerative grace there
   may be in the heart of infancy itself, testifies--"the work of God is
   not yet without existence, because it is not observed and understood by
   us."

   By these and many other considerations that might be named, it is made
   clear, I think, to any judicious and thoughtful person, that the most
   important age of Christian nurture is the first; that which we have
   called the age of impressions, just that age, in which the duties and
   cares of a really Christian nurture are so commonly postponed, or
   assumed to have not yet arrived. I have no scales to measure quantities
   of effect in this matter of early training, but I may be allowed to
   express my solemn conviction, that more, as a general fact, is done, or
   lost by neglect of doing, on a child's immortality, in the first three
   years of his life, than in all his years of discipline afterwards. And
   I name this particular time, or date, that I may not be supposed to lay
   the chief stress of duty and care on the latter part of what l have
   called the age of impressions; which, as it is a matter somewhat
   indefinite, may be taken to cover the space of three or four times this
   number of years; the development of language, and of moral ideas being
   only partially accomplished, in most cases, for so long a time. Let
   every Christian father and mother understand, when their child is three
   years old, that they have done more than half of all they will ever do
   for his character. What can be more strangely wide of all just
   apprehension, than the immense efficacy, imputed by most parents to the
   Christian ministry, compared with what they take to be the almost
   insignificant power conferred on them in their parental charge and
   duties. Why, if all preachers of Christ could have their hearers, for
   whole months and years, in their own will, as parents do their
   children, so as to move them by a look, a motion, a smile, a frown, and
   act their own sentiments and emotions over in them at pleasure; if,
   also, a little farther on, they had them in authority to command,
   direct, tell them whither to go, what to learn, what to do, regulate
   their hours, their books, their pleasures, their company, and call them
   to prayer over their own knees every night and morning, who could think
   it impossible, in the use of such a power, to produce almost any
   result? Should not such a ministry be expected to fashion all who come
   under it to newness of life? Let no parent, shifting off his duties to
   his children, in this manner, think to have his defects made up, and
   the consequent damages mended afterwards, when they have come to their
   maturity, by the comparatively slender, always doubtful, efficacy of
   preaching and pulpit harangue.

   If now I am right in the view I have been trying to establish, it will
   readily occur to you that irreparable damage may be and must often be
   done by the self-indulgence of those parents, who place their children
   mostly in the charge of nurses and attendants fur just those years of
   their life, in which the greatest and most absolute effects are to be
   wrought in their character. The lightness that prevails, on this point,
   is really astonishing. Many parents do not even take pains to know any
   thing about the tempers, the truthfulness, the character generally, of
   the nurses to whom their children are thus confidingly trusted. No
   matter--the child is too young to be poisoned, or at all hurt, by their
   influence. And so they give over, to these faithless and often cruelly
   false hirelings of the nursery, to be always with them, under their
   power, associated with their persons, handled by their roughness, and
   imprinted, day and night, by the coarse, bad sentiments of their voices
   and faces, these helpless, hapless beings whom they call their
   children, and think they are really making much of, in the instituting
   of a nursery for them and their keeping. Such a mother ought to see
   that she is making much more of herself than of her child. This whole
   scheme of nurture is a scheme of self-indulgence. Now is the time when
   her little one most needs to see her face, and hear her voice, and feel
   her gentle hand. Now is the time when her child's eternity pleads most
   entreatingly for the benefit of her motherly charge and presence. What
   mother would not be dismayed by the thought of having her family grow
   up into the sentiments of her nurse, and come forward into life as
   being in the succession to her character! And yet how often is this
   most exactly what she has provided for.

   Again, it is very clear that, in this early kind of nurture, faithfully
   maintained, there is a call for the greatest personal holiness in the
   parents, and that just those conditions are added, which will make true
   holiness closest to nature, and most beautifully attractive--saving it
   from all the repulsive appearances of severity and sanctimony. In this
   charge and nurture of infant children, nothing is to be done by an
   artificial, lecturing process; nothing, or little by what can be called
   government. We are to get our effects chiefly by just being what we
   ought, and making a right presence of love and life to our children.
   They are in a plastic age that is receiving its type, not from our
   words, but from our spirit, and whose character is shaping in the molds
   of ours. Living under this conviction, we are held to a sound verity
   and reality in every thing. The defect of our character is not to be
   made up here, by the sanctity of our words; we must be all that we
   would have our children feel and receive. Thus, if a man were to be set
   before a mirror, with the feeling that the exact image of what he is,
   for the day, is there to be produced and left as a permanent and fixed
   image forever, to what carefulness, what delicate sincerity of spirit
   would he be moved. And will he be less moved to the same, when that
   mirror is the soul of his child?

   Inducted, thus, into a more profoundly real holiness, He shall, at the
   same time, grow more natural in it. The family quality of our piety,
   living itself into our children, will moisten the dry individualism we
   suffer, relieve the eccentricities we display, set purity in the place
   of bustle and presumption, growth in the place of conquest, sound
   health in the place of spasmodic exaltations; for when a conviction is
   felt in Christian families, that living is to be a means of grace, and
   as God will suffer it, a regenerating power, then will our piety be
   come a domestic spirit, and as much more tender, as it is closer to the
   life of childhood. Now, we have a kind of piety that contains,
   practically speaking, only adults, or those who are old enough to
   reflect and act for themselves, and it is as if we lived in an adult
   world, where every one is for himself. If we could abolish also
   distinctions of age, and sex, and office, we should only make up a
   style of religion somewhat drier and farther off from nature than we
   now have. We can never come into the true mode of living that God has
   appointed for us, until we regard each generation as hovering over the
   next, acting itself into the next, and casting thus a type of character
   in the nexi, before it comes to act for itself. Then we shall have
   gentle cares and feelings; then the families will become bonds of
   spiritual life; example, education and government, being Christian
   powers, will be regulated by a Christian spirit; the rigidities of
   religious principle will be softened by the tender affections of nature
   twining among them, and the common life of the house dignified by the
   sober and momentous cares of the life to come. And thus Christian
   piety, being oftener a habit in the soul than a conquest over it, will
   be as much more respectable and consistent as it is earlier in the
   birth and closer to nature.
     __________________________________________________________________

II.
PARENTAL QUALIFICATIONS.

   "For I know him, that he will command his children and his house hold
   after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord."--Genesis, xviii
   19.

   THE real point of the declaration, here, is not that Abraham will
   command his children, but that he is such a man, having such qualities
   or qualifications as to be able to command, certain to command, and
   train them into an obedient and godly life. The declaration is, you
   will observe--"For I know him;" not simply and directly--"For I know
   the fact." Every thing turns on what is in him, as a father and
   householder--his qualifications, dispositions, principles, and modes of
   life--and the declaration is, that what he is to do, will certainly
   come out of what he is. He will certainly produce, or train a godly
   family, because it is in him, as a man, to do nothing else or less. The
   subject raised then by the declaration is, not so much family training
   and government, as it is--

   The personal and religious qualifications, or qualifications of
   character, necessary to success in such family training and government.

   There is almost no duty or work, in this world, that does not require
   some outfit of qualifications, in order to the doing of it well. We all
   understand that some kind of preparation is necessary to fill the place
   of a magistrate, teach a school, drill a troop of soldiers, or do any
   such thing, in a right manner. Nay, we admit the necessity of serving
   some kind of apprenticeship, in order to become duly qualified for the
   calling, only of a milliner, or a tailor. And yet, as a matter of fact,
   we go into what we call the Christian training of our children, without
   any preparation for it whatever, and apparently without any such
   conviction of negligence or absurdity, as at all disturbs our assurance
   in what we do. Not that young parents, and especially young mothers,
   are not often heard lamenting their conscious insufficiency for the
   charge that is put upon them, but that, in such regrets, they commonly
   mean nothing more than that they feel very tenderly, and want to do
   better things than, in fact, any body can. It does not mean, as a
   general thing, that they are practically endeavoring to get hold of
   such qualifications as they want, in order to their Christian success.
   After all, it is likely to be assumed that they have their sufficient
   equipment in the tender instinct of their natural affection itself. So
   they go on, as in a kind of venture, to command, govern, manage,
   punish, teach, and turn about the way of their child, in just such
   tempers, and ways of example and views of life, as chance to be the
   element of their own disfigured, ill-begotten character at the time.
   This, in short, is their sin--the undoing, as it will by and by appear,
   of their children--that they undertake their most sacred office,
   without any sacred qualifications; govern without self-government,
   discharge the holiest responsibilities irresponsibly, and thrust their
   children into evil, by the evil and bad mind, out of which their
   training proceeds.

   I know not any thing that better shows the utter incompetency of mere
   natural affection as an equipment for the parental office, or that, in
   a short way, proves the fixed necessity in it, of some broader
   competency and higher qualification, than just to glance at the real
   cruelties, even commonly perpetrated, under just those tender, faithful
   instigations of natural affection, that we so readily expect to be a
   kind of infallible protection to the helplessness of infancy. How often
   is it a fact, that the fondest parents, owing to some want of insight,
   or of patience, or even to some uninstructed, only half intelligent
   desire to govern their child, will do it the greatest wrongs--stinging
   every day and hour, the little defenseless being, committed to their
   love, with the sense of bitter injustice; driving in the ploughshare of
   abuse and blame upon its tender feeling, by harsh words and pettish
   chastisements, when, in fact, the very thing in the child that annoys
   them is, that they themselves have thrown it into a fit of uneasiness
   and partial disorder, by their indiscreet feeding; or that in some
   appearance of irritability, or insubjection, it has only not the words
   to speak of its pain, or explain its innocence. The little child's
   element of existence becomes, in this manner, not seldom, an element of
   bitter wrong, and the sting of wounded justice grows in, so to speak,
   poisoning the soul all through, by its immedicable rancor. The pain of
   such wrong goes deeper, too, than many fancy. No other creature suffers
   under conscious injury so intensely. And the mischief done is only
   aggravated by tihe fact that the sufferer has no power of redress, and
   has no alternative permitted, but either to be cowed into a weak and
   cringing submission, or else, when his nobler nature has too much stuff
   in it for that, to be stiffened in hate and the bitter grudges of
   wrong. I know not any thing more sad to think of, than the cruelties
   put upon children in this manner. It makes up a chapter which few
   persons read, and which almost every body takes for granted can not
   exist. For the honor of our human nature, I wish it could not; and that
   what we call maternal affection, the softest, dearest, most
   self-sacrificing of all earthly forms of tenderness and fidelity, were,
   at least, sufficient to save the dishonor, which, alas! it is not; for
   these wrongs are, in fact, the cruelties of motherhood, and as often, I
   may add, of an even over-fond motherhood, as any--wrongs of which the
   doers are unconscious, and which never get articulated, save by the
   sobbings of the little bosom, where the sting of injury is felt.

   Here, then, at just the point where we should, least of all, look for
   it, viz: at the point of maternal affection itself, we have displayed,
   in sadly convincing evidence, the need and high significance of those
   better qualifications of mind and character, by which the training of
   children becomes properly Christian, and upon which, as being such, the
   success of that training depends. Few persons, I apprehend, have any
   conception, on the other hand, of the immense number and sweep of the
   disqualifications that, in nominally or even really Christian parents,
   go in to hinder, and spoil of all success, the religious nurture of
   their children. Sometimes the disqualification is this, and sometimes
   it is that; sometimes conscious, sometimes unconscious; sometimes
   observable by others and well understood, and sometimes undiscovered.
   The variety is infinite, and the modes of combination subtle, to such a
   degree, that persons taken to be eminently holy in their life, will
   have all their prayers and counsels blasted, by some hidden fatality,
   whose root is never known, or suspected, whether by others, or possibly
   by themselves. The wonder that children, whose parents were in high
   esteem for their piety, should so often grow up into a vicious and
   ungodly life, would, I think, give way to just the contrary wonder, if
   only some just conception were had of the various, multifarious,
   unknown, unsuspected disqualifications, by which modes of nurture,
   otherwise good, are fatally poisoned.

   Sometimes, for example, it is a fatal mischief, going before on the
   child, but probably unknown to the world, that the parents, one or
   both, or it may be the mother especially, does not accept the child
   willingly, but only submits to the maternal office and charge, as to
   some hard necessity. This charge is going to detain her at home, and
   limit her freedom. Or it will take her away from the shows and
   pleasures for which she is living. Or it will burden her days and
   nights with cares that weary her self-indulgence. Or she is not fond of
   children, and never means to be fond of them--they are not worth the
   trouble they cost. Indulging these und such like discontents, unwisely
   and even cruelly provoked, not unlikely, by the unchristian discontents
   and foolish speeches of her husband, she poisons both herself and her
   child beforehand, and receives it with no really glad welcome, when she
   takes it to her bosom. Strange mortal perversity that can thus repel,
   as a harsh intrusion, one of God's dearest gifts; that which is the
   date of the house in its coming, and comes to unseal a new passion,
   whereby life itself shall be duplicated in meaning, as in love and
   duty! This abuse of marriage is, in fact, an offense against nature,
   and is no doubt bitterly offensive to God. Though commonly spoken of,
   in a way of astonishing lightness, it is just that sin, by which every
   good possibility of the family is corrupted. What can two parents do
   for the child, they only submit to look upon, and take as a foundling
   to their care? If they have some degree of evidence in them that they
   are Christian disciples, they will have fatally clouded that evidence,
   by a contest with God's Providence, so irreverent to Him, and so cruel
   to their child. If now, at last, they somewhat love the child, which is
   theirs by compulsion, what office of a really Christian nurture can
   they fill in its behalf? They are under a complete and total
   disqualification, as respects the duties of their charge. They are out
   of rest in God, out of confidence toward Him, hindered in their
   prayers, lost to that sweetness of love and peace which ought to be the
   element of their house. Delving on thus, from such a point of
   beginning, and assuming the possible chance of success, in what they
   may do in the spirit of such a beginning, is simply absurd. What can
   they do in training a child for God, which they have accepted, at his
   hands, only as being thrust upon them by compulsion?

   I might speak of other disqualifications that have a similar character,
   as implying some disagreement with Providence. But it must suffice to
   say generally, that there can be no such thing as a genuine Christian
   nurture that is out of peace with God's Providence--in any respect. On
   the contrary, it is when that peace is the element of the house, and
   sweetens every thing in it--pain, sickness, loss, the bitter cup of
   poverty, every ill of adversity or sting of wrong--then it is, and
   there, as nowhere else, that children are most sure to grow up into
   God's beauty, and a blessed and good life. The child that is born to
   such keeping, and lovingly lapped in the peaceful trust of Providence,
   is born to a glorious heritage. On the other hand, where the endeavor
   and life-struggle of the house is, at bottom, a fight with Providence;
   envious, eager, anxious, out of content, out of rest, full of complaint
   and railings, it is impossible that any thing Christian should grow in
   such an element. The disqualification is complete.

   Another whole class of disqualifications require to be named by
   themselves; those I mean which are caused by a bad or false morality in
   the parties, at some point where the failure is not suspected, and
   misses being corrected by the slender and very partial experience of
   their discipleship.

   They are persons, for example, who make much of principles in their
   words, and really think that they are governed by principles, when, in
   fact, they do every thing for some reason of policy, and value their
   principles, more entirely than they know, for what they are worth in
   the computations of policy. Contrivance, artifice, or sometimes
   cunning, is the element of the house. A subtle, inveterate habit of
   scheming creeps into all the reasons of duty; and duty is done, not for
   duty's sake, but for the reasons, or prudential benefits to be secured
   by it. Even the praying of the house takes on a prudential air, much as
   if it were done for some reason not stated. A stranger in the house,
   seeing no scandalous wrong, but a fine show of principle, has a certain
   sense of coldness upon him, which he can not account for. How much of
   true Christian nurture there may be in such a house, it is not
   difficult to judge. Here, probably, is going to be one of the cases,
   where everybody wonders that children brought up so correctly, turn out
   so badly. It is not understood that such children were brought up to
   know principles, only as a stunted undergrowth of prudence, and that
   now the result appears.

   Again there is, in some persons, who appear, in all other respects, to
   be Christian, a strange defect of truth or truthfulness. They are not
   conscious of it. They would take it as a cruel injustice, were they
   only to suspect their acquaintances of holding such an estimate of
   them. And yet there is a want of truth in every sort of demonstration
   they make. It is not their words only that lie, but their voice, air,
   action, their every putting forth has a lying character. The atmosphere
   they live in is an atmosphere of pretense. Their virtues are
   affectations. Their compassions and sympathies are the airs they put
   on. Their friendship is their mood and nothing more. And yet they do
   not know it. They mean, it may be, no fraud. They only cheat themselves
   so effectually as to believe, that what they are only acting is their
   truth. And, what is difficult to reconcile, they have a great many
   Christian sentiments, they maintain prayer as a habit, and will
   sometimes speak intelligently of matters of Christian experience. But
   how dreadful must be the effect of such a character, on the simple,
   trustful soul of a little child. When the crimen falsi is in every
   thing heard, and looked upon, and done, he may grow up into a
   hypocrite, or a thief, but what shall make him a genuine Christian?

   In the same manner, I could go on to show a multitude of
   disqualifications for the office of a genuine Christian nurture, that
   are created by a bad or defective morality, in parents who live a
   credibly Christian life. They make a great virtue, it may be, of
   frugality or economy, and settle every thing into a scale of
   insupportable parsimony and meanness. Or, they make a praise of
   generous living, and run it into a profligate and spendthrift habit.
   Or, they make such a virtue of honor and magnanimity, as to set the
   opinions and principles of men in deference, above the principles of
   God. Or, they get their chief motives of action out of the appearances
   of virtue, and not out of its realities. There is no end to the
   impostures of bad morality, that find a place in the lives of reputably
   Christian persons. They are generally too subtle to be detected by the
   inspection of their consciousness, and very commonly pass unobserved by
   others. And yet they have power to poison the nurture of the house,
   even though it appears to be, in some respects, Christian. Hence the
   profound necessity that Christian parents, consciously meaning to bring
   up their children for God, should make a thorough inspection of their
   morality itself, to find if there be any bad spot in it, knowing that,
   as certainly as there is, it will more or less fatally corrupt their
   children.

   We have still another whole class of disqualifications to speak of,
   that belong, as vices, to the Christian life itself, and will, as much
   more certainly, be ruinous in their effects. Some of them would never
   be thought of as disqualifications for the Christian training of
   children, and yet they are so, in a degree to even cut off the
   reasonable hope of success. Probably a great part of the cases of
   disaster, that occur in the training of Christian families, are
   referable to these Christian vices, which are commonly not put down as
   evidences of apostasy, or any radical defect of Christian principle,
   because they are not supposed to imply a discontinuance of prayers or a
   fatal subjection to the spirit of this world.

   Sanctimony, for example, as we commonly use the term, is one of these
   vices. It describes what we conlceive to be a saintly, or over-saintly
   air and manner, when there is a much inferior degree of sanctity in the
   life. There is no hypocrisy in it, for there is no intention to
   deceive; but there is a legal, austere, conscientiousness, which keeps
   on all the solemnities and longitudes of expression, just because there
   is too little of God's love and joy in the feeling, to play in the
   smiles of gladness and liberty. Now it is the little child's way, to
   get his first lessons from the looks and faces round him. And what can
   be worse, or do more to set him off from all piety, by a fixed
   aversion, than to have gotten such impressions of it only, as he takes
   from this always unblessed, tedious, look of sanctimony. What can a
   poor child do, when the sense of nature and natural life, the smiles,
   glad voices, and cheerful notes of play, are all overcast and gloomed,
   or, as it were, forbidden, by that ghostly piety in which it is itself
   being brought up? And yet the world will wonder immensely at the
   strange perversity of the child that grows up under such a saintly
   training, to be known as a person mortally averse to religion! Why, it
   would be a much greater wonder if he could think of it even with
   patience I

   Bigotry is another of these Christian vices, and yet no one will assume
   his infallible capacity, in the matter of Christian training, as
   confidently as the bigot. Has he not the truth? is he not opposite, as
   possible, to all error? has any man a greater abhorrence of all laxity
   and all variation from the standards? Is he not in a way of speaking
   out always, and giving faithful testimonies in his house? Yes, that
   must be admitted; and yet he is a man that mauls every truth of God,
   and every gentle and lovely feeling of a genuinely Christian character.
   His intensities are made by his narrowness and hate, and not by his
   love. He fills the house with a noise of piety, and may dog his
   children possibly into some kind of conformity with his opinions. But
   he is much more likely, by this brassy din, to only stun their
   intelligence and make them incapable of any true religious impressions.
   There is no class of children that turn out worse, in general, than the
   children of the Christian bigots.

   The vice of Christian fanaticism operates, in another and different
   way, but with a commonly disastrous effect. The fanatic is a man who
   mixes false fire with the true, and burns with a partly diabolical
   heat. He means to be superlatively Christian, but it happens that what
   he gets, above others, is the addition of something to his passions,
   which would be more genuine, if it were in his affections. He scorches,
   but never melts. He is most impatient of what is ordinary and common,
   and does not sufficiently honor the solid works and experiences of that
   goodness which is fixed and faithful. This kind of character makes a
   fiery element for childish piety to grow in. What can the child become,
   or learn to be, where every thing is in this key of excess? It is as if
   there were a simoon of piety blowing through the house, and it dries
   away all gentle longings and holiest sympathies of the child's
   affectionate nature, so that all attractions God-ward are suspended. A
   certain violence and harshness in the parental fanaticism wakens often
   the sense of injustice too, or hate, and makes the superlative piety
   appear to be no better, after all, than it might be.

   Another Christian vice is created by a censorious habit. Not by that
   habit of judging and condemning, which takes a pleasure in condemnation
   itself--that is the vice of a Christless character, not of a
   Christian--but there is a large class of disciples who think it a kind
   of duty, and a just acknowledgment of the fact, of human depravity, to
   be seeing always dark things. They judge evil judgments because they
   will be more faithful, and will be only doing to others just as they do
   to themselves. This habit is like a poisonous atmosphere in the house.
   It kills all springing sentiments of confidence and esteem. That
   charity which believeth all things, and hopeth all things, appears to
   be already stifled in it. What shall a child aspire to, when there is
   no really estimable growth, and good, and beauty, any where?

   It is a great vice also, as regards the Christian training of a family,
   that there is a habit in the parents of receiving nothing by authority,
   and really disowning authority in all matters of religious. God reigns
   himself by authority, and because he is God; and parents are to govern
   by authority, partly, in the same manner. If the parent is a debater
   with God in every thing, saying always No, to God, till he has gotten
   his proofs, the spirit will go through the house. The children will
   demand a reason for every thing required, and will put the parents
   always on trial, instead of being put under authority themselves.
   Nothing breaks down faster the religious conscience, or untones more
   completely the divine affinities of the childish nature, than to have
   lost the feeling, ceased to hear the ring, of authority. Abraham could
   believe God's words, and so it was in him to command his children after
   him.

   Anxiousness is another infirmity, or vice of character, that has always
   a noxious effect in the training of Christian families. Where there is
   but a little faith, there is apt to be great anxiousness. And nothing
   will so dreadfully torment the life of a child, as to be perpetually
   teased by the anxious words and looks and interferences of this unhappy
   superintendence. And if the pretext given is a concern for the child's
   piety, the effect is only so much more disastrous. What can he think of
   piety, when it has only worried him at every play and every natural
   pleasure of his life? Just contrary to this feeble, half-believing,
   half-Christian vice of anxiety, the parental habit should be one of
   confidence; gladdened always in the faith that God is the child's
   covenanted keeper, and will never fail to guard the trust that is
   faithfully committed to his hands, never allow to grow up in sin what
   parental fidelity is training, by all reasonable diligence, for a godly
   life.

   This enumeration of the moral and religious vices, that spot the beauty
   and mar the completeness of character, in one way or another, of almost
   all merely ordinary Christians, could be indefinitely extended.
   Nothing, in fact, is farther off, generally, from the truth, than the
   assumption, by nominally Christian parents, of their sufficiency, or
   their properly qualified state, as regards the training of their
   children. They are almost all disqualified, or under-qualified, to such
   a degree as to make their work perilous, and as ought to fill them with
   real concern for their success. What are we all, in the merely initial
   state of Christian living, but diseased patients, just entered into
   hospital? We are not all in the same sort of weakness and defect, but
   all weak and defective--one-sided, passionate, broken in principle,
   corrupted by mixed motive, lame in faith. How foolish then is it for us
   to be assuming that, because we have come to Christ and begun to be
   disciples, we are ready, of course, for the holy nurture and safe
   ordering of our families. How foolish, also, to be wondering, as we so
   often do, that the children of one or another Christian, or reputedly
   good Christian family, turn out so ill--as if it were some evidence of
   a singularly perverse and reprobate nature in such children. Little do
   we know what subtle poisons were hid in what we took to be the good
   Christian piety of those families. After all, it may have been much
   less good, or more exceptionably good, than we thought.

   It may occur to some of you, as a discouraging disadvantage, that,
   where one parent is duly qualified for the training of the children in
   piety, the other is not, but is in fact, a real hindrance to the right
   and safe proceeding of the endeavor. The parents are never equally well
   qualified; and one, or the other of them, is likely to be a good deal
   out of line, in some kind of personal defect, or obliquity of practice.
   Sometimes one of them will be a purely worldly-minded person, or an
   unbeliever, or, it may be, even fatally corrupted by vicious habits.
   There is, accordingly, no hope of concert in the endeavor to train the
   children up in piety. And this, the other party, who is more commonly
   the mother, may be tempted in some hour of discouragement to think,
   amounts to a fatal disqualification, such as quite takes away the
   rational confidence of success. Let me come to her aid, in the
   assurance that God connects Himself even the more certainly with one
   party, if only there is, in that one, a believing and truly faithful
   spirit, prepared for the work. He pledges himself in formal promise to
   one party, in all such conditions, declaring that the believing wife
   sanctifies, takes away the defect of, the unbelieving husband. Let her
   also consider what is said of young Timothy--how the apostle figures
   the faith of the good grandmother, and her daughter the good mother,
   descending on Timothy in the third generation, when his father, all
   this time, was a Greek, probably an unbeliever and idolater. There was
   not force enough, you perceive, in all that father's influence to break
   the descent of the faith of these two godly mothers upon his son.

   This, then, is the conclusion to which we are brought; that
   qualifications are wanted for this work as for almost no other, and
   that where they are really had, if it be only by one party, they are
   not likely to fail. But how shall they be obtained? that is the
   question. Who is subtle enough to go through this hunt of the
   character, and actually find every loose joint of morality ill his
   practice, every vice of defect, or distemper in his Christian life? No
   one, I answer--that is impossible. No weeding process, carried on by
   ourselves, ever did or can extirpate our evils. The only true method
   here is the method of faith; to be more perfectly and wholly trusted to
   God, more singly, simply Christian. God's touch in us can feel out
   every thing; every most subtle spot of wrong or weakness he can heal.
   The reason why we have so many of these spots and disqualifying vices
   is, that we are only a little Christian. Whereas, if we could be fully
   entered into Christ's keeping, and have our whole consciousness
   overspread and clothed by his righteousness, we should live, in every
   part, and be kept in holy equilibrium above our defects and disorders,
   all the time. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ then as a complete
   investiture, and there will be no poison flowing down upon your
   children, from any thing in your life and example. If Christ is made,
   to those who trust in him, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
   redemption, what is there that he can not and will not be made?
   Wonderful is the completeness of any soul that is complete in him. How
   pure and perfect the morality, how wise the discretion, how gentle and
   full, and free, the life in which he lives! The house and its
   discipline become a most joyous element to children, when thus
   administered. Every thing good in it is welcome, even the restraints
   and supervisions; for they have a genera] air of confidence and hope
   and gentle feeling, that wins and not repels. Even authority itself is
   welcome, because it is enforced by character, and not by tones of
   violence, or dictatorial airs of heat and menace. Whoever comes thus
   into God's full love, to be in it and of it, has a true equipment for
   the family administration. If it can be said--Herein is Love, what else
   can really be wanting? This bond of perfectness, brings all needed
   qualifications with it, so that when the love or the faith working by
   it, really reigns and tempers the man by its impulse, it can truly be
   said, as of Abraham--For I know him, that he will command his children
   and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

III.
PHYSICAL NURTURE, TO BE A MEANS OF GRACE.

   "Feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee and
   say, who is the Lord?"--Proverbs, xxx. 8-9.

   A MOST fit subject of prayer! And if the feeding of an adult person,
   such as Agur, has a connection so intimate with his religious life and
   character, how much more the feeding and the physical nurture of a
   child. I use the text, therefore, to introduce, for our present
   consideration, as a kind of first point, the food or feeding of
   children, and their physical treatment generally.

   It will not be incredible to any thoughtful person, least of all to any
   genuinely philosophic person, that the treatment and fare of the body
   has much to do with the quality of the soul, or mind--its affinities,
   passions, aspirations, tempers; its powers of thought and sentiment,
   its imaginations, its moral and religious development. For the body is
   not only a house to the mind as other houses are, which we may live in
   for a time with no perceptible effect on our character, but it is a
   house in the sense of being the mind's own organ; its external life
   itself, the medium of all its action, the instrument of its thought and
   feeling, the inlet also of all its knowledges and impressions, and the
   instigator, by a thousand reactions, of all such spiritual riot and
   corruption as have had their leaven brewed in as many physical abuses
   and disorders. So intimate is this connection of mind and body, so very
   close to real oneness are they, that no one can, by any possibility, be
   a Christian in his mind, and not be in some sense a Christian in his
   body. If his soul is to be a temple of the Holy Ghost, then his body
   must be. If his soul is under government, then his body will be. And if
   his body is not under government, then his soul, by no possibility, can
   be; save that, in every such ease, it will and must be under the
   government of the body; subject to its power, swayed by all its
   excesses and distempers.

   Hence that most determined, almost proud, resolve of the apostle, when
   he declares--"I will not be brought under the power of any." Under the
   body? No! he will scorn that low kind of thraldom. Meats, drinks,
   appetites--none of these shall have the mastery in him. He will assert
   the supreme right of the soul or person, above the house it lives in;
   so God's preeminent right in the soul. He will say to the body--"stay
   thou down there"--as they that fast do, in fasting; and, what is more
   profoundly, more scientifically rational than fasting, when it is
   practiced in the real insight of its reasons? It is the soul rising up,
   in God's name, to assert herself over the body; over its appetites,
   passions, tempers, and, if possible, distempers, And how often the
   poor, coarse, stupid, sensual, fast-bound slaves of the body, calling
   themselves disciples, need this kind of war, and a regular campaign of
   it, to get their souls uppermost and trim themselves for the race.

   One must be a very inobservant person, not to have noticed, that all
   his finest and most God-ward aspirations are smothered under any load
   of excess, or overindulgence. It is as if the body were calling down
   all the other powers, even those of poetry, magnanimity, and religion,
   to help it do the scarcely possible work of digestion. At that point
   they gather. The sense of beauty is there, and the soul's angel of
   hope, and the testimony of God's peace, and the music of devotion, and
   the thrill of sermons, dosing, all together, and soughing in dull
   dreams round the cargo of poppies in the hold of the body. To raise any
   fresh sentiment is now impossible. Even prayer itself is mired, and can
   not struggle out. The news of some best friend's death can only be
   answered by dry interjections, and forced postures of grief, that will
   not find their meaning till to-morrow.

   And much the same thing holds true, only under a different form, when
   the body is prematurely diseased and broken, by the excesses of
   self-indulgence. Its distempers will distemper the mind itself; its
   pains prick through into the sensibilities, even of the spiritual
   nature. Out of the pits of the body, dark clouds will steam up into the
   chambers of the soul, and all the devils of dyspepsia will be hovering
   in them, to scare away its peace, and choke the godlike possibilities,
   out of which its better motions should be springing.

   So important a thing, for the religious life of the soul, is the
   feeding of the body. Vast multitudes of disciples have no conception of
   the fact. Living in a swine's body, regularly over-loaded and oppressed
   every day of their lives, they wonder that so great difficulties and
   discouragements rise up to hinder the Christian clearness of their
   soul. Could they but look into Agur's prayer, and take the
   meaning--feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny
   thee, and say, who is the Lord?--they would find a real gospel in it.
   And making it truly their own, they would dismiss, at once, whole
   armies of doubts; their faith would get wings to rise; they would rest
   their soul in an element of power, and peace and sweetness, and would
   run the way of God's commandments with a wonderful clearness and
   liberty.

   I have spoken, thus briefly, to a fact of adult experience, because it
   is adult conviction which my subject needs to obtain. To simply look on
   children from without, and tell what effects will be wrought on their
   religious tempers and habit by their feeding, and the general nurture
   of their body, will not carry any depth of conviction by itself; for
   there is no creature of God less adequately understood, or conceived,
   than a child. And therefore it is that I appeal to parents, in this
   manner, requiring them to make some observation of themselves; to
   notice what becomes of them, and their sentiments, and senses of Christ
   and of God, when they are down under the burdens of an overloaded, or
   permanently diseased body.

   The principle I am here asserting, as regards the religious import of
   feeding and bodily nurture, in the case of children, is the same on
   which the child Daniel and his friends acted, in the choice of their
   very simple and temperate diet. Whether Daniel had been brought up from
   his infancy in this manner does not appear. He may have been prompted
   to this choice, by a purely divine impulse. But whether he came into it
   by one method or the other, makes little difference; for, in either
   case, the most important matter is to observe the result, and that such
   kind of feeding was chosen, or instituted, for the sake of the result
   that would follow, on perfectly natural principles, viz: to give
   greater clearness to the religious perceptions and sentiments of the
   soul. The body grew toward perfect health, because it was burdened and
   distempered by no excesses. And the soul was just as much more open to
   God and the sense of unseen things, as the body was more serenely and
   blissfully well, in its physical condition. In this manner the child's
   nature grew apace, in the molds of a perfectly evened judgment, and was
   also wonderfully opened to God and all highest discoveries of his will.
   In a certain sense, he became a great prophet by his physical
   nurture--God gave him knowledge, thus, and skill, in all learning and
   wisdom, and he had understanding in all visions and dreams. His feeding
   stood with his health, and with all purest affinities and deepest
   openings toward God.

   Let us glance a moment, now, at some of the points here involved, and
   distinguish, if we can, the 1esllts that are always depending on the
   sight feeding of children.

   The child is taken, when his training begins, in a state of
   naturalness, as respects all the bodily tastes and tempers, and the
   endeavor should be to keep him in that key; to let no stimulation of
   excess, or delicacy, disturb the simplicity of nature, and no sensual
   pleasuring, in the name of food, become a want or expectation of his
   appetite. Any artificial appetite begun, is the beginning of distemper,
   disease, and a general disturbance of natural proportion. Intemperance!
   the woes of intemperate drink I how dismal the story, when it is told;
   how dreadful the picture, when we look upon it. From what do the father
   and mother recoil, with a greater and more total horror of feeling,
   than the possibility that their child is to be a drunkard? Little do
   they remember that he can be, even before he has so much as tasted the
   cup; and that they themselves can make him so, virtually, without
   meaning it, even before he has gotten his language! Nine-tenths .of the
   intemperate drinking begins, not in grief and destitution, as we so
   often hear, but in vicious feeding. Here the scale of order and
   simplicity is first broken, and then what shall a distempered or
   distemperate life run to, more certainly, than to what is intemperate?
   False feeding genders false appetite, and when the soul is burning, all
   through, in the fires of false appetite, what is that but a universal
   uneasiness? and what will this uneasiness more naturally do, than
   betake itself to the pleasurable excitement of drink? What is wanted is
   a sensation--the soul is aching for a sensation; for it is one of the
   miseries of food that the tasting pleasure is soon over and the cloyed
   body turns away in disgust; one of the excellencies of drink, that the
   sensation is a long one, and may be easily drawn out so as to cover
   whole hours of duration. Food, sleep, friends, the self-enjoyment of
   character-what an excellent and easy substitute it is for them all!
   Thus, for example, when a very young child, taken by the captivating
   flavor of some dainty or confectionery, has refused to restrain itself,
   and has kept on, as by a kind of spell, repeating the sensation again
   and again, till the organs, dried and cloyed by excess, refuse to give
   it longer, you will see that a wonderful uneasiness follows, asking
   what sensation next? and really there is nothing that can fill the
   vacant space, or quiet the uneasiness. One toy or another will be
   seized and thrown into the fire. The plays that before satisfied look
   insipid and do not please. The world goes ill because there is nothing
   good enough in it, and a general cry finishes the overdone pleasure of
   the day. And here you have in small, as in a single view, just that
   misery of distemper and uneasiness which is wrought, by the bad feeding
   of childhood, and prepares the vice of intemperance, even before it
   appears.

   It is only a larger and more comprehensive mischief of the wrong
   feeding of children, that it puts them under the body, teaches them to
   value bodily sensations, makes them sensual every way, and sets them
   lusting in every kind of excess. The vice of impurity is taught, how
   commonly, thus, at the mother's table. The finer sentiments and wits of
   children are smothered also and deadened, by this same animalizing
   process. They make a dull figure at school. Their feeling is coarse,
   their conscience weak, their passions low and violent. Their higher
   affinities, those which ally them to God and character and unseen
   worlds, appear to be closed up, and the lines of their faces,
   particularly about the mouth, give a low sensual expression, even when
   the upper-head is large and full. A certain degree of selfishness is
   likely to be somehow developed in children, for sin of every kind is
   selfish, but the lowest, meanest, and most utterly degraded type of
   selfishness, is the sensual; that which centers in the body, and makes
   every thing bend to bodily sensation And yet the early feeding and
   growth of children tends, how often, to just this and nothing higher.
   Saying nothing of genius and great action, impossible to be developed
   in this manner out of the finest possible organization, what hope is
   there under such abuse of nature, that religion will there begin to
   loosen her noble aspirations, and claim her sonship with God? What
   place can the love of God find open, in a soul that is shut up under
   the brutishness of sensuality? What sensibility is left for Christ and
   God, when the body has become the total manhood?

   And exactly this it will most certainly be, if first it becomes the
   total childhood. We have a way of saying, continually, that children
   are creatures of the senses, and we please ourselves in making
   allowances for them in this manner, and raising expectations of them
   that suppose the likelihood of their, by and by, coming out of their
   senses, into the higher ranges of thought and spiritual impulse. But we
   do not remember, always, the immense distinction between being in the
   senses and being in the sensualities; between going after the eyes, and
   going after the stomach; between the almost divine curiosity of
   intelligence, exploring all objects, sounds, and colors, to get in the
   stock of its mental furniture, and the totally incurious hankering of
   appetite, for some finer, freer indulgence of the animal sensation.
   Little hope is there of a child, who is in the senses, after this
   latter fashion. This he will quite seldom or never outgrow; on the
   contrary, it will overgrow him, and subjugate all nobler impulse in
   him, by a kind of natural law; even as disease propagates more disease
   and not health. In this manner, a child can be fairly put under the
   body for life, by the time he is five years old. And just this, I
   verily believe, is often true. Kindness, it may be, has done it, but it
   is that kindness which is better called cruelty. Coarseness of feeling,
   lowness of impulse, gluttony, dissipation, drunkenness, adultery--all
   foul passions that kennel in a sensual soul, it has cherished as a
   foster-mother; not once imagining the fact, in the indiscreet feeding
   of the hapless creature trusted to its care.

   This, too, will be rendered yet more probable by reviewing, briefly,
   some of the methods by which a more judicious, and more properly
   Christian feeding will conduce toward a different and happier result.

   First of all, it will not be a permitted practice, to quiet the child
   in states of irritation, or stop it in crying, or pacify it in fits of
   ill-nature, by dainties that please the taste. What is this but a
   schooling and drawing out of sensation, by making it the reward of just
   that which is most totally opposite to self-government? It must be a
   very dull child that will not cry and fret a great deal, when it is so
   pleasantly rewarded. Trained, in this manner, to play ill-nature for
   sensation's sake, it will go on rapidly, in the course of double
   attainment, and will be very soon perfected, in the double character of
   an ill-natured, morbid, sensualist, and a feigning cheat beside. By
   what method, or means, can the great themes of God and religion get
   hold of a soul, that has learned to be governed only by rewards of
   sensation, paid to affectations of grief and deliberate actings of
   ill-nature?

   Simplicity also, as opposed to luxuries, condiments, and confections,
   is a condition of all right feeding for infancy and childhood, which
   ought to approve itself to the most ordinary measure of parental
   discretion. Of course I do not mean to say that the child is never to
   have his holiday feast--that would be to cut him off from another kind
   of benefit--I only insist that he is not to have a perpetual holiday,
   and be stimulated by continual flavors on his organs, till the
   beautiful simplicity of his appetite is gone and nothing pleases
   longer, but that which is intense enough to be rather poison than food.
   Coffee, for example--what can be worse for a child's body, or his
   future character, than to be dosed every morning with his clip of
   coffee? No matter if he cries for it, all the worse if he does; for it
   shows that he has been already taught to love it, and is so far taken
   away, prematurely, from the natural simplicity of his tastes. And how
   is the child going to be drawn by the beauty of God, and the sacred
   pleasures of God's friendship, when thinking always of the dainties he
   has had, or is again to have, and counting it always the main blessing
   of existence, to have his body seasoned by the flavors of sensation?
   Instead of praying, as possibly he may be taught, in words--"Feed me
   with food convenient for me"--he prays, in fact, from morning to night,
   with all diseased longings and hankerings, to be fed, in the exact
   contrary, with what will most increase his already overgrown
   sensuality. In a manner faithfully characteristic of his low,
   prudential morality, Paley advises that all children and young person
   should live simply, because they are now susceptible enough to relish
   simple things; in order that, as their tastes grow duller with
   advancing age, they may allow themselves a freer indulgence in the
   stimulations of appetite, and may so maintain the feeding pleasures to
   the last. Counsel not to be questioned, even if these pleasures were
   the chief end of life itself. We are only disappointed and vexed by the
   lowness of it, when we recall, what is the real and true penalty of
   youthful indulgence, that it takes away the possible relish of truth,
   duty, and religion, and makes the soul forever inaccessible to these
   noblest powers of character and blessedness.

   In a wise, physical nurture, it is a matter of great import also to
   regulate the times of feeding. For this induces the sense of order,
   which is closely allied to a habit of self-government. If the nursing
   child is simply stuffed to its last limit, at any and all hours, then
   it is put in the way, not of intelligent feeding, which is interspaced
   by rest, but of always being filled to its limit. The feeding must, of
   course, be as much more frequent in infancy as the demands of a more
   rapid consumption require, but there should be times, and a degree of
   order established, as soon as possible; otherwise the stuffing method
   will go on into childhood, and boyhood, and by that time the bodily
   habit is in total disorder, carrying the tempers and general character
   with it. The breakfast before breakfast, and the dinner before dinner,
   and the casual snatching and feeding at all hours between, bring the
   child to the table with a scowl upon his face, and a nervous, morbid
   look of disgust, which declare, as plainly as possible, that there is
   nothing good enough prepared for him; and, quite as plainly, that he is
   a poor, misgoverned and spoiled child. He is overtaken by all the woes
   of sensuality, and yet has gotten almost none of its pleasures; for he
   is always kept, by his irregular, ungoverned feeding, so close up to
   the line. of possible appetite, that peevishness and ill-nature are the
   spice of all his sensations, and his body and soul are about equally
   distempered by the morbid irritations and dyspeptic woes that have come
   upon them. What a preparation is this for the calm, sweet, thoughtful,
   motives of religion, and the gentle whispers of God's truth in the
   heart!

   It should also be understood in the religious training of children, how
   great mischiefs are likely to follow, when much is made of the
   pleasures of the table. If the feeding is the great circumstance of the
   house and the day, if the discourse turns always on the peculiar relish
   of this, or the wonderful delicacy of that, and the main stress of life
   in general on the bliss of good living, it will not much avail, that
   the parents have a certain wish to see their children grow up in
   religion. A stranger falling into such a family, will be amazed to find
   how pervasive and spirit-like this most unethereal, undiffusive kind of
   bliss may be. The smack of appetite will seem to be in the atmosphere
   of the house. It will be as if the gastric nerve of the family were
   become the whole brain. A certain coarseness of feeling and character
   will appear in every thing. The grain will be coarse, both of body and
   soul; and the general expression of manners, faces, and voices, will be
   such as indicates a reduction of grade, in all the finer impulses of
   society, intelligence, and duty. The family affections themselves will
   seem to have fallen back, to make room for the valued bliss of the
   appetites. No matter how much of prayer and regular church-going there
   may be in such a family, the child brought up in it has a most sad
   fortune to bear, in the savoring habit to which it trains him. Nor is
   it only in some high conditioned family, where wealth is steeping
   itself in luxury, that this kind of woe is put upon children. It quite
   as often begins at the coarse, low table of the sensually minded poor.
   These are even most likely of all to live, and teach their children to
   live, for what they may eat. The humble Christian mother, it may be,
   having no luxuries of dress and show to give her children, makes it a
   great point to have them enjoy the feeding of their bodies; and so,
   instead of fining them to a nobler pleasure in the virtues of
   frugality, order, gentle society, and good action, she graduates them
   into just that coarsest sensuality which is the bane of all character,
   for this life and the next.

   It is a much greater point, in this connection, than is commonly
   supposed, that children should be trained to good manners in their
   eating. Good manners are a kind of self-government which operates
   continually to keep the body under, and hold the sensualizing tendency
   of food in check. Animals have no manners, and the higher gift of
   manners is allowed to man, to keep him from the coarseness and lowness
   to which his animal nature would otherwise run. In this view, good
   manners are even a sort of first-stage religion, for the reduction of
   the body. If the child is practiced carefully, at his food, in
   deferring to superiors and seniors; in the restraint of haste, or
   greediness; in the proprieties of positions, and the handsome uses of
   tools; in the limitation of his feeding by his wants, and a
   good-natured submission to restriction when restriction is needed for
   his good; he will not grow sensual in that manner, but his mind will be
   all the while getting sovereignty over the body. Good breeding and
   civility are, in this view, indispensable. The Christian training of
   children, without any care of their manners in these respects, is only
   the training, in fact, of barbarians and savages, in thie houses of
   such as call themselves Christian people.

   There is great importance also, for a similar reason, in the observance
   of a Christian blessing, or giving of thanks at the table. The mere
   form, taken only as a constantly recurring acknowledgment of God and
   the obligations of gratitude, laid on the family by his goodness, is a
   matter of inestimable value. The bare recollection of a higher nature
   and the higher meaning of life, coupled uniformly thus with the order
   of the table, qualifies the lower sensations, and raises them to a kind
   of spiritual dignity It is even a pitiful figure, in this view, which
   the great Franklin makes, when, with so little show of philosophy,
   saying nothing of Christian reverence, he recites, in a manner of
   evident pleasure, the wit of his boyhood: asking his father, at the
   packing of his barrel of meat, why he did not say grace over the whole
   barrel at once, and save the necessity of so many repetitions? These
   repetitions are the very things most wanted. They compose the liturgy
   of the table, and have their value, not in the quantities of meat they
   season, but in the seasoning of the partakers themselves, by so many
   reiterations of their, at least, formal homage and gratitude. At the
   same time there should be much care taken to make these blessings of
   the table more than a form; to connect a real and felt meaning with
   them, and make them the expression of a living and true gratitude in
   all present. Children can be so trained, in this matter, as even to
   miss the flavor of their meat, when no blessing is upon it. What then
   can be expected, in a Christian family, when the children are put to
   their food with no such recognition of God and have their faces turned
   downward always upon it, even as if they were animals? Doubtless the
   blessing may, too often, be a mere form, but it is a form which, apart
   from any conscious glow of sentiment, no Christian family can afford to
   lose.

   Much also may be done for children, by associating subjects, and
   sentiments, and plans of practical charity, with the blessings and
   pleasures of the table. To do this requires no very ingenious methods,
   or deeply studied plans. It will be done almost, of course, if the
   parents themselves are, at all, given to such things; for, in such a
   case, they can hardly fail to speak of the children of the poor, and
   the bitter pains and pinings of their unsatisfied hunger. If the
   appetites of children are eager and easily turned to a habit of
   sensuality, their sympathies also are quick, and their compassions
   wonderfully tender. Let these last be called into play, and kept in
   play, as they may be always by a few simple words of charity, and
   proposed acts of bounty to the children of want, and the former, the
   appetites, will become incentives even habitually, to what is noblest
   in feeling and remotest from a properly sensual character. The body
   itself becomes the interpreter, in such a case, of want, and offers
   itself dutifully to mercy, to be used as its organ.

   Such are a few of the suggestions that require to be noted and
   observed, in the right feeding of children Others will occur to you
   daily, as your work goes on, if only you are really awake to the
   transcendent importance of the subject. Let it never be assumed, for
   one moment, that you are now doing nothing and can be doing nothing for
   your children, because you are only feeding their bodies. A very
   considerable part of your parental charge lies just here; in giving
   your children such a nurture in the body, as makes them superior to the
   body; subordinates the passions, and evens the tempers of the body;
   prepares them to a state of robust and massive healthiness; gives them
   clearer heads, and nobler sentiments of truth; preparing them, in that
   manner, to be good scholars, to have their affectional nature opened
   wide by a general love, to have their perceptive feeling quickened to
   all highest forms of beauty and good, and so to have them ready, more
   and more ready, for a state of eternally unsealed affinity with God.
   There is not any thing, in the highest ranges of their spiritual and
   religious nature, that will not be somehow affected, and powerfully
   too, by the feeding of their bodies. Even their conscience itself,
   which is God's own organ or throne, so to speak, in their nature--the
   most self-asserting and, as we should say, most indestructible of all
   their powers--can be made to ring out clear and true, like a bell in
   the night, or it can be stifled and choked, so as scarcely to be
   audible--all by the mere feeding of the body. So there is a feeding
   that makes a manly life, and a feeding that makes a mean, weak, ignoble
   life. So there is a feeding which makes room for God, and a feeding
   that leaves him no vacant space or chamber to fill. The question here
   is not, exactly, what converting power is exerted or not exerted, what
   Christian truth impressed or not impressed, but it is what kind of
   metal, in fact, the future man is to be made of; for all that is
   entered, thus early, into the feeding habit of the body, is about as
   really composite and substantial as that which is prepared in the
   inborn properties of nature itself. This feeding nurture, if we take
   the real sense of it, is to grow in good or bad affinities and
   possibilities; to grow a body under the soul, or over it; to form a
   good or bad staple, in the substance of the man, which is going to
   remain unchanged, by all his future changes and transformations, about
   as certainly as his face, or gait, and in much the same degree.

   To complete this view of the bodily nurture and keeping, something
   ought also to be said of personal neatness, and also of dress, in both
   of which the bodily habit is concerned, though in a more external and
   less decisive way.

   As regards the matter of personal neatness, I will only suggest the
   very close relationship of association between it, as a habit, and the
   spiritual habit of the soul in religion. In this holy endeavor of
   grace, or religion, the soul aspires to be clean. Conscious of great
   defilement in sin, it hears a call to come and be made white, even as
   the snow. It begins with the prayer--"Create in me a clean heart, O
   God," and the longing after purity and a clean consciousness before
   Him, draws it on. To be washed, purified, made clean--under these, and
   such like terms of aspiration, it is exercised, in all the keeping of
   the life, that it may incur no spot or stain, and be effectually purged
   from all most subtle defilements. In this view, bodily neatness, or the
   cleanly keeping of the person, is a kind of outward religion going
   before, preparing tastes, images, sensibilities, habits that make the
   soul more akin to religion, readier to feel the obligation, and labor
   in the purifying endeavor. And, in this view, the mother, the poor
   Christian mother, who has nothing of this world's good, as we commonly
   speak, to put upon her children, has yet one of the best goods of all.
   which she may, without fail, bestow, viz: a cleanly habit. She gives
   them a great mark of honor, and sets them in a way of great hope and
   preferment, as regards all highest character, when she trains them to a
   felt necessity of neatness and order. On the other hand, if she allows
   them to grow up in a filthy and loose habit, crowding all bounty upon
   them, and breathing out her soul beside, in prayer and fasting on their
   account, it will be wonderful if they have much sensibility to the
   defilements of the soul, or come to God in any determinate longings
   after purity. Nay, it will be wonderful if the dirt upon their persons
   and clothing is not found upon their conscience also, and if they do
   not go on to live the disorder in their souls, which has been the
   untidy element of their bodies.

   There is also this very peculiar excellence in neatness, that it is not
   ambitious, not for show, but more for what it is in itself--an honest
   kind of benefit, or good, that brings along no bad or false motive with
   it. Hence there is no temptation in the practice. Honor and ornament
   and grace of poverty, as it often is, it is only the more truly such,
   that it simply fulfills and perpetuates a fixed necessity, looking
   after no reward, save what it is to itself. Formed to such a habit, and
   scarcely conscious of it, the children grow into a kind of pure
   simplicity in good, which is itself one of the finest symbols and
   surest outward preparations of the religious life and character.

   The subject of dress, taken as related to religious character in youth,
   is one of transcendent importance, but as I am treating mostly of what
   is to be lone for children, in the few first years of their training, I
   shall dismiss the subject with only a few suggestions, such as my
   particular purpose appears to require.

   There is this very singular and striking contrast between animals and
   men, that they are born dressed, and these to be dressed; while yet the
   fact of a dress is equally necessary to both. The object of the
   distinction appears to be, to allow, in the latter case, a certain
   liberty of form and appearance, even as there is given a grand central
   liberty of life and character within. It allows us to choose what shall
   be added to finish out our form, or appearing; and it is a singular
   fact, in this connection, that we always take our dress to be, in some
   sense, ourselves; just as if it grew out of our bodily substance; so
   that we feel ourselves ordinarily limited and hampered, in behavior and
   manners, in thought and feeling, and fancy, by the dress we have on.
   The consciousness of being badly, or half absurdly dressed, makes us
   awkward. We can not sit down to write in a sordid and tattered
   dress--thought can not sufficiently respect itself, the feeling nature
   and the taste and the fancy can not be in trim in such a guise. As a
   king would not like to appear in the dress of a convict, so they ask a
   dress that more respects their quality. There is a fearfully powerful
   reaction, thus, in dress, upon what is inmost and deepest in character.
   And so much is there in this fact, that every Christian parent should
   be fully alive to it, even from the first; understanding that the child
   is going to enlarge his consciousness, so as, in a sense, to take in
   his dress and be configured to it--inverting the common order of speech
   on the subject, when we talk of cut ting the dress to the child; for it
   is equally true, in a different sense, that the child will be cut to
   his dress.

   Hence the dreadful mischief done to a child, by what may be called the
   dolling of it; that is, by dressing, or over-dressing it, just to
   please, or amuse, or, what is really more true, to tickle a certain
   weak and foolish pride in the parents. What meantime has become of that
   most tender and godly concern, which belongs to the Christian charge
   put upon them, in the gift of this same child? It takes whole months,
   how often, to get the child's looks and dress into such trim that it
   can be offered by them for baptism, making the desired impression; in
   which it turns out that the chief object to them, of baptism, is the
   exhibition of the doll they have been dressing; not to get the seal and
   sacrament of God's mercy upon it, as a creature in the heritage of
   their own corrupted life.

   And then, afterwards, the dressing goes on still, in faithful keeping
   with its sad beginning. In a few days this same child appears, marching
   the streets, in the figure of a little gentleman with a cane; or if it
   be a daughter, hung with necklaces and chains, and set off with as much
   of finery as can well be supported--visibly conscious, in either case,
   of the fine show being made; even!. the foolish parents, it might fitly
   despise, were just now admiring their doll at home, and praising to
   itself the pretty figure it made!

   Is this now the dress of a Christian child? is this such a dress as a
   properly Christian nurture prescribes? What is this child training for,
   but simply to be a fop, or fashionist, or fool? This taste for show,
   and finery, and flattery--what is it but the beginning of all
   irreligion? and what will the after life be, but the continuance of
   this beginning?

   Just contrary to this, whoever will bring up a child for God, must put
   him, at the very first, into God's modes and measures. The real
   question of dress, is what shall be put upon this child, to make it
   feel most like a Christian--what will give him the finest feeling with
   the least of show and vanity? What will leave him in a state most
   natural. and simple, and farthest from affectation? What will be most
   like to the putting on of Christ himself, his righteousness, beauty,
   truth, meekness, and dignity? Dress your child for Christ, if you will
   have him a Christian; bring every thing, in the training, even of his
   body, to this one final aim, and it will be strange, if the Christian
   body you give him does not contain a Christian soul.
     __________________________________________________________________

IV.
THE TREATMENT THAT DISCOURAGES PIETY.

   "Fathers provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
   discouraged."--Colossians, iii. 21.

   DISCOURAGED, the apostle means, in good; that is, in worthy purposes
   and pious endeavors. Nothing will more certainly put a child in a
   discouraged feeling, than to be angered by a parent's ill-nature and
   abuse. The anger is, most certainly, far enough from being itself a
   state of discouragement; but anger is a passion that can not hold long
   and the after state into which it subsides, in the case of inferiors
   and dependants, is commonly a giving up to the bad, a passionless and
   low desperation, that is equivalent to a general surrender of all high
   aims and aspirations.

   In this view, it would not be altogether amiss, and certainly no
   improper use of the apostle's words, if I were to offer under them a
   lecture to parents, on the provoking ways of treatment and government.
   But I have chosen them for a different purpose, and one that is more
   inclusive, viz: to introduce and give sanction to a discourse on--

   The discouragement of piety in children; the ways in which it is
   discouraged, and the great care necessary to avoid a mistake so
   injurious.

   I speak here, of course, to parents who really desire the spiritual
   welfare of their children. Nothing is farther off from their design,
   than to push their children away from Christ into a state of alienated
   and discouraged feeling. And yet they do it, very often, by faults of
   management not suspected, and never afterwards discovered; unless,
   possibly, after the injury is done, when it can no longer be repaired.

   It becomes, in this view, a very serious and practically important
   question, how, or by what methods, Christian parents, unawares to
   themselves and contrary to their really good intentions, discourage
   piety in their children? Let us see if we can partially answer the
   question.

   We begin, then, where the apostle begins with his remonstrance. His
   language is particularly addressed to fathers; for he seems to have in
   view the case of children, who are in the more advanced stages of
   childhood, or in what we call the period of youth. And yet the language
   is equally applicable to the case of mothers and very little children.
   It might not be wholly amiss for a half-grown lad, or youth, who has
   violated his father's feelings, by some really base act of crime, or
   disobedience, to see, by the smoke of his indignant passion, how deeply
   his right sensibility is revolted. That will never discourage him in
   any thing good. It might even rouse his moral nature, when nothing less
   violent would suffice. The father will really discourage good in his
   son, only when he stings him with a sense of injustice, and keeps him
   in a wounded feeling, by his own ungoverned, groundless passion. But in
   the case of the mother, dealing with her very young child, there is no
   place even for so much as a feeling of impatience. No crisis occurs
   that she has any right to carry by a storm. And yet there are many
   mothers who breed a climate of 5torms for their children to grow up in,
   even from the first. They make an element of pettishness and passion,
   and call it Christian nurture to maintain a kind of quarrel with their
   children, from infancy upward. We do not commonly conceive that the
   children are discouraged, thus, in the matter of piety; but the real
   fact is, that their better, higher nature, quite worn down by such
   treatment, sinks at last into a kind of atrophy, which is the essence
   of all discouragement. By the time they are passed through this first
   chapter of torment, their faces even have begun to take on a forlorn
   expression, as if their well-abused feeling had been quite choked off
   from every thing hopeful or good. Nothing is more beautiful than the
   God-ward affinities, and glad impulses to good, in a childish soul; but
   when it has once been kiln-dried in this hot furnace of motherly or
   fatherly passion, there is no more any putting forth after the divine.
   A kind of indifference, or sullen prejudice, sets off the heart from
   God, and the gentle affinities close up under the stupor of so great
   early abuse and discouragement.

   Children are also discouraged and hardened to good by too much of
   prohibition. There is a monotony of continuous, ever sounding,
   prohibition, which is really awful. It does not stop with ten
   commandments, like the word of Sinai but it keeps the thunder up, from
   day to day, saying always thou shalt not do this, nor this, not this,
   till, in fact, there is really nothing left to be done. The whole
   enjoyment, use, benefit, of life is quite used up by the prohibitions.
   The child lives under a tilt-hammer of commandment, beaten to the
   ground as fast as he attempts to rise. All commandments, of course, in
   such a strain of injunction, come to sound very much alike, and one
   appears to be about as important as another. And the result is that, as
   they are all in the same emphasis, and are all equally annoying, the
   child learns to hate them all alike, and puts them all away. He could
   not think of heartily accepting them all, and it would even be a kind
   of irreverence to make a selection. Nothing so fatally worries a child,
   as this fault of over-commandment. The study should be rather to forbid
   as few things as possible, and then to soundly enforce what is
   forbidden. Such kind of prohibitions the child will even like, and will
   be al] the happier, that he has something good to observe. But nothing
   can be more impotent, in the way of authority, than the din of a
   continual prohibition. Even the commandments of God will, in such a
   case, be robbed of all just authority, by the custom of a general
   weariness and distaste; in which all highest man. dates are leveled to
   equality with the pettiest and most useless restraints.

   Again, it is a great discouragement to piety in children, when they are
   governed in a hard, unfeeling, way or in a manner of force and
   overbearing absolutism Any thing which puts the child aloof from the
   parent. or takes away the confidence of love and sympathy, will as
   certainly be a wall to shut him away from God. If his Christian father
   is felt only as a tyrant, he will seem to have a tyrant in God's name
   to bear; and that will be enough to create a sullen prejudice against
   all sacred things. Nor is the case at all better when the child is
   cowed under fear of such a parent, and reduced to a feeling of dread or
   abject submission. There is a beautiful courage in children as respects
   approach to God, when God is not presented as a bugbear; and this
   natural state of courage, is just that which makes the time of
   childhood so ingenuously open to religion. But if their courage, even
   toward their father, is already broken down into fear and servile
   submission, they will only think of God with as much greater fear, and
   shrink from all the claims of piety with a kind of abject recoil, as
   from a thing forbidden. No gentleness even of Christ will suffice, in
   such a case, to win, or reassure the broken courage of the soul. I
   recall a family in which the father, known as a man of condition and of
   no little repute for his Christian good works, brought up a large
   family of boys to be ruled at a distance. He addressed them in a kind
   of imperious, unfeeling way; not with any violence of manner, but with
   a stern-faced grin that seemed to say, "it is well that you fear me."
   And fear him they most certainly did--fear was the element in which
   they grew. And the result was that having no self-respect, and living
   under a law of mere suppression, they fell into base immoralities from
   their childhood, ant were never afterwards known, even one of them, to
   have so much as a thought of piety.

   Another and even more common way of discouraging children ill matters
   of piety is by an over-exacting manner, or by an extreme difficulty of
   being pleased. Children love approbation, and are specially
   disappointed, when they fail of it in their meritorious endeavors.
   Their chagrin is nevermore complete, in fact, than when, having set
   themselves to any purpose of well-doing, they are still repulsed by a
   manner of fault-finding at the end, and blamed on account of some
   trivial defect which they did not know, and would really have tried to
   avoid. Some parents appear to think it a matter of true faithfulness,
   that they be not too easily pleased, lest their children should take up
   loose impressions of the strictness of duty. They do not consider how
   they would fare themselves, if God were to make a point of treating
   them in the same manner. His manner with them is exactly opposite. He
   perceives that he will only repel them, by making it a matter of
   difficulty to please him, and that he could never draw them on, if he
   did not yield them his smile under great faults and shortcomings, and
   did not give them the testimony that they please him, when they are a
   great way off from his own scale of perfection. In all which we may
   readily see how great discouragement is put upon children, in all their
   good attempts, when their parents will not allow themselves to be
   pleased with any thing they do. Possibly they are withheld by scruples
   of orthodoxy. If so, the mischief is only the greater. What can win a
   child to the attempt to please God, when his parents dare not suffer so
   much as a thought of the possibility in him, and, for the same reason,
   dare not so much as approve him themselves. Such kind of orthodoxy can
   not be too soon forsaken, or too earnestly repented of.

   Closely akin to this, is the fault of holding displeasure too long, and
   yielding it with too great difficulty. It is right that children, doing
   wrong, should encounter some kind of treatment that indicates
   displeasure. But the displeasure should not take the manner of a
   grudge, and hold on after the wrong is visibly felt and repented of. On
   the contrary, there should even be a hastening toward the child, in
   glad recognitions and cordial greetings, when the tokens only of
   relenting begin to appear; even as the prodigal's father is
   represented, in the parable, as discovering him, in his return, when he
   is yet a great way off, and advancing to meet and embrace him. By this
   tender figure God is shown us, and the holy generosity of his
   fatherhood is represented. We see that he is only the more ready to be
   pleased, because of his magnanimity; holding no resentments, putting
   off the feeling of offense at the earliest moment, and the cheapest
   possible rate. Nay, He will even take our good by anticipation;
   accepting us for what we ask, before he can accept us for what we are.
   Well is it for those parents who think it incumbent on them, to hold
   their displeasure till the culprit is sufficiently scathed by it, if
   they do not hold it just a little too long; turning, thus, even his
   repentance into a sullen aversion, and setting it in his feeling, that
   there is the same heavy tariff of displeasure still to be paid, when he
   would forsake his sins and turn himself to God. When will it be learned
   that penance is no fit beginning of piety?

   And here let me speak of the very great danger, after a time of
   discipline, that the parent may hold his displeasure too long; as he
   certainly will, if there is any ugly feeling, or wicked, natural
   resentment in him. Thus Jean Paul beautifully says:--"A punishment is
   scarcely of such importance to a child as the succeeding quarter of an
   hour, and the transition to forgiveness. After the storm, the seed
   finds the soil warm and softened; the terror and hatred of the
   punishment are now past, which before resisted and struggled against
   the word, and gentle instruction finds its way, and brings healing with
   it, as honey assuages the sting of bees, and oil the pain of a wound.
   In this hour we can say much, if we use the utmost gentleness of voice,
   and by the manifestation of our own pain, soothe that of the child. But
   every continuance of wintry anger is poisonous. Mothers easily fall
   into this prolongation of punishment. This continuance of anger; this
   would-be punishment of pretending a diminution of love, either fails to
   be comprehended by the child, because he is wholly immersed in the
   present and so misses its effect, or else he becomes satisfied with a
   deprivation of the signs of love, and learns to do without it; or else
   he is embittered by the continuance of punishment for a sin which he
   has already buried. Through this prolongation of harshness, we lose
   that beautiful and touching transition into forgiveness, which, by
   coming slowly and after a long period, only loses its power." [17]

   Hasty and false accusations again are a great discouragement to piety
   in children. Their good feeling, or intention, appears to be rated low
   by their parents, when they are put under the ban of dishonor, by false
   and groundless imputations; and they are very likely, as the next
   thing, to show that they are no better than they were taken to be. On
   this account, a wise parent will be religiously careful of all
   volunteer and random charges of blame, lest he may discourage fatally
   all pious or ingenuous aspirations by them; for to batter self-respect,
   or insult the sense of character, thus gratuitously, is the surest way
   possible to break every natural charm of virtue and religion. The
   effect is scarcely better where acknowledged faults are exaggerated,
   and set off in colors of derision. It will do for a parent to be just,
   severely just; for, by that means, he will best impress the sacred
   severity of principle. God is just in all his charges and reproofs; but
   there is no manner of excess or spirit of exaggeration in them. And
   exactly this it is which makes his kindness so beautiful, so inspiring
   to our courage, so attractive to our love. But harsh justice,
   exaggerated justice, is injustice. When a child, therefore, is
   persecuted by railing words, cauterized by satire, blamed without
   reason or measure for faults not easily corrected, the severity is
   really unprincipled as well as unfriendly, and is only the more
   dreadfully mischievous, that it takes on airs of piety, and bears the
   Christian name. How can he be drawn by that which has no grace of
   allowance, and yields no sympathy to the struggles of his infirmity?
   How many poor children are beaten out of all their natural affinities
   for good, by just this kind of cruelty! They had parents who, in fault
   of the better evidences of love and patience, thought to make up the
   deficit in being at least severe enough to be Christian; which, though
   it was an easy grace for them--the only grace at their command--was,
   alas! fearfully hard on the subjects.

   We bring into view a different class of discouraging causes, when we
   speak of that anxiousness, or always miserable concern, for children,
   by which some parents keep them in a continual torment of suppression.
   We have really no right to allow a properly anxious feeling any where.
   Anxiety is a word of unbelief, or unreasoning dread. Full faith in God
   puts it at rest; any solid conviction of necessity and right is
   chloroform to the pain of it. And we have the less right to be anxious,
   that it is a feeling which destroys the comfort of others whenever and
   wheresoever it appears. Only to be in a room with an anxious person,
   though a stranger, is enough to make one positively unhappy; for the
   manner, the nervous unsteadiness, and worry, and shift, are so
   irresistibly expressive, that no effort of silence, or suppression, is
   able to conceal the torment. To go a journey thus with an anxious
   person, is about the worst kind of pilgrimage. What then is the woe put
   upon a hapless little one or child, who is shut up day by day and year
   by year, to the always fearing look and deprecating whine, the
   questioning, protesting, super-cautionary keeping of a nervously
   anxious mother. If the child catches the infection himself, he will
   never come to any thing; never dare any great purpose that belongs to a
   man, or a Christian. And if he does not catch it, which is more
   probable, then he will pitch himself into a campaign of will and
   passion with all that kind of control, a good deal less rational,
   probably, than the control itself. Simply to enter the house will raise
   a breeze in his feeling, and he will be worried and fretted, till he
   has somehow made his escape. Nothing is more opposite to the hopeful
   and free spirit of childhood, and nothing will so dreadfully overcast
   the sky of childhood, as the sad kind of weather it is always making.
   It worries the child in every putting forth and play, lest he should
   somehow be hurt; takes him away, or would, from every contact with the
   great world's occasions, that would give fit schooling to his manhood.
   And then, since the child will most certainly learn, at last, how
   little reason there was in the eternal distress of so many fears and
   imaginations of harm, he is sure to be issued finally, in a feeling of
   confirmed disrespect, which is the end of all good influence or advice.
   And then it will be so much the worse, if the anxiety whose bagpipe
   melody has been the torment of his early days, has shown itself in the
   same unregulated way in matters of religion. Nothing will set a child
   farther off from religion, or make him more utterly incapable of
   sympathy with it, than to have had it put upon him in a whining and
   misgiving way, in all his moods and occasions. No! there must be a
   certain courage in maternity and the religion of it. The child must be
   wisely trusted to danger, and shown how to conquer it. A pleasure must
   be taken in giving him a certain range of adventure; and he must see
   that his courage and capacity are confided in. And then it must be
   seen, in the same way, that his truth, fidelity, piety, are as much
   expected as his manhood. In a certain good sense, the mother may be
   anxious for him, burdened in her prayers in his behalf, but she must
   take on hope and confidence nevertheless, and show that courage in him,
   as regards all good endeavor, is met and supported by courage in
   herself.

   Again, it will be found that piety is very commonly discouraged in
   children, by giving them tests of character that are inappropriate to
   their age. There is an immense cruelty put upon children here, by
   parents who have really no design but simply to be faithful. Their
   child, for example, loses his temper in some matter in which he is
   crossed; and the conclusion is forthwith sprung upon him that he has a
   bad heart, and is certainly no Christian child. Whereupon he ceases to
   pray; or, if he is put to it as a form, does it with an averted and
   reluctant feeling, as if the wrong were conclusive against his prayers.
   It is only necessary to ask how the father, how the mother would
   themselves fare, tested by the same rule? If irritation, passion, any
   loss of temper, is conclusive against the little being who has scarcely
   begun to be practiced in self-government, how is it with them who ought
   by this time to be immovably fixed in their serenity? So if the child
   has played, or shown some eagerness for play on Sunday, has not the
   father, or the mother, who indeed has outgrown all such care for play,
   been delving still, even in the church worship itself, and at the table
   of communion, in schemes, and projects, and works, that thrust out, for
   the time, even these most sacred things from any due place in their
   attention? If sometimes a mere child is carried away by exuberant life
   and playfulness, is that worse than to be cankered by the love of gain,
   or by the severe and sober sins of a grasping, eager, worldly manhood?
   The sins of children are ingenuous and open, and on just that account
   are to be less severely judged. The sins of manhood are sins of
   gravity, prudence, self-seeking, always contriving to wear some
   plausible aspect of sobriety and dignity; but they ale not any the more
   consistent with piety on that account. We do not judge that any one is
   of course without piety, or is no Christian, because he has faults, or
   failings, or even because he is overtaken by sins; why then should a
   child be condemned, as having no true evidence of piety, just because
   he is only a little less under the power of evil than his Christian
   father and mother? God, I am certain, judges children's faults in no
   such manner, and therefore it is never to be assumed by us that they
   are without piety, because they falter in some things. If they only
   falter, seeming still to love what is good, and struggle ingenuously
   after it, there is just as good reason to hope that their hearts have
   been touched by the Spirit of God, as there is that the hearts of older
   persons have been, when they are groping always in the seventh chapter
   of the Romans, having a mind to serve God, but always failing in the
   service. The child must be judged or tested in the same general way as
   the adult. If he is wholly perverse, has no spirit of duty, turns away
   from all religious things, it will not discourage any thing good in him
   to tell him that he is without piety; but if he loves religious things,
   wants to be in them, tries after a good and obedient life, he is to be
   shown how tenderly God regards him, how ready he is to forgive him; and
   when he stumbles or falls, how kindly he will raise him up, how
   graciously help him to stand. Nor does it make any difference that no
   time is remembered, when he seemed to be brought unto God, by a great
   change of experience, such as adult persons are often the subjects of.
   He ought not to be the subject of any such change; and if he is
   properly trained, will not be. As regards the testing of his condition
   or character, nothing at all depends on that. It will even be a good
   sign for him that he has always seemed to love Christ; and it will be
   no proper evidence to the contrary, that he sometimes falters. Children
   are very ingenuous, and they may even show some disinclination, for a
   time, to all religious duties, without creating any such evidence.
   Adults often suffer such disinclination, when they do not allow it to
   appear. The sum of all I would say here is, let children be judged as
   children, and let them not be cruelly discouraged in all thoughts of
   love to God, because they falter, as older people do; only in a
   different manner.

   I must also speak of another and more general mode of discouragement,
   in what may be called the holding back, or holding aloof system, by
   which children are denied an early recognition of their membership in
   the church, and an admission to the Lord's table. I have spoken of this
   membership already, in another place, and shall also speak, hereafter,
   of the supper in its more positive uses. What I now refer to, more
   especially, is the negatively bad or discouraging effect thrown upon
   their piety, by these methods of detention, or exclusion. The child
   giving evidence, however beautiful, of his piety, is still kept back
   from the fellowship and table of Christ, for the simple defect of
   years. As if years were one of the Scripture evidences of grace.
   Sometimes the difficulty is that he can speak of no experience, or
   change, such as we call conversion; and sometimes, if he can, that he
   is yet too young to be confided in. And so it turns out, after all that
   is said of the membership initiated in baptism, that nothing is
   practically made of it, or allowed to be made of it. The membership it
   creates is only a disjunctive conjunction; words for a show, answered
   by no conditions or consequences of fact. The poor child still is
   virtually counted or assumed to be an alien, required to be converted
   in just the same fashion as all heathens are, and to show the fact by
   the same kind of evidences. The little, saintly daughter, for example,
   of a venerable Presbyterian minister, aching for a place at the Lord's
   table, goes to her father, after being several times postponed by him
   and by the session, asking--"father, when shall I be old enough to be a
   Christian?" He and his session, alas! did not believe that of such is
   the kingdom of heaven. Had the dear child gone to Jesus, she would most
   certainly have gotten a different answer. True, the religious
   experience of children is of course small--only not as small, or
   unreliable, by any means, as the experience commonly is of an adult
   convert only a few weeks old. Besides, what is the use of a fold, if
   the lambs are to be kept outside till it is seen whether they can stand
   the weather?

   The chilling, desolating effect of this very unnatural and cruel
   practice, will be understood without difficulty. No plan could be
   devised for the discouragement of piety in children, that would be more
   certain of its object. They are only mocked and tantalized by their
   baptism itself. They are thrust away and kept aloof from the communion
   of Christ, for reasons that make it impossible for them to be reliably
   Christian. And so their courage is broken down, and all their religious
   longings are crippled, just when they most want grace and sympathy to
   draw them on.

   The remedy is plain. In the first place, there ought to be some
   exercise or service in every church, to which the baptized children may
   be called, in common with the adult members, there to be recognized in
   a begun relationship. They should be formally addressed and prayed
   with. But the chief exercise, in which they can as heartily partake as
   any, should be the singing of simple hymns to Christ, such as are used
   by the Moravian brethren for this purpose. In this manner, too, they
   will quite as much edify, as be edified, by the adult brethren. Their
   childish sympathies will, in this manner, be laid hold of at the
   earliest moment. They will perceive that so much, at least, of worship
   and religion is open to them as to others, and will begin to feel
   themselves at home among the brethren.

   In the next place, there should be some arrangement, in which it is
   understood that children, piously disposed, though not confirmed or
   accepted formally as members on their own account, may be allowed,
   either on consultation with the pastor or without, to come to the
   Lord's table for the time, on the score of their initial membership in
   baptism, and their hopefully gracious character. In this manner, some
   confidence will be shown that they are going to claim their place, in
   full church relations, as soon as they are better matured in character
   and evidences; and this kind of confidence will have great power with
   them, to encourage and support their struggles, and help them forward
   into an established Christian life.

   And then, once more, no child should ever be kept back from a complete
   and formal, or formally professed, membership in the body of Christ,
   simply because of his age. Some children will give more reliable
   evidence of Christian character at seven years of age than others at
   fourteen. Were every thing as it should be, and as the most genuine
   ideas of baptism and Christian nurture suppose, nearly all the subjects
   would be found in the church, as brethren accepted, by the time they
   are twelve years old, and the greater part of them before they are ten
   years old.

   While the church cooperates, in this manner, cherishing the baptized
   children as her own, it is understood, of course, that parents are to
   be engaged in putting forward their children and preparing them to bear
   the Christian profession. They are not to assume that the matter of
   true prudence here is all on one side, the side of detention; as if
   there were nothing to be sure of, but that their children do not get on
   too fast. If that were all, it were the easiest thing in the world to
   settle every question, by the argument of delay; which negative grace,
   alas! is about the only kind of function some parents are equal to. No,
   this grip of detention is not any so easy and safe kind of duty. It may
   put the child by his time for life. It may fatally discourage all his
   beginnings of godliness, and may so far choke his growth in good that
   he will never be recovered.

   The matters which I have gathered up in this discourse, it is not to be
   denied, my brethren, make a melancholy picture. When we discover in how
   many ways even Christian parents themselves discourage the piety of
   their children, it ceases to be any wonder that they so often turn out
   badly, and come to a sad figure in their life. There are very few
   children brought up in Christian families, who do not, at some time,
   show a particular openness and tenderness to the calls of religion.
   These flowering times of piety, ought to be all setting times of fruit,
   and 1 verily believe that thee would be, if the flowers were not broken
   off by some rough handling, or discouraging treatment. And it should
   scarcely be any wonder that so many children of Christian parents come
   forward into life, in a dulled, uncaring mood; as if their conscience
   were under some paralysis, or as if they had somehow fallen out of all
   sense and sentiment of religion. The reason is, how often, that all
   their religious affinities have been battered by parental
   discouragement. They think of religion, if they think of it at all,
   only as a kind of forbidden fruit; and since it has never been for
   them, why should it ever be?

   Here, too, is the solution of, alas! how many cases, where Christian
   parents speak, with great sadness, of a time when this or that child,
   now utterly submerged under the world, or the world's vices, was
   greatly exercised in matters of religion, fond of prayer, wanting even
   to be admitted to Christ's table. How many children have been
   discouraged, kept back, with just the same effect! Treated as if their
   piety was impossible, how could it become a fact? O, if they had been
   wisely and skillfully encouraged, assisted, led along, how different
   probably the state and character in which they would now be found!

   A heavy shade is here thrown, too, upon all those sorrowful regrets in
   which Christian parents bewail what they call the mystery of their lot,
   in having children grown up to a prayerless and godless maturity. Alas!
   it is too easy, in most cases, to account for this mystery. When we see
   in how many ways children may be thrown off from the courses of holy
   obedience, or discouraged in them, we have a strong ground of
   presumption that the mystery deplored by their parents is not as deep
   as they suppose. For myself, when I look over this field of misuse,
   misconception, misdirection, seeing in how many and subtle ways
   children are turned off from Christ, when they might be and ought to be
   drawn to his fold, it is no longer a wonder that they go astray; it
   would only be a greater wonder if they met the call of Christ more
   faithfully, and stood in a character more answerable to the privilege
   he gives them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [17] Levana iii.  65.
     __________________________________________________________________

V.
FAMILY GOVERNMENT.

   "One that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection
   with all gravity."--1 Timothy, iii. 4.

   TO BE a Christian bishop, whether in a clergy of one order or of three,
   is to be set in a high office, demanding high qualifications. What may
   be taken as qualifications, the apostle is here specifying; and among
   the rest, he names the character evinced by maintaining a good and
   sound government in the house. "For if a man know not how to rule his
   own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?" A very
   singular test, in one view, for a Christian bishop; one that passes by
   the matter of learning and eloquence, and church reputation, laying
   hold, instead, of a gift in which some very ordinary men, and not a few
   ordinary women, excel. And with good reason; for, in fact, how very
   much alike, in the elements of merit and success, are all that purchase
   to themselves a good degree, in whatever rank, or sphere--alike in
   fidelity, order, patience, steadiness, attention, application to the
   charge that is given them. Nay, when the apostle drops in thoughtfully
   what he takes to be the same thing in effect, as ruling one's house
   well, viz: "the having his children in subjection with all gravity,"
   the words themselves, appear to have a sound of character and office in
   them, as if spoken of a bishop with his flock. And what indeed is the
   house but a little primary bishopric under the father, taking oversight
   thereof?

   Family Government, then, is the subject here suggested for discussion.
   And we naturally endeavor--

   I To ascertain what is the true conception of family government.

   Of course it is to be government; about that there ought to be no
   hesitation. It is not to be a mere nursing, or dressing, or
   provisioning agency; not to be an exhorting, advising, consulting
   relationship; not to be a lavishing of devotion, or parental
   self-sacrifice; but the radical constitutive idea, that in which it
   becomes family government, is that it governs, uses authority,
   maintains law and rules, by a binding and loosing power, over the moral
   nature of the child. Parents, it would sometimes appear, fall into a
   practical ambiguity here--as if the governing power were a kind of
   severity, or harsh assumption; not perceiving that, by common consent,
   we speak of an ungoverned family as the synonym of a disorderly,
   wretched, and dishonored, if not ruined, family. There is no greater
   cruelty, in fact, than this same false tenderness, which is the bane of
   so many families. There is a kind of cruelty indeed, which is exactly
   opposite, and misses the idea of government on the other side, viz:
   that brutish manner of despotic will and violence, which makes no
   appeal to the moral nature at all, driving straight by, upon the fears,
   in a battery of force. And yet, whether even this be really more cruel
   in its effects, than the false tenderness just named, is a fair subject
   of doubt. The true idea, that which makes the domestic order and state
   so beneficent, is that it is to be a state of government; a state where
   love has authority, and presides ill the beneficent order of law.

   But when we have reached this point, that family government is to
   govern, we shall find that multitudes of parents who assume the
   Christian name, have yet no practical sense of the intensely religious
   character of the house, or the domestic and family state. They go into
   their office loosely, and without any conception, for the most part, of
   what their authority means. This, I will now undertake to show, drawing
   out especially the points in which they most commonly seem to fall
   below the real sense of their office, in the opinions they hold
   concerning it.

   First of all, their family government is never conceived, in its true
   nature, except when it is regarded as a vicegerent authority, set up by
   God, and ruling in his place. Instead of creating us outright, God has
   seen fit to give us existence under laws of reproduction; having it for
   his object, in the family order and relationship, to set us forth,
   under a kind of experience in the small, and in terms of sense, that
   faithfully typify our wider relationship to Him, the eternal Father and
   invisible Ruler of the worlds. We are infants too, men and women in the
   small, that we may be as flexible in our will as possible. Our parents,
   if they are godly themselves, as by the supposition they will be, are
   to personate God, in the double sense of bearing his natural and moral
   image before us, ever close at hand; and also in the right of authority
   with which they are clothed. And, that they may have us at the greatest
   advantage, it is given them to clothe us, and feed us, and bathe us,
   day and night, in the unsparing and lavish attentions of their love;
   enjoying our enjoyments, and even their own sacrifices for us. First,
   the mother has us, at her bosom, as a kind of nursing Providence.
   Perused by touch and by the eyes, her soul of maternity, watching for
   that look and bending ever to it, raises the initial sense of a divine
   something in the world; and when she begins to speak her soft
   imperative, putting a little decision into the tones of her love, she
   makes the first and gentlest possible beginning of authority. And then
   the stiffer tension of the masculine word, connected with the wider,
   rougher providence of a father's masculine force, follows in a stouter
   mode of authority, and the moral nature of the child, configured
   thereto, answers faithfully in a rapidly developed sense of obligation.
   The parents are to fill, in this manner, an office strictly religious;
   personating God in the child's feeling and conscience, and bending it,
   thus, to what, without any misnomer, we call a filial piety. So that
   when the unseen Father and Lord is Himself discovered, there is to be a
   piety made ready for him; a kind of house-religion, that may widen out
   into the measures of God's ideal majesty and empire. Hence the
   injunction, "Children obey your parents in the Lord." They could not
   make a beginning with ideas of God, or with God as an unseen Spirit;
   therefore they had parents given them in the Lord--the Lord to be in
   them, there to personate and finite himself, and gather to such human
   motherhood and fatherhood, a piety, transferable to Himself, as the
   knowledge of his nobler, unseen Fatherhood arrives.

   Again, it is another point, very commonly overlooked, or forgotten,
   that parental government is genuine, only as it bears rule for the same
   ends that God Himself pursues, in the religious order of the world.
   True family government will be just as religious as His, neither more
   nor less. It will have exactly the same ends and no other. Just here,
   accordingly, is the main root of mischief and failure in the government
   of Christian families. The parents are not Christian enough to think of
   bearing rule for strictly Christian ends. They drop into a careless,
   irresponsible way, and rule for any thing that happens to chime with
   their own feeling or convenience. They want their children to shine, or
   be honorable, or rich, or brave, or fashionable; so to serve themselves
   in them, or their pride, or their mere natural fondness. They bring in,
   thus, bad motives to corrupt all government, and even to corrupt
   themselves. If they have some care of piety in their government, it is
   a kind of amphibious care, sometimes in one element and sometimes in
   another. They are never truly and heartily in God's ends. And the
   result is that what they do in the name of religion, or to inculcate
   religion, shows their want of appetite, and has really no effect but to
   make both God's authority and theirs irksome. Nothing answers the true
   purpose here, but to bring in all the noblest ideas of truth, and
   forgiveness and self sacrifice, and assert a pitch of virtue in the
   house high enough to be inspiring. The government will then have a
   genuine authority and power, because the rule of God is in it. As it
   rules for God, and with God, God will be in it; otherwise it is mortal
   self-assertion only.

   Closely related is the conviction to be firmly held, that family
   discipline, rightly administered, is to secure, and may secure, a style
   of obedience in the child that amounts to a real piety. If we speak of
   conversion, family government should be a converting ordinance, as
   truly as preaching. For observe and make due account of this single
   fact, that when a child is brought to do any one thing from a truly
   right motive, and in a genuinely right spirit, there is implied in that
   kind of obedience, the acceptance of all best and holiest principle. I
   do not mean, of course, that children are to be made Christians by the
   rod, or by any summary process of requirement. There is no such short
   method of compulsory piety here, as some are reported to have held, or
   put in exercise. But it is not absurd to expect and aim to realize in
   the family, a genuine spirit of obedience; obedience, that is, front
   the principle that God enthrones, and which underlies all piety--just
   what the apostle means, if I understand him rightly, by having children
   "in subjection with all gravity." In the phrase "all gravity," he is
   looking at a kind of obedience that touches the deepest notes of
   principle and character. Contrary to this, there is an obedience
   without principle, which is obedience with all levity; that which is
   paid to mere will and force; that which is another name for fear; that
   which is bought by promises and paid by indulgences; that which makes a
   time-server, or a coward, or a lying pretender as the case may be, and
   not a Christian. This latter--that which makes a Christian--is the aim
   of all true government, and should never be out of sight for an hour.
   Let the child be brought to do right because it is right, and not
   because it is unsafe, or appears badly, to do wrong. In every case of
   discipline for ill-nature, wrong, willfulness, disobedience, be it
   understood, that the real point is carried never till the child is
   softened into love and duty; sorry, in all heartiness, for the past,
   with a glad mind set to the choice of doing right and pleasing God. How
   often is it true that in the successful carrying of such a point,
   (which can not be carried, save by great resources of love and gospel
   life in the parents,) the fact of a converted will is gained. And one
   must be a dull observer of children and their after life, who has not
   many times suspected that just the ones who are said to be converted
   afterwards, and suppose themselves to be, had their wills not seldom
   bowed to this in their childhood, under the government of the house.

   Having so far indicated what is the true idea of family government as a
   Divine institution, let us next inquire--

   II. By what methods it will best fulfill its gracious tnd beneficent
   purposes?

   It is hardly necessary to say that the vicegerent office to be
   maintained, and the gracious ends to be secured, make it indispensable
   that parents should them;3elves be living in the Spirit, and be so
   tempered by their faithful walk, as to have the Christly character on
   them. Nothing but this will so lift their aims, quiet their passions,
   steady their measures and proceedings, as to give them that personal
   authority which is requisite. For this authority of which I speak
   supposes much--so much of grace and piety, that God is expressed in the
   life; so much as to even it in all principle, fasten it in all
   moderation of truth and justice, gladden it in heaven's liberty and
   peace, and, above all, clear it of sanctimony; for if any thing will
   drive a poor child mad with disgust of religion, it is to be tormented
   day and night with the drawlings and mock solemnities of a merely
   sanctimonious piety. Children love the realities, and are worried by
   all shams of character. If then parents can not be deep enough in
   religion to live it naturally, and have it as an element of gladness,
   clear of all sanctimony, it is doubtful whether they might not better
   be even farther off from the semblance of it than they pretend to be.
   Of this one thing they may be sure, that they get no addition of
   personal authority by any thing put on; or by any prescribed longitudes
   of expression. The most profoundly real thing in the world is this
   matter of personal authority. Jesus had it as no other ever had,
   because he had most of reality and divine truth in his character; we
   shall have the same, only as we have the same steady affinities in us,
   and the same Spirit without measure upon us.

   There is also another precondition of authority in parents closely
   related to this; I mean that they be so far entered into the Christian
   order of marriage, as to fulfill gracefully what belongs to the
   relation in which they are set, and show them to the children as doing
   fit honor to each other. By a defect just here, all authority in the
   house is blasted. Thus Dr. Tiersch, in his excellent little treatise on
   the Christian Family Life, says:--"A wife can not weaken the authority
   of the father without undermining her own, for her authority rests upon
   his, and if that of the mother is subordinated to that of the father,
   yet it is but one authority, which can not be weakened in either of the
   two who bear it, without injury to both. The mother, therefore, must
   consider it a matter of family decorum which is not to be broken, never
   even in little matters to contradict the father in the presence of the
   children, except with the reservation of a modest admission of his
   right of decision, and that in cases which admit of no delay. But just
   as much is it the duty of the husband to leave the authority of his
   wife unassailed in the presence of other members of the household; and
   when he is obliged to overrule her objections, to do it in a tender and
   kindly form If he turns to her with roughness and harshness from
   jealousy of his place of rule, it is not only the heart of his wife
   which is estranged from him; with the children, too, intervenes a
   weakening of the moral power, under which they should feel themselves
   placed. If in their presence their mother is blamed as foolish or
   obstinate, and so lowered to the place of a child or a maidservant,
   that sanctity immediately vanishes, which, in the eyes of the children,
   surrounds the heads of both father and mother in common." [18]

   Again it is of the highest importance in family government, that
   parents understand how early it begins--how easily, in fact, the great
   question of rule and obedience may be settled, or well-nigh settled,
   before the time of verbal order and commandment arrives. Thus there is
   what may be fitly called a Christian handling for the infant state,
   that makes a most solid beginning of government. It is the even
   handling of repose and gentle affection, which lays a child down to its
   sleep so firmly, that it goes to sleep as in duty bound; which teaches
   it to feed when food is wanted, not when it can be somehow made uneasy,
   or the mother is uneasy for it; which refuses to wear out the night in
   laborious caresses and coaxings, that only reward the cries they
   endeavor to compose; which places the child so firmly, makes so little
   of the protests of caprice in it, wears a look so gentle and loving,
   and goes on with such evenness of system, that the child feels itself
   to be, all the while, in another will, and that a good will; consenting
   thus, by habit and quietly, to be lapped in authority, lust as it
   consents to breathe, in the lap of nature and her atmospheric laws. And
   so it becomes a thoroughly governed creature, under the mere handling
   elf its infantile age. Neither should it seem that this is, in any
   sense, an exaggeration. For though the government we speak of here is
   silent, and utters for the time no law, there still is law enough
   revealed to feeling in the mere motions and modes of the house. Who is
   ignorant that by jerks of passion, flashes of irritation, unsteady
   changes of caprice and nervousness, fits of self-indulgence, disgusts
   with self and life that are half the time allowed to include the child,
   songs and caresses both of day and night, that are volunteered as much
   to compose the mother's or the nurse's impatience as the child's--who
   is ignorant that an infant, handled in this manner, may be kept in a
   continual fret of torment and ill-nature. Meantime there is, just
   opposite, what a beautiful power of order, and quiet, and happy rule,
   when the motions and modes of the handling are such as token peace,
   repose, firmness, system, confidence, and a steady all-encompassing
   love. Here is law, felt, we may even say, in every touch, entered into
   every sensational experience, confided in, submitted to, with all
   gravity. So that when the time of words arrives, the child is already
   under government, and the question of obedience and order is already
   half settled.

   We come now to the age of language, or the age when words begin to be
   used to express requirement and authority. Indeed this will be done,
   assisted by tones and signs of manner, even before the child itself is
   able to speak.

   And here it is to be noted that much depends upon the tone of command,
   or the kinds of emphasis employed. It is a great mistake to suppose
   that what will make a child stare, or tremble, impresses more
   authority. The violent emphasis, the hard, stormy voice, the menacing
   air, only weakens authority; it commands a good thing as if it were
   only a bad, and fit to be no way impressed, save by some stress of
   assumption. Let the command be always given quietly, as if it had some
   right in itself, and could utter itself to the conscience by some
   emphasis of its own. Is it not well understood that a bawling and
   violent teamster has no real government of his team? Is it not
   practically seen that a skillful commander of one of those huge
   floating cities, moved by steam on our American waters, manages and
   works every motion by the waving of a hand, or by signs that pass in
   silence; issuing no order at all, save in the gentlest undertone of
   voice? So when there is, or is to be, a real order and law in the
   house, it will come of no hard and boisterous, or fretful and termagant
   way of commandment. Gentleness will speak the word of firmness, and
   firmness will be clothed in the airs of true gentleness.

   Nor let any one think that such kind of authority is going to be
   disrespected, or disregarded, because it moves no fright or fear in the
   subjects. That will depend on the fidelity of the parent to what he has
   commanded. How many do we see, who fairly rave in authority, and keep
   the tempest up from morning to night, who never stop to see whether any
   thing they forbid or command is, in fact, observed. Indeed they really
   forget what they have commanded. Their mandates follow so thickly as to
   crowd one another, and even to successively thrust one another out of
   remembrance. And the result is that, by this cannonading of pop-guns,
   the successive pellets of commandment are in turn all blown away. If
   any thing is fit to be forbidden, or commanded, it is fit to be watched
   and held in faithful account. On this it is that the real emphasis of
   authority depends, not on the wind-stress of the utterance. Let there
   be only such and so many things commanded, as can be faithfully
   attended to--these in a gentle and firm voice, as if their title to
   obedience lay in their own merit--and then let the child be held to a
   perfectly inevitable and faithful account; and, by that time, it will
   be seen that order and law have a stress of their own, and a power to
   rule in their own divine right. The beauty of a well-governed family
   will be seen, in this manner, to be a kind of silent, natural-looking
   power; as if it were a matter only of growth, and could never have been
   otherwise. At first, or in the earlier periods of childhood, authority
   should rest upon its own right, and expect to be obeyed just because it
   speaks. It should stake itself on no assigned reasons, and have nothing
   to do with reasons, unless it be after the fact; when, by showing what
   has been depending, in a manner unseen to the child, it can add a
   presumption of reason to all future commands. It is even a good thing
   to the moral and religious nature of a child, to have its obedience
   required, and to be accustomed to obedience, on the ground of simple
   authority; to learn homage and trust, as all subject natures must, and
   so to accept the rule of God's majesty, when the reasons of God are in
   scrutable. There is little prospect that any child will be a Christian,
   or any thing but a skeptic, or a godless worldling, who has not had his
   religious nature un folded by an early subjection to authority,
   speaking in its own right.

   Nay, I will go farther; there is a certain use in having a child, in
   the first stages of government, feel the pressure of law as a
   restriction. For, as the law of God is a schoolmaster to bring us to
   Christ, so there is a like relation between law and liberty in the
   training of the house. It is by a certain friction, if I may so speak,
   on the moral nature, a certain pressure of control, not always welcome,
   that the sense of law gets hold of us. Observances that we do not like,
   prepare us to a kind of obedience, further on, that is free--that
   welcomes the same command because it is good, the same authority
   because it is wholesome and right. And so it comes to pass that a son,
   grown almost to manhood, will gladly serve the house, and yield to his
   parents a kind of homage that even anticipates their wishes, just
   because he has learned to be in subjection, with all gravity, under
   restrictions that were once a sore limit on his patience.

   At the same time it should never be forgotten, in this due assertion of
   authority and restrictive law, that there is a great difference between
   the imperative and the dictatorial; between the exact and the exacting.
   I have spoken already of the common fault of commanding overmuch, and
   forgetting or omitting to enforce what is commanded; there is another
   kind of fault which commands overmuch, and rigidly exacts what is
   commanded; laying on commands, as it seems to the child, just because
   it can, or is willing to gall his peace by exacting something that
   shall cut away even the semblance of liberty. No parent has a right to
   put oppression on a child, in the name of authority. And if he uses
   authority in that way, to annoy the child's peace, and even to forbid
   his possession of himself, he should not complain, if the impatience he
   creates grows into a bitter animosity, and finally a stiff rebellion.
   Nothing should ever be commanded except what is needed and required by
   the most positive reasons, whether those reasons are made known or not.

   Another qualification here to be observed, belongs to what may be
   called the emancipation of the child. A wise parent understands that
   his government is to be crowned by an act of emancipation; and it is a
   great problem, to accomplish that emancipation gracefully. Pure
   authority, up to the last limit of minority, then a total,
   instantaneous self-possession, makes an awkward transition. A young
   eagle kept in the nest and brooded over till his beak and talons are.
   full-grown, then pitched out of it and required to take care of
   himself, will most certainly be dashed upon the ground. The
   emancipating process, in order to be well finished, should begin early,
   and should pass imperceptibly, even as age increases imperceptibly.
   Thus the child, after being ruled for a time, by pure authority, should
   begin, as the understanding is developed, to have some of the reasons
   given why it is required to abstain, or do, or practice, in this or
   that way instead of some other. The tastes of the child, too, should
   begin to be a little consulted, in respect to his school, his studies,
   his future engagements in life. When he is old enough to go on errands,
   and to labor in various employments for the benefit of the family, he
   should be let into the condition of the family far enough to be
   identified with it, and have the family cause, and property, and hope,
   for his own. Built into the family fortunes and sympathies, in this
   manner, he will begin, at a very early day, to command himself for it,
   and so will get ready to command himself for himself, in a way that
   will be just as if the parental authority were still running on, after
   it has quite run by.

   Is it necessary to add that a parent who governs at the point of
   authority will not, of course, allow himself to be known only as a
   bundle of commandments? In order to have authority, he must have life,
   sympathy, feeling unbent in play. He must connect a gospel with his
   law, and so instead of being a law over the house, he must undertake to
   be a law written in the heart; winning love as commanding out of love,
   consummating obedience, by the glad and joyous element in which he
   bathes the playful homage and trust of his children.

   As to the motives addressed by family government in a way of
   maintaining or securing obedience, they need to be of two kinds; such
   as belong to a character in principle, and such as belong to a
   character that is equivocal in it, or fallen below it. The first kind
   should never be left out of sight. They are such as these: doing right
   because it is right; loving God because he loves the right; God's
   approbation; the approbation of a good conscience; the sense of honor
   with himself, as opposed to the meanness of lying and deceit. These
   are, by distinction, the religious motives; and where these are
   completely ignored, all others are radically faulty, of course. But
   there is, beside, a very great and hurtful mistake that is commonly
   made in choosing, from among the lower and second-class motives, those
   which are really most questionable, and most likely to be followed by
   sinister effects. Here again we are to follow God, who undertaken to
   dislodge us, in the plane below principle, or keep us from settling
   into it, by raking it, every way, in a cannonade of penalty and fear.
   No, say the plausible sophisters of our day, in what they take to be
   its better wisdom, fear is a mean and servile motive; we will not make
   cowards of our children. They do not observe the very considerable
   distinction between terror and fear; that terror lays hold of passion,
   fear of intelligence: that one dispossesses the soul, the other nerves
   it to a wise and rational prudence; that one scatters all distinctions
   of principle, and the other turns the soul thoughtfully towards
   principle. Missing this distinction, they make their appeal sometimes
   to the sense of honor before men, frequently to the sense of
   appearance, or to what will be the appearance of the family, not less
   frequently to the desire of success in life; praising the shows of
   bravery and spirit, deifying, so to speak, human conventionalities and
   laws of fashion. They do not see the total want of dignity in these ap
   peals; how they all put shams and shows, and falsities, in the place of
   solid realities; how they sort with all lying semblances of virtue, run
   the soul into all most cowardly fictions of time-serving, pretense,
   hypocrisy, sycophancy, and make even hollowness itself the principal
   substance of life. Therefore it is that God appeals to fear, backs
   authority and law by penalties that waken fear; because this one
   prudential motive has a place by itself, in not being positive or
   acquisitive, in any sense, but only negative; and so far has the
   semblance of unselfishness. It makes no one selfish to fear, though
   fear, as a motive, is not up to the level of principle loved for its
   own sake. The wise parent, therefore, will not be wiser than God; and
   wheresoever fear is needed, he will speak to fear, and make as little
   as possible of appearance, popularity, and opinion, understanding that,
   if he is to have his children in subjection with all gravity, they must
   be brought into God's principle, by a motive that is unambitious,
   unworldly and real, and turns the soul away by no computations of pride
   and airy pretense.

   There is, then, to be such a thing as penalty, or punishment, in the
   government of the house. And here again is a place where large
   consideration is requisite. First of all, it should be threatened as
   seldom as possible, and next as seldom executed as possible. It is a
   most wretched and coarse barbarity that turns the house into a
   penitentiary, or house of correction. Where the management is right in
   other respects, punishment will be very seldom needed. And those
   parents who make it a point of fidelity, that they keep the flail of
   chastisement always a going, have a better title to the bastinado
   themselves than to any Christian congratulations. The punishments
   dispensed should never be such as have a character of ignominy; and
   therefore, except in cases of really ignominious wickedness, it would
   be better to avoid, as far as may be, the infliction of pain upon the
   person. For the same reason the discipline should, if possible, be
   entirely private; a matter between the parent and child. Thus it is
   well said by Dr. Tiersch, "If ever a severe punishment is necessary, it
   must be carried out so as to spare the child's self-respect; not in the
   presence of his brothers and sisters, nor of the servants. For a
   wholesome terror to the others, it is enough if they perceive, at a
   distance, something of that which happens. And if only the smallest
   triumph over his misfortune, the least degree of mockery arise,
   bitterness and a loss of self-respect are the consequences to the
   child." [19]

   Punishments should be severe enough to serve their purpose; and gentle
   enough to show, if possible, a tenderness that is averse from the
   infliction. There is no abuse more shocking, than when they are
   administered by sheer impatience, or in a fit of passion. Nor is the
   case at all softened, when they are administered without feeling, in a
   manner of uncaring hardness. Whenever the sad necessity arrives, there
   should be time enough taken, after the wrong or detection, to produce a
   calm and thoughtful revision; and a just concern for the wrong, as
   evinced by the parent, should be wakened, if possible, in the child. I
   would not be understood, however, in advising this more tardy and
   delicate way of proceeding, to justify no exceptions. There are cases,
   now and then, in the outrageous and shocking misconduct of some boy,
   where an explosion is wanted; where the father represents God best, by
   some terrible outburst of indignant violated feeling, and becomes an
   instant avenger, without any counsel or preparation whatever. Nothing
   else expresses fitly what is due to such kind of conduct. And there is
   many a grown up man, who will remember such an hour of discipline, as
   the time when the ploughshare of God's truth went into his soul like
   redemption itself. That was the shock that woke him up to the staunch
   realities of principle; and he will recollect that father, as God's
   minister, typified to all dearest, holiest, reverence, by the pungent
   indignations of that time.

   There is great importance in the closing of a penal discipline. Thus it
   should be a law never to cease from the discipline begun, whatever it
   be, till the chill is seen to be in a feeling that justifies the
   discipline. He is never to be let go, or sent away, sulking, in a look
   of willfulness unsubdued. Indeed, he should even be required always to
   put on a pleasant, tender look, such as clears all clouds and shows a
   beginning of fair weather. No reproof, or discipline, is rightly
   administered till this point is reached. Nothing short of this changed
   look gives any hope of a changed will. On the other hand. when the face
   of disobedience brightens out into this loving and dutiful expression,
   it not only shows that the malice of wrong is gone by, but, possibly,
   that there is entered into the heart some real beginning of right, some
   spirit of really Christian obedience. Many a child is bowed to holy
   principle itself, at the happy and successful close of what, to human
   eyes, is only a chapter of discipline.

   In order to realize this Christian issue of discipline, it is sometimes
   recommended that the child should be first prayed with, and made
   conscious, in that manner, of his own wrong, as before God, and of the
   truly religious intentions by which the parent is actuated. No rule of
   this kind can be safely given; for there is great danger that the child
   will begin to associate prayer and religion with his pains of
   discipline; than which nothing could be more hurtful. It would be far
   better, in most cases, if the prayer were to follow, coming in to
   express and gladden his already glad repentances.

   There are many things remaining still to be said, in order to a
   complete view of the subject; but there are two simple cautions that
   must not be omitted, and with these I close--

   1. Observe that great care is needed in the processes of detection, or
   the police of discovery. The child must not be allowed to go on
   breaking through the orders imposed, or into the ways of vice, not
   detected. This will make his life a practice in art and hypocrisy; and
   what is worse, will make him also confident of success in the same.
   Nothing will corrupt his moral nature more rapidly. There must be a
   very close and careful watch on the part of fathers and mothers, to let
   no deviation of childhood pass their discovery. And then, again, the
   greatest care and address will be needed, to keep their circumspection
   from taking on the look of a deliberate espionage, than which nothing
   will more certainly alienate the confidence and love needful to their
   just authority. Nothing wounds a child more fatally, than to see he is
   not trusted. Under such an impression, he will soon become as unworthy
   of trust as he has been taken to be. On the other hand, he will
   naturally want to be worthy of the trust he receives. For the same
   reason, he should never be set upon by volunteer charges, or
   accusations which have no other merit than to be the ground of a
   cross-questioning process. It is a harsh experiment that insults a
   child, in order to find out whether he is innocent or guilty. Besides,
   if he is guilty, there is no small risk of drawing him on to
   asseverations of innocence, that will fatally break down his
   truthfulness. Neither will it answer, in the case of little children,
   to make then reporters of their own wrongs, by allowing the under
   standing that they shall so obtain pardon. For then they are only
   trained to a manner of sycophancy that mocks all government. What then
   shall be done? First of all, make much of the fact, that when a child
   is doing any secret wrong, he grows shy, ceases to be confiding and
   demonstrative, even as Adam, when he hid himself among the trees. Then
   let the watch grow close-watch his companions, the way he goes, the way
   he returns, his times, what he says, and what he particularly avoids
   speaking of at all; speak of his shyness, and observe the reasons he
   assigns, question his reasons. It will be difficult for any young child
   to escape this kind of search. Indeed, this kind of search will almost
   never be needed if children are inspected carefully enough, at a very
   early period, when, as yet, they are simple, and the art of wrong has
   not begun to be learned. Accustomed then to the feeling that art hides
   nothing, they will never try to hide any thing by it afterwards.

   2. Have it as a caution that, in holding a magisterial relation,
   asserting and maintaining law, discovering and redressing wrong, you
   are never, as parents, to lose out the parental; never to check the
   demonstrations of your love; never to cease from the intercourse of
   play. If you assert the law, as you must, then you must have your
   gospel to go with it; your pardons judiciously dispensed, your
   Christian sympathies flowing out in modes of Christian concern, your
   whole administration tempered by tenderness. Above all, see that your
   patience is not easily broken, or exhausted. If your authority is not
   established in a day, you have small reason, in that fact, to be
   fretted, or discouraged and the less reason, if you are and are seen to
   be, to believe that it ever can be established. There will sometimes be
   a child, or children, given, that have a more restive and less easily
   reducible nature than others, and partly because they have more to
   reduce. Time with such is commonly a great element, and as time is
   needed for them, patience will be needed in you. Let them have a little
   more experience of themselves, and of what a good and wise regulation
   means; let their rational nature be farther unfolded and come to your
   aid, and they will be gradually taking sides with your authority. The
   other and more tractable children, winning on their respect, will also
   assist in the taming of their repugnances. Meantime God, who perhaps
   gave you this trial to complete your patience, and purify all graces in
   you, will be raising you to a higher pitch of character and authority,
   which no most wayward child can well resist. And so it will be your
   satisfaction to see, in due time, that your reward is coming; that your
   children are growing into all truth and order together; melting into
   all confidence and good understanding with authority itself. Your
   triumph will now be sealed. You will have your house in subjection with
   all gravity; a little bishopric, as the apostle would say, gathered in
   heaven's truth and unity, obedient, Christian filial, and free.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [18] Page 99.

   [19] Page 153.
     __________________________________________________________________

VI.
PLAYS AND PASTIMES, HOLIDAYS AND SUNDAYS.

   "And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in
   the streets thereof."--Zechariah, vii. 5.

   HAPPY days are these that figure in the prophet's vision. The people of
   the city are accustomed to scenes that are widely different, and give a
   peculiar zest to his picture. In the times of pestilence, in the
   horrors of the siege, in the sweeping out of captivity, what silence of
   desolation have they seen--the silence of ghastly death, the silence of
   gaunt famine, the silence of emptiness and depopulated life. It shall
   no more be so; the city shall be God's mountain, sheltered under his
   care, exempt from all the past desolations of pestilence and
   war--peaceful, populous, secure, and strong. All which is shown by two
   simple touches that make out the complete picture--"There shall yet old
   men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with
   his staff in his hand for very age. And the streets of the city shall
   be full of boys and girls, playing in the streets thereof."

   We can see, too, for ourselves that the prophet's feeling goes into his
   picture; and that he has a natural delight in it himself. He sees the
   venerable crones gathering at the corners, and blesses himself in the
   sight; hears the ring of happy voices in the streets and market-places,
   and plays his feeling in, with the playing boys and girls of the Lord's
   glad mountain. Inspiration has not taken the nature out of him, but has
   only made him love the innocent glee of childhood the more.

   I draw it, accordingly, from this beautiful touch of the prophet's
   picture, that religion loves too much the plays and pleasures of
   childhood, to limit or suppress them by any kind of needless austerity.

   Having set the young of all the animal races a playing, and made their
   beginning an age of frisking life and joyous gambol, it would be
   singular if God had made the young of humanity an exception; or if,
   having put the same sportive instinct in their make, he should restrict
   them always to a carefully practical and sober mood. What indeed does
   he permit us to see, in the universal mirth-time which is given to be
   the beginning of every creature's life, but that He takes a certain
   pleasure in their exuberant life, and regards their gambols with a
   fatherly satisfaction? What, too, shall we judge, but that as all
   instincts are inserted for that to which they tend, so this instinct of
   play in children is itself an appointment of play?

   Besides, there is a very sublime reason for the play-state of childhood
   which respects the moral and religious well-being of manhood, and makes
   it important that we should have our first chapter of life in this key.
   Play is the symbol and interpreter of liberty, that is, Christian
   liberty; and no one could ever sufficiently conceive the state of free
   impulse and the joy there is in it, save by means of this
   unconstrained, always pleasurable activity, that we call the play of
   children. Play wants no motive but play; and so true goodness, when it
   is ripe in the soul and is become a complete inspiration there, will
   ask no motive but to be good. Therefore God has purposely set the
   beginning of the natural life in a mood that foreshadows the last and
   highest chapter of immortal character. Just as he has made hunger in
   the body to represent hunger in the soul, thirst in the body to
   represent thirst in the soul, what is sweet, bitter, sour in the taste
   to represent what is sweet, bitter, sour in the soul's feeling,
   lameness to represent the hobbling of false principle, the fierce
   combustion of heat to represent the rage of angry passion, all things
   natural to represent all things spiritual, so he prepares, at the very
   beginning of our life, in the free self-impulsion of play, that which
   is to foreshadow the glorious liberty of the soul's ripe order and
   attainment in good. One is the paradise of nature behind us, the other
   the paradise of grace before us; and the recollection of one images to
   us, and stimulates us in, the pursuit of the other.

   Holding this conception of the uses, and the very great importance of
   play, as a natural interpreter of what is highest and last in the grand
   problem of our life itself, we are led, on sober and even religious
   conviction, to hold in high estimation the age of play. As play is the
   forerunner of religion. so religion is to be the friend of play; to
   love its free motion, its happy scenes, its voices of glee, and never,
   by any needless austerities of control, seek to hamper and shorten its
   pleasures. Any sort of piety or supposed piety that i.s jealous of the
   plays and bounding activities of childish life, is a character of
   hardness and severity that has, so far at least, but a very
   questionable agreement with God's more genial and fatherly feeling. One
   of the first duties of a genuinely Christian parent is, to show a
   generous sympathy with the plays of his children; providing playthings
   and means of play, giving them playtimes, inviting suitable companions
   for them, and requiring them to have it as one of their pleasures, to
   keep such companions entertained in their plays, instead of playing
   always for their own mere self-pleasing. Sometimes, too, the parent,
   having a hearty interest in the plays of his children, will drop out
   for the time the sense of his years, and go into the frolic of their
   mood with them. They will enjoy no other play-time so much as that, and
   it will have the effect to make the authority, so far unbent, just as
   much stronger and more welcome, as it has brought itself closer to
   them, and given them a more complete show of sympathy.

   On the same principle, it has an excellent effect to make much of the
   birthdays of children, because it shows them, little and dependent as
   they are, to be held in so much greater estimation in the house. When
   they have each their own day, when that day is so remembered and
   observed as to indicate a real and felt interest in it by all, then the
   home in which they are so cherished is proportionally endeared to
   feeling, and what has magnified them they are ready to magnify.

   On the same principle, too, public days and festivals, those of the
   school, those of the state, and those of religion, are to be looked
   upon with favor, as times in which they are to be gladdened by the
   shows, and plays, and simple pleasures appropriate to the occasions;
   care being only taken to put them in no connection with vice, or any
   possible excess. Let them see what is to be seen, enjoy what is to be
   enjoyed, and shun with just so much greater sensibility whatever is
   loose, or wild, or wicked.

   Religious festivals have a peculiar value to children; such I mean as
   the festivals of Thanksgiving and Christmas--one a festival of thanks
   for the benefits of Providence, the other for the benefits of that
   supernatural providence which has given the world a Saviour and a
   salvation. Both are religious, and, in that fact, have their value; for
   nothing will go farther to remove the annoyance of a continual,
   unsparing, dry restraint upon the soul of childhood, and produce a
   feeling, as respects religion, of its really genial character, than to
   have it bring its festive and joyously commemorative days. One of the
   great difficulties in a properly religious nurture is, that religion
   has to open its approaches to the soul, and make its beginnings in the
   shape of law; to say God requires of you this, forbids you in that,
   makes it your life to be set in all ways of obedience. It takes on thus
   a guise of constraint, and so far wears a repulsive look; but if it can
   show how genial it is, how truly it loves even childish enjoyment, by
   gilding for it days of joy and festive celebrations, then the
   severities of law and responsible obedience take on themselves a look
   of benignity, and it begins to be felt that God commands us, not to
   cripple us, but to keep as safe and lead us into good. Such days, it is
   true, may be greatly abused by what is really unchristian; what is
   sensual and low, and very close to vice itself; and it is much to be
   regretted that the Christmas festival, otherwise so beautiful and
   appropriate, taken as a Christian commemoration of the greatest fact of
   the world's history, has been so commonly associated with traditional
   looseness and excess. The friends of such a day can not do it any so
   great honor, as to clear it entirely of the excess and profane jollity
   by which it was made to commemorate any thing and every thing but
   Christ, that, setting it in character as a genuine religious festivity,
   they may give it to all friends of Christ as a day of universal
   observance.

   Happily there is now such an abundance of games and plays prepared for
   the entertainment of children, that there is no need of allowing them
   in any that stand associated with vice. Those plays are generally to be
   most favored that are to be had only in the open air, and in forms of
   exercise that give sprightliness and robustness to the body. At the
   same time, there needs to be a preparation of devices for the
   entertainment of children indoors in the evening; for the prophet did
   not give it as a picture of the happy days of Jerusalem, that the
   streets of the city should be full of boys and girls playing there in
   the evening, or into the night, away from their parents and the
   supervision of their home. There is any thing signified in that but
   happiness and public well-being. Christian fathers and mothers will
   never suffer their children to be out in the public streets in the
   evening, unless they are themselves too loose and self-indulgent to
   assume that care of the conduct and the hours of their children, which
   is imposed upon them by their parental responsibilities. In country
   places, far removed from all the haunts of vice, and in neighborhoods
   where there are no vicious children, it might work no injury if boys
   were allowed to be out, now and then, in their coasting or skating
   parties in the evening. But the better rule in large towns, the
   absolute rule, having no exceptions as regards very young children,
   will be that they are never to be out or away from home in the evening.
   Meantime, it will be the duty of the parents, and a kind of study
   especially of the mother, to find methods of making the house no mere
   prison. but a place of attraction, and of always cheerful and pleasant
   society. She will provide books that will feed their intelligence and
   exercise their tastes--pictures, games, diversions, plays; set them to
   inventing such themselves, teaching them how to carry on their little
   society, in the playful turns of good nature and fun, by which they
   stimulate and quicken each other; drilling them in music, and setting
   them forward in it by such beginnings that they will shortly be found
   exercising and training each other; shedding over all the play,
   infusing into all the glee, a certain sober and thoughtful look of
   character and principle, so that no over grown appetite for sport may
   render violent pleasures necessary, but that small, and gentle, and
   easy, and almost sober pleasures, may suffice; becoming, at last, ever
   most satisfactory. Here is the field of the mother's greatest art, viz:
   in the finding how to make a happy and good evening for her children.
   Here it is that the lax, faithless, worthless mother most entirely
   fails; here the good and wise mother wins her best successes.

   Meantime some care must be exercised, that the religious life itself be
   never set in an attitude of repugnance to the plays of childhood. There
   must be no attempt to raise a conscience against play. Any such
   religion will certainly go to the wall; any such conscience will be
   certainly trampled, and things innocent will be done as if they were
   crimes; done with a guilty feeling; done with as bad effects every way,
   on the character, as if they were really the worst things. Nothing is
   more cruel than to throw a child into the attitude of conflict with God
   and his conscience, by raising a false conscience against that which
   both God and nature approve. It is nothing less than making a
   gratuitous loss of religion, required by no terms of reason, justified
   by no principle, even of Christian sacrifice itself.

   Suppose, for example, that a child has begun to show many pleasant
   evidences of love to God and all good things, but that he is eager
   still in play, or sometimes gets quite wild in the excitement of it.
   If, at such a time, it is sprung upon him, as a conclusion, that he
   does not truly love God, because he is so much taken by the excitements
   of play, he will thus be discouraged without reason, in all his
   confidences of piety, and it will be strange, if by and by he does not
   begin to show a settled aversion to religious things. How can he do
   less, when he is compelled to see it, as in conflict with all the most
   innocent and most truly natural instincts of his age? Or, to make the
   case more plain, drawing the question to a closer point, suppose the
   child, having so many evidences of piety in his dispositions, to be
   found at some kind of play in the family prayers, or that he rushes out
   from such prayers, in a manner that indicates eagerness and an
   emancipated feeling, or that he sometimes shows uneasiness in the hours
   of public worship on Sunday, or gives manifest tokens, in the morning,
   of a desire to escape from it, is it then to be set down, in your
   parental remonstrances with him, that he has, of course, no love to
   God, or the things of religion? By no means. How often does the adult
   Christian feel even a disinclination to such things; how often hurry
   away from his formal prayer, that he may get into his shop, or his
   field, or into some negotiation that has haunted his sleep in the
   night; how often sit through sermons with his mind on the game of
   politics, on the investment made or to be made, on his journey, or his
   mortgage, or the rivals he has in his trade? Is it worse for a child to
   be after his plays, with only the same kind of eagerness? Doubtless all
   such engrossments of the soul, whether of one kind or the other, are to
   be taken as bad signs, and, as far as they go, to be allowed their due
   weight. But which is worse and more fatal, the child's undue possession
   by the spirit of play, or the man's by the spirit of gain--the honest,
   artless, letting forth of nature by one, or the deliberate, studied,
   scheming of the other--it is not difficult, I think, to guess. No
   matter if the latter is more sober and thoughtful in the mood,
   observing a better show of gravity. For just that reason he is only to
   be judged the more harshly. If then we can beat with adult Christians,
   who are much in the world, and, forgetting themselves often, fall into
   moods of real disinclination to their duty, are we to set it down as
   some total evidence against the piety of a child, that, by mere
   exuberance of life, he is occasionally hurried away from sacred things,
   into matters of play? Nothing is more unjust. Why should we require it
   of a child to be perfect, when we do not require it of a man? And if we
   tolerate inconstancy of feeling or impulse in one, why not a much less
   worldly and deliberate inconstancy in the other?

   Thus far we speak for the side of play, showing how far off it is from
   the purpose of religion to take away, or suppress, the innocent plays
   of childhood; how ready it is, on the other hand, to foster them and
   give them sympathy. But it is not the whole of life, even to a child,
   to be indulged in play. There is such a thing as order, no less than
   such a thing as liberty; and the process of adjustment between these
   two contending powers, begins at a very early date. Under the law of
   the house, of the school, and of God, the mere play impulse begins very
   soon to be tempered and moderated by duty, and the problem is to make
   divine order itself, at last, a state of liberty analogous to the state
   of play, as already suggested. But the law that is to fashion such
   order will be first felt as a restriction; then, when it becomes the
   spirit of the life, the order itself will be liberty. There is no such
   thing, therefore, as a possibility to childhood of unrestricted play.
   Restriction must be encountered as often as the order of the house
   demands it, then as often as the school demands it, then as often as
   the duties of religion demand it; though such restrictions are never to
   be looked upon as hostile to the child's play, but only as terms that
   are really necessary for his training into the organic relations under
   which he is born, best for his character, and even best for the
   enjoyments of his play itself. Otherwise he would either become sated
   by it in a short time, or his appetite for it would become so
   egregiously overgrown, that no possible devices or means could be
   invented to keep pace with it. Besides, a child, thus put to nothing
   but mere play, would very soon grow into such lightness and dissipation
   of feeling, as to be mentally addled, and would so be wholly
   incapacitated for any of the more sober an4 manly offices of life.

   Here, then, begins a process of training into moral order, which,
   without wishing to be any restriction upon play, is yet of necessity
   such a restriction. The child is required to conform his conduct,
   including his plays, to the peace of the house, to the conditions of
   sick persons in it to the hours and times and general comfort of other
   inmates older than himself. Errands are put upon him that require him
   to forego his pleasures. When he is old enough, he is set to works of
   industry, it may be, that he may contribute something to the general
   benefit. By all which restrictions of play, lie is only prepared to
   enjoy his pastimes and plays the more. The restrictions he will
   doubtless feel, at the time, and may be somewhat restive under them;
   but when he is thoroughly brought into the order of the house, and is
   set in the habit of serving it, as an interest of his own, then he will
   obey, contrive, and work, and even drudge himself to serve it,
   constrained by no motive but the service itself.

   In the same manner it will be laid upon him to be at his place in the
   school, to be punctual to his times, to miss no lesson, to hold his
   mind to his studies by close, unfaltering application, even though it
   cost him a loss of just that liberty in play that he would most like,
   and take it as the very bliss of his good fortune to have. Restricted
   thus by the order of the school, he will only enjoy his play-times the
   more, and finally will come to the enjoyment of study itself for its
   own sake.

   And so it will be in religion. There must, of course, be in it, what
   may be called restrictions upon children. All law is felt as
   restriction at the first, but it will not be that God makes war on
   their innocent plays; they only need as much to be established in right
   conduct, well-doing, and piety, as to have their indulgence in such
   pleasures. If God will take them away from all misrule and
   wretchedness, and will bring them into all best conditions of
   blessedness and peace, and even of liberty itself, he must pit them
   under his commandments, train them into his divine will, and settle
   them in his own perfect order; and if he is obliged, in such a design,
   to infringe here and there upon their plays, it is not be cause he
   likes the infringement, but only that he seeks the higher bliss of
   character for them. Thus when a little child is required to say his
   prayers and retire at the proper time for sleep, there is nothing to
   complain of in that kind of constraint, even though he wants to
   continue his play; for the thing required is plainly for his good--this
   for the double reason that it trains him toward obedience to God, and a
   life in heaven's order, and because it even gives him a better
   appetite, and a fuller fund of vigor for, his play itself. And so it is
   universally; no constraint is to be blamed as infringement on his
   happiness, or a harsh severity against his pleasures, when, in fact,
   all highest happiness and widest range of liberty depend on the
   requirement imposed.

   The suggestions and distinctions thus far advanced, have, it will now
   be seen, another kind of use and importance, when taken as preparatives
   for the settlement of a great practical question, viz: how to use the
   Christian Sabbath, or Sunday. so as to best honor the day in its true
   import, and best secure the ends of Christian nurture. The question is
   one that relates to a whole seventh part of the child's time, and to
   just that part which is most peculiarly religious in the form, and most
   likely to assist the implanting and due fostering of religious
   impressions. So much indeed is there in this matter of a right use of
   Sundays, that the success of family nurture will be more exactly
   represented and measured by that use, than by any thing else. Sunday is
   preeminently the child's day for the soul, and the defective or bad use
   of it is never going to be compensated, by any wisest, best use of the
   other six days of the week. Indeed there is so much depending on this
   day, as regards human society, and the growth, and purity, and power of
   religion, that where it is lost in the training of families, no other
   kind of advantage--no liturgical drill, or eloquent preaching, or
   faithful and clear doctrine--can possibly make up the loss.

   The main question, here, is how much, or little, of restriction is to
   be laid upon children in the due observance of the day? And the
   tendency is, it will be observed, to one or the other of two opposite
   extremes--that of undue severity, or that of unchristian looseness--and
   this, for two distinct sets of reasons. Sometimes for the reason of
   self-indulgence, or indolence in the parents; and sometimes for the
   reason of insufficient views of the day, as it stands in the Scripture,
   or in the judgments to be held of its uses. Thus it will be noted--

   1. That, where parents are too indolent for any kind of painstaking in
   their families, they will contrive to case the burdens of their duty by
   one or the other of two distinct methods. They will either take up the
   notion that it is best and most soundly orthodox, to make a very stiff
   practice for their children; in which case they will perhaps require
   them to sit down within doors a good part of the day, learning
   catechism or scripture, stilling the house in that manner so as to
   allow them to sleep; or else they will take up the notion that, in
   modern times, we are to be more liberal, of course, being more
   intelligent; in which case they will get their children off to the
   Sunday-school, (with a lesson, or without,) or if they better like it,
   send them into the streets, or the fields. Here is the first great
   obstacle to be encountered, in securing a right and useful Sunday in
   families, viz: that invincible self-indulgence in parents, which is the
   bane of all true care and responsibility; the poison, too, of all
   honest judgment in finding what the way of duty is. They have
   frequently nc such earnest and prayerful desire of the religious
   benefit of their children, as fastens their own attention, or presses
   them into a study of plans and expedients for creating a religious
   interest in their minds. And then a double mischief follows, viz: that
   they grow rusty themselves in their religious character, and having no
   good conscience, subside into a state of silence and acknowledged
   incapacity; and next, that, having become mere drones of respectful
   nothingness in the positive duties of religion, they stand as actual
   impediments in the way of all genuine religious impressions in their
   families. The man who can make sacrifices and take pains for his
   children at home will grow, and be a useful Christian every where; and
   the man who can not, will be a dead weight every where. Here is the
   secret of a great part of that drying up of character which we so often
   deplore; and the secret also of that strangely irreligious temper, that
   hatred and contempt of all religion, that so often excites our wonder
   in the children of nominally Christian families. Let no parent hope to
   have God's blessing on the Sundays of his house, or indeed on any thing
   else that concerns the religious welfare of his children, unless he is
   willing to take pains, make sacrifices, burn as a light of holy
   example, for them and before them. Pass then,

   2. To the inquiry what is the true conception of our Lord's day, or
   Sunday? What, according to the Scripture, and to all sound judgment of
   the day, as related to the Christian training of families, and to the
   general welfare of society, is the mode and amount of restriction
   imposed by it? I think it will be found, in giving a right answer to
   this question, that the true use of the day lies between two errors, or
   extremes, that stand over against each other; one that makes a
   virtually Jewish day of it, and an opposite that, with undue haste,
   quite sweeps it away. Neither is the mode of scripture, and the two are
   about equally weak, as regards their philosophic grounds and reasons.

   According to the Scripture, God ordained a religious day, called a
   Sabbath, at the very morning of the creation. This was the day that
   Moses found already existing and only re-enacted in the ten tables of
   the moral law, as he did the statutes against lying and murder. The
   Sabbath stands, therefore, on precisely the same ground, scripturally,
   as the others; on the same too morally, save that the precise natural
   and social reasons for it, equally clear to God, are not so to us; and
   that, so far, it has the character to us of a simply divine institute,
   while the other nine statutes of the decalogue have the nature of
   acknowledged principles, grounded in their perceptible moral reasons.
   Could we also grasp, as God does, the precise natural reasons for
   observing just one day in seven as holy time, tracing perfectly the
   vast religious, and social, and moral, and physical effects involved,
   it would have no more the look of an institute, and would become a
   principle of natural obligation, like the others that stand with it.

   In this view, it can not be repealed any more than the statute against
   theft, or false witness. It is not a Jewish day, in any proper sense of
   the term, but a day of humanity, a world's-creation day; type also and
   ground of the new-creation day of the Lord. Moses went on, it is true,
   after the delivery of the decalogue, and ordained laws civil, and
   police regulations, by which the Sabbath was to be observed and
   enforced, and it was these that gave a Jewish character to their
   Sabbath. And, so far, no farther, it was that the Sabbath was repealed,
   in becoming a Lord's day. When Paul complains to the Colossians, that
   they "observe new moons and Sabbaths," and boldly rebukes the
   Galatians, that they "turn again to the beggarly elements desiring to
   be in bondage," and "observe days, and months, and times, and years,"
   he does not mean to call the seventh day of the decalogue beggarly
   elements, any more than he does the command to have but one God, or not
   to steal or kill. The beggarly elements are the political additions,
   those rigors of observance that were added by the political statutes
   and the religious drill of the ritual; designed, as it was, for a
   slavish people, low in their perceptions, and unable to know religion
   at all, save in the practice of austerities under it. Restriction was
   to them, at their low point, about the only religious conception they
   were equal to, and their whole ritual economy had a great part of its
   merit, in the stringent closeness of it, and the perpetual girding of
   their practice under its hard austerities. So far the whole economy was
   to be displaced, and the civil-law Sabbath was to go down with it. But
   the more ancient Sabbath be longed to the covenant of promise itself,
   and had the same kind of freedom and genial life in it that pertained,
   in Paul's view, to the whole Abrahamic order in religion. We can see
   too, for ourselves, that, so far as it is affirmed in the moral code of
   the decalogue, in distinction from the civil law, it has a character of
   extreme beauty and benignity. What can be a more genial token for God,
   than that he appoints such an institute of universal rest from labor?
   And what could evidence a more beautiful mercy than that God should
   take the part, in this manner, of all labor, even that of servants and
   slaves, and indeed of the laboring beasts, the oxen and the asses,
   asserting his protection over them (beautiful lesson of mercy to
   animals!) even against the selfishness of their owners, and allowing
   them to have a respite to their otherwise endless toils. There is, in
   fact, no restrictive word in the commandment, save what may be felt of
   restriction in the injunction to "keep the day holy," and even that is
   interpreted, to a great degree, by the simple requirement of a
   cessation from labor; though it is, doubtless, to be understood that
   the day is duly hallowed, only by a careful devotion of it to the uses
   of religion. Is there any thing harsh or unduly restrictive in such a
   day? Does Christianity itself find any thing to accuse, or any want of
   benignity in it?

   There is, then, no pretext of authority in the Scripture for making the
   Lord's day, or Sunday, a Jewish day to children. And those parents who
   make it a point of fidelity to lay it on their children, according to
   the strict police regulations of the Jewish code, would be much more
   orthodox, if they went farther back, and took up conceptions of the day
   some thousands of years older. When they assume that every thing which
   can be called play in a very young child is wrong, or an offense
   against religion, they try, in fact, to make Galatians of their
   children; incurring a much harsher, Christian rebuke, than if they only
   turned to the beggarly elements themselves, and laid their own souls
   under the bondage. What can a poor child do, that is cut off thus, for
   a whole twenty-four hours, from any right to vent his exuberant
   feeling--impounded, strictly, in the house and shut up to catechism; or
   taken to church, there to fold his hands and sit out the long
   solemnities of the worship, and what to him is the mysterious lingo of
   preaching; then taken home again to struggle with the pent up fires,
   waiting in dreary and forlorn vacancy, till what are called the mercies
   of the day are over? What conception does he get of religion, by such
   kind of treatment, but that it comes to the world as foe to every
   bright thing in it; a burden, a weariness, a tariff, on the other six
   days of life?

   But there comes in, here, a grand scripture reason for some sort of
   restriction, viz: that restriction is the necessary first stage of
   spiritual training every where. Instead of rushing into the conclusion,
   therefore, as many parents do, that all religious observances which
   create a feeling of restraint, or become at all irksome to children,
   are of course hurtful, and raise a prejudice in their minds against
   religion, the Scripture boldly asserts the fact that all law begins to
   be felt as a bondage. Law and gospel have a natural relationship, and
   they are bound together every where, by a firm interior necessity. It
   is so in the family, in the school, and in religion. The law state is
   always felt to be a bondage, and the restriction is irksome. By and by,
   the goodness of the law, and of them by whom it is administered, is
   fully discovered, and the obedience that began as restriction merges in
   liberty. The parents are obeyed with such care, as anticipates even
   their wishes; the lesson, that was a task, is succeeded by that free
   application which sacrifices even health and life to the eagerness of
   study; and so the law of God, that was originally felt only in the
   friction, rubbed in by that friction, is finally melted into the heart
   by the cross of Jesus, and becomes the soul's liberty itself. It is no
   fault then of a Sunday that it is felt, in some proper degree, as a
   restriction; or even that the day is sometimes a little irksome to the
   extreme restlessness of children. All restraint, whether in the family
   or the school, is likely to be somewhat irksome at the first. The
   untamed will, the wild impulse of nature, always begins to feel even
   principle itself in that way of collision with it. Nor is it any fault
   of the Sunday observance, that it has, to us, the character of an
   institute. If it were a mere law of natural morality, we might observe
   it without any thought of God's will; but if we receive it as an
   institute, we acknowledge God's will in it; and nothing has a more
   wholesome effect on just this account, than the being trained to an
   habitual surrender to what God has confessedly enjoined or instituted
   by his will. It is the acknowledging of his pure authority, and is all
   the more beneficial, when the authority is felt in a somewhat
   restrictive way. The transition too is easy from this to a belief in
   the supernatural facts of Christianity. The conscience and life is
   already configured to such faith; for whatever is accepted as an
   institution of God, is accepted as the supernatural injunction of his
   will.

   The flash judgments, therefore, of many, in respect to the observance
   of Sunday, are not to be hastily accepted. We are not to read the
   prophet, as if promising that the streets of the city shall be full of
   boys and girls, on the Lord's holy day, playing in the streets thereof;
   or as if that kind of license were necessary to clear the irksomeness
   of an oppressive observance; or as if the power of religion were to be
   increased by removing every thing in it, which disturbs the natural
   impatience of restraint. Some child that was, for example, now grown up
   to be a man--a profligate it may be, a sworn infidel, a hater of all
   religion--laughs at the pious Sundays that his godly mother made him
   keep, and testifies to the bitter annoyance he suffered under the
   irksome and superstitious restrictions thus imposed on his childish
   liberty. Whereupon some liberalist or hasty and superficial disciple,
   immediately infers that all Sunday restrictions are injurious, and only
   raise a hostile feeling in the child toward all religion. Whereas it
   may be, in the example cited, for such are not very infrequent, that
   the child was never accustomed to restriction at any other time as he
   ought to have been, or that his mother was too self-indulgent to exert
   herself in any such way for his religious entertainment, as to respite
   and soften the strictness of the Sunday observance. Perhaps the
   requirement was really too restrictive, or perhaps it was so little and
   so unevenly restrictive, as to make it only the more annoying. Be it as
   it may, in this or any particular example, a true Sunday observance
   needs to be restrictive in a certain degree, and needs to be felt in
   that way, in order to its real benefit. What is wanted is to have God's
   will felt in it, and then to have it reverently and willingly accepted.
   A Sunday turned into a holiday, to avoid the supposed evil of
   restrictiveness, would be destitute of religious value for just that
   reason.

   The true principle of Sunday observance, then, appears to be this: that
   the child is to feel the day as a restriction, and is to have so much
   done to excite interest, and mitigate the severities of restriction,
   that he will also feel the true benignity of God in the day, and learn
   to have it as one of his enjoyments. When the child is very young, or
   just passing out of infancy, it will be enough that, with some simple
   teaching about God and his day, a part of his more noisy playthings are
   taken away; or, what is better than this, that he have a distinct
   Sunday set of playthings; such as may represent points of religious
   history, or associate religious ideas, abundance of which can be
   selected from any variety store without difficulty; then, as the child
   advances in age, so as to take the full meaning of language, or so as
   to be able to read, the playthings of the hands and eyes will be
   substituted by the playthings of the mind; which also will be such as
   connect some kind of religious interest--books and pictures relating to
   scripture subjects, a practice in the learning and beginning to sing
   Christian hymns, conversations about God and Christ, such as bring out
   the beauty of God's feeling and character, and present Him, not so much
   as a frightful, but more as a friendly and attractive being; for the
   child who is only scared by God's terrors and severities, will very
   soon lose out all proportional conceptions of him, and will want to
   hear of him no more. Even the Sunday itself that only brings him to
   mind will, for just that reason, become a burden. The endeavor should
   be to excite a welcome interest in the day and the subjects it recalls.

   And the devices that may be used are endless. The natural history of
   Palestine, the rivers, lakes, mountains, every city, every plain, will
   be easily associated in the child's memory, with the events and
   characters, and religious transactions of the sacred history; so with
   lessons of duty and sentiments of piety. For such uses, an embossed map
   of the Holy Land would be invaluable in a family of young children.
   Here are marked the sites of towns and cities, and the face of the
   ground is given on which they stood, or stand. Here was the locality of
   a battle, on this mountain or slope, or in this plain, or by this
   river. Here dwelt some patriarch, or prophet, or ministering woman.
   Looking over these ranges of mountain, through these valleys, and
   across these lakes and plains, questions of locality, geography,
   prospect, transaction, miracle, travel, can be raised with endless
   variety, such as will sharpen the intellectual curiosity, and the sense
   of religion together. The whole country may be daguerreotyped in this
   manner on the child's mind, and a tenfold interest excited in every
   event, whether of the Old or New Testament history.

   The day itself also will be raising fruitful topics of inquiry. The
   topics of public preaching, especially those which relate to
   Christ--Christ the child, Christ the friend, brother, bread, way,
   reconciling grace--will raise interesting questions in the child's
   mind, and he will be delighted if the parent can make out a good and
   lively child's version of them.

   Hearing much too of the church, and the communion of saints in its
   order and ordinances, he will want to know more exactly what the church
   is, what it is for, and who are in it. And when he is rightly informed
   concerning it, as being God's holy family, or school, ill which all the
   members are disciples or learners together, and how Christ himself
   dwells in it, unseen, as the teacher and head, preserving its order
   from age to age, and dispensing gifts of life and salvation to them
   that are folded with him in it, how tenderly will it move his feeling,
   and with what gladness, to hear that he also is a member, whom Christ
   has accepted beforehand, to grow up as a disciple in it. His feeling
   will thus begin at once to take sides with it, as with his family
   itself, and he will be drawn along into the spirit and cause of it,
   just as he is into the cause of his family.

   Perhaps too he will have witnessed the sacraments, the holy supper, and
   baptism as administered to infants, and he will be asking, probably,
   for some explanation of these. And nothing can have a more benign
   effect on a child's religious feeling than to be trained to a genuine
   faith in sacraments. But, in order to this, they must be sacraments;
   that is, observances appointed by God, as the occasions of a special
   faith in the special visitations and powers he engages to bestow on the
   receivers.

   We lave become even a little jealous of sacraments. Our recoil from the
   extravagances of priestly magic has been carried too far. We keep them
   on foot, but we can scarcely be said to have faith in them, or to use
   them. The very attitude of mind they require is what we want--want in
   the family, want in the church. They set us before God in just the way
   to receive Him best. He knew exactly what we wanted, and therefore gave
   them to communicate his own divine power in them. Suppose that
   Carthage, in giving to her sons an oath (sacramentum) of eternal
   hostility to Rome, hat been able to pledge a war-grace also, going into
   battle with them to make them strong before their enemy and always
   victorious, how eagerly would they have taken hold of it, in the
   terrible encounters of the field!

   The supper then is to be a sacrament and no merely monumental affair,
   as if it were a coming to the tomb of Jesus to read his inscription;
   but it is to be an occasion where he is to be discerned, manifested as
   discerned, in his most real, only real, presence; dispensing himself
   and his reconciling peace to the soul. Explained thus to the child, in
   a manner adapted to his understanding, it is also to be added--"this is
   for you, and Christ is waiting to receive you and bless you in it,
   whenever you can ask it truly believing that he will, according to the
   faith to which you were pledged in your baptism." I see no objection
   whatever to his being taken to the supper casually, whenever his
   childish piety really and seriously desires it; unless some opposing
   scruples in the church, or the minister, should make it unadvisible.
   Christ, I am sure, would say--"Suffer the child and forbid him not."

   The sacrament of baptism, which he will often see dispensed to
   infants--and they ought always to be presented in a public way, or in
   the open church, for that purpose--can be handled, in these Sunday
   conversations, with still greater effect. This preeminently is the
   child's sacrament; signifying no regenerative work done upon the child,
   (opus operatum,) but the promise of an always cherishing, cleansing,
   sealing mercy, in which he is to be grown, as one that is born in due
   time; and which he is always to believe in, and be taking hold of, in
   all his childish struggles with evil. And he is to have it, not as a
   sacrament dispensed once for all and ended, but as a perpetual baptism,
   always distilling upon him, pledged to go with him, overliving his many
   faults and falls, and operating restoratively when it can not
   progressively, assisting repentances when it can not growths in good.
   He is thus to be always putting on Christ, as being baptized into
   Christ, and to live in the washing of regeneration and the renewing of
   the Holy Ghost, shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour.
   Sentiments of profoundest reverence for his baptism are to be always
   cherished in him. He is to have it as the one pure thing that has
   touched, and always touches him. Family government, the family prayers,
   the saintly mother's kiss, every thing earthly, has the touch and stain
   of evil; but the sacrament of God's pure Spirit has not. All purest
   sympathy of God is here with him. He is God's child, and is to be God's
   man. Using thus his baptism, growing up into his baptism, obligation
   will be serious, but never oppressive; for he breathes for giving help,
   and has it for his element.

   Now all these subjects of the Sunday conversation--the church, the
   supper and baptism--being institutes of God, like the day itself, chime
   with the day, and go to keep alive the same institutional faith, thus
   to keep alive the faith of a supernatural religion and make it
   habitual. Nature being all, there is no Sunday, no church, no
   sacraments. All God's institutes are set up on the world by His
   immediate authority, never grown out of nature and her causes. And it
   is just here that the childish affinities are most readily taken hold
   of by religion. Children want the supernatural; and the Lord's day,
   used in this manner, or enlivened by this kind of teaching, will
   prepare an ingrown habit of faith, and will never annoy them, or worry
   them, by its reasonable restrictions. They will "count the Sabbath a
   delight, and the holy of the Lord honorable," and will have beside, all
   the blessings of the prophet that follow. Under such a practice,
   religion, or faith, will be woven into the whole texture of the family
   life, and the house will become a truly Christian home. Nothing will be
   remembered so fondly, or steal upon the soul with such a gladsome, yet
   sacred, feeling afterward, as the recollection of these dear Sundays,
   when God's light shone so brightly into the house,, and made a holiday
   for childhood so nearly divine.
     __________________________________________________________________

VII.
THE CHRISTIAN TEACHING OF CHILDREN.

   But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been
   assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them.--2 Timothy, ii. 14.

   THIS exhortation of the apostle to his young friend Timothy, is the
   more remarkable that it relates to his training in the Old Testament
   scriptures, which were the only sacred writings known at the time of
   his childhood--"And that, from a child, thou hast known the Holy
   Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
   faith which is in Christ Jesus." His father was a Greek, (Acts xvi. 1,)
   and probably an unbeliever; but his mother was a woman of such piety,
   that she omitted nothing in the training of her son, and the apostle
   speaks of her, in the same epistle, even as having let down upon him a
   kind of piety by entail. But her faithful lessons--these are what he is
   now calling to mind; and it is affecting to notice that he not only
   charges it on him to remember what he has learned from the Scriptures,
   because they are God's word, but also to value the same things the
   more, "knowing of whom he has learned them;" that is, from his gracious
   and faithful mother. Under cover of this beautiful example, as it
   appears in all the parties concerned, the young minister and disciple,
   the godly mother and her instructions, the apostle and his
   congratulations, you will perceive that I am going to speak of--

   The Christian teaching of children.

   And I can not do better than to notice, in the beginning, three points
   which stand upon the face of the apostle's exhortation.

   1. The very great importance of this teaching, when rightly dispensed.
   It is not indeed the first duty of the parent, for other duties go
   before, as we have already seen, preceding even the use of language.
   Neither is it, as a great many parents appear to assume, a matter in
   which their religious duties to their children are principally summed
   up. It is not every thing to teach, or verbally instruct their
   children, least of all to indoctrinate them in the formulas and
   theoretic principles of the faith. But how very great importance must
   there be in the teaching, when an apostle, setting his young friend in
   charge as a preacher of the gospel, bids him continue still in the
   teachings of his godly mother, and even to remember them for her sake.
   The New Testament preacher is exhorted still to be an Old Testament
   son, and is sent forth, in the power of the ancient Scripture, even
   after Christ has come. And just so it will ever be true of the ripest
   and tallest of God's saints, who were trained by His truth in their
   childhood, that however deep in their intelligence or high in spiritual
   attainments they have grown to be, the motherly and fatherly word is
   working in them still; and is, in fact, the core of all spiritual
   understanding in their character.

   2. It is to be noted that the teaching of Timothy's mother was
   scriptural--"And that, from a child, thou hast known the Holy
   Scriptures." They had, as far as we have been able to learn, no
   catechisms in that day. The ten commandments and certain selected
   Psalms, were probably the scriptures in which they were most.
   exercised, and which probably Timothy had "learned," in the sense of
   having them stored in his memory. And there is this very great
   advantage in the scriptural teaching, or training, that it fills the
   mind with the word and light of the Spirit, and not with any mere
   wisdoms of opinion. And there is the less reason, now, for going out of
   the divine word to get lessons for the teaching of children, that our
   scripture roll is enlarged by the addition of the words and history of
   Christ himself. In a right use of the Scripture, thus amplified by the
   gospel, there is no end to the subjects of interest that may be raised.
   The words are simple, the facts are vital, the varieties of locality,
   dialogue, incident, character, and topic, endless.

   I do not undertake to say that nothing shall be taught which is not in
   the words of the Scripture. But it must be obvious that very small
   children are more likely to be worried and drummed into apathy by
   dogmatic catechisms, than to get any profit from them. If exercised in
   them at all, it should be at a later period, when their intelligence is
   considerably advanced; that they may, at least, get some shadow of
   meaning in them, to repay the labor of committing them to memory. It is
   generally supposed, in the arguments urged for a training in catechism,
   that the real advantage to be gained is the fastening or anchoring of
   the child in some fixed faith. But the deplorable fact is, that what is
   called a fastening is really the shutting in, or encasing of the soul,
   in that particular shell of opinion--the training of the child to be a
   sectarian before he is a Christian. His anchorage in some Christian
   belief, which is certainly desirable, would be accomplished much more
   effectually, if he were trained, for example, to recite the Apostle's
   or the Nicene creed. Here he does not merely memorize, but he assents;
   and, what is more, does it by an act of practical homage, or worship--a
   confession. And then what he assents to is no matter of opinion, or
   speculative theology, but a recitation of the supernatural facts of the
   gospel, taken simply as facts. For these facts are intelligible even to
   a very young child, and will be recited always with the greater
   interest, that the recitation is itself a religious act, or confession.

   I am principally concerned here with the case of very young children,
   not with such as are farther advanced in age, or intelligence; and
   there is no room for doubt, in their case, whatever may be decided in
   respect to others, that the teaching of Timothy's mother, the scripture
   teaching, is to be preferred. The memorizing of the ten commandments
   and the Lord's prayer, followed by the Apostle's creed and the simplest
   Christian hymns, connected with scripture readings, conversations, and
   discussions, will compose a body of teaching specially adapted to a
   child, and most likely to make him wise unto salvation.

   3. It is to be noted that the most genuine teaching, or only genuine
   teaching, will be that which interprets the truth to the child's
   feeling by living example, and makes him love the truth afterwards for
   the teacher's sake. It is a great thing for a child, in all the after
   life, to "know of whom" he learned these things, and to see a godly
   father, or a faithful mother, in them. No truth is really taught by
   words, or interpreted by intellectual and logical methods; truth must
   be lived into meaning, before it can be truly known. Examples are the
   only sufficient commentaries; living epistles the only fit expounders
   of written epistles. When the truly Christian father and mother teach
   as being taught of God, when their prayers go into their lives and
   their lives into their doctrine, when their goodness melts into the
   memory, and heaven, too, breathes into the associated thoughts and
   sentiments to make a kind of blessed memory for all they teach, then we
   see the beautiful office they are in, fulfilled. In this manner,
   Timothy was supposed to have a complete set of recollections from his
   mother woven into his very feeling of the truth itself It was more true
   because it had been taught him by her. There was even a sense of her
   loving personality in it, by which it always had been, and was always
   to be, endeared. On the other hand, it will always be found that every
   kind of teaching in religion, which adds no personal interest, or
   attraction to the truth, sheds no light upon it from a good and
   beautiful life, is nearly or quite worthless.. And here is the
   privilege of a genuinely Christian father and mother in their teaching,
   that they pass into the heart's feeling of their child, side by side
   with God's truth, to be forever identified with it, and to be,
   themselves, lived on and over with it, in the dear eternity it gives
   him.

   But these are general considerations, which it is sufficient to have
   suggested without further dwelling upon them. There are yet a great
   many subordinate and particular points, of a more promiscuous
   character, to which also I must call your attention. And I deem it here
   a matter of consequence to make out, first of all, a somewhat extended
   roll of things, which are not to be taught; for so many things are
   taught which are not true for any body, and so many which are only
   theologically true for minds in full maturity--to all others
   meaningless and repulsive--that many a child is fatally stumbled in
   religion, just because of his teaching.

   First of all, then, children are not to be taught that they were
   regenerated in their baptism. That will only convert the rite into a
   superstition, and put the child in a totally false position, where he
   will rest his Christian title on a mere outward transaction already
   past, and what is even worse, on a function of priestly magic.
   Furthermore, if the child should turn out, when he is fully grown, to
   be a totally reckless and profane person, having no pretense, or even
   semblance of religious character, it will now be discovered to him that
   his regeneration meant nothing, had no practical effect or value, and
   since there is no second baptismal regeneration, it will only be left
   him to have neither any care for the old, or hope of a new that is
   better. Indeed he must now be saved, for aught that appears, without
   re. generation; which makes a very awkward kind of gospel. If the child
   could be taught that his baptism signifies regeneration; supposing a
   pledge on God's part of the necessary grace, and so the fact
   presumptive, that the faith and careful training of his parents shall
   be so far issued in a gracious character, that his very first putting
   forth of good endeavor, (having been divinely prepared,) shall be
   crowned with Christian evidence, it would be well. But no young child
   can grasp such a conception evenly enough to hold it. The most that can
   be said to him, therefore, of his baptism, is that God gave it to his
   parents and to himself, as a pledge of the Holy Spirit, and all needed
   help, that he may grow up into good, as a regenerated man.

   As little are young children to be taught that they are of course
   unregenerated. This, with many, is even a fixed point of orthodoxy, and
   of course they have no doubt of it. They put their children on the
   precise footing of heathens, and take it for granted that they are to
   be converted in the same manner. But they ought not to be in the same
   condition as heathens. Brought up in their society, under their
   example, baptized into their faith and upon the ground of it, and
   bosomed in their prayers, there ought to be seeds of gracious character
   already planted in them; so that no conversion is necessary, but only
   the development of a new life already begun Why should the parents cast
   away their privilege, and count their child an alien still from God's
   mercies?

   Again, you are not to teach your children that they need, of course, to
   be regenerated, because they fail in obedience, show bad tempers, and
   display manifold other faults. Have you no faults yourselves? Do you
   then spring it as a conclusion against yourselves, that you are
   unregenerate persons, or do you take hold of God's help, with new
   earnestness and confidence, that you may get strength to overcome your
   faults and be clear of them? Shortcomings, faults, casual
   disinclinations of feeling, are bad signs, such as ought to waken
   distrust, but they are not, of course, conclusive evidences.

   As little are you to teach them that they are certainly unregenerate,
   or without piety, because they are light in many of their
   demonstrations, full of play, abounding in frolicsome gayeties. Which
   is worse and farthest from God, these innocent exuberances of life, or
   the covetous, overcaring overworking, enviously plotting, sobriety of
   their parents?

   Again you are never to teach your very young children that they are too
   young to be good, or to be really Christian. Never allow them to see
   that you expect them to be pious only at some future day, when they are
   older. What you despair of, or assume to be no possibility for them,
   they certainly will not attempt and the discouragement of good, thus
   thrown upon them, may be even fatal to their future character. Draw
   them rather into your own exercises, taking always for granted, that
   they will be with you. Promise them a common part with you in God's
   friendship, and as your love to God makes you good to them, careful of
   them, tender toward them, show them how it will make them good to one
   another and to you, and all good and happy together.

   Again, do not teach them that they can never pray, or do any thing
   acceptable to God, till after they are converted or regenerated. This,
   with many, is a great point of orthodoxy, and I would not speak of it
   with severity, because it is a very natural mistake and yet it is one
   of the most hurtful delusions, short of real infidelity, that can be
   put into language. It is not only not true for children, but it is not
   true for any body, and is, in fact, a kind of barricade before the
   heavenly gate for every body, still outside. It is very true that no
   one can pray, or do any thing acceptably, to God, as being and
   remaining unconverted, unregenerated; but that is a very different
   thing from showing that no one can pray, or do any thing acceptably
   till after they are converted, or regenerated. The difference is just
   as wide as between all good possibility and none whatever. God is ready
   to hear every child's prayer, every man's prayer, calls him to come and
   be heard for all he wants, only let him pray as coming to be converted,
   or born of the Spirit, in his prayer. If the prayers of the wicked are
   an abomination, as they certainly are, let them come to cease being
   wicked, and be made right with God. Can not a wicked man become right?
   and at what time and where, better than when God is hearing and helping
   his prayer? His very prayer will be a praying out of wickedness into
   right. But when he can not think, work, pray; can not do any thing
   acceptably, till after he is born of the Spirit, that word after fences
   him back; shuts him up in his sin, there to bide his time. What
   multitudes of children have been shut away from the kingdom of God, by
   this one misconception of piously intended orthodoxy.

   The mistake of teaching is scarcely less fatal, when the child is put
   to the doing of good works, and the making up of a character in the
   self-regulating way. That kind of duty is so legal and painful, and the
   poor child will be so often floored by his failures in it, that he will
   not continue long. A kind of despair will come upon him in a short
   time, and religion itself will take on a hard impossible look, that is
   even repulsive. Nothing will draw the child onward in ways of piety,
   but the sense of forgivenesses, helps, felt sympathies of grace and
   love. Salvation by faith, is the only kind of religion that a child can
   support. If there is no ladder to heaven but a ladder of will-works and
   observances, he will not be climbing it long. Where Luther fell off and
   lay groaning infant steps will not persist.

   It is a great mistake, too, and a great Christian wrong. under
   salvation by faith, to be always showing children what a hard, dry
   service the Christian life must be. A great many parents do this
   unthinkingly, because it is just so to them. Where there is a real
   living faith. and children believe most easily, cheerfulness,
   brightness, liberty, joy, are the element of life itself. But if the
   parent is down in the lowest grades of possible devotion, worried and
   not blessed by his piety, galled and not comforted; if the children
   hear him mourning always in his prayer, and confessing shortcomings and
   defeats and poverty enough to ungospel all the gospel promises, it
   should not be wonderful that they are not particularly drawn to that
   kind of piety.

   These, now, are some of the things which are not to be taught, but
   carefully avoided in the training of children. There are a great many
   other things which are not to be taught, for the reason that they can
   not be sufficiently apprehended, and will only confound the
   understanding instead of giving it light. These are to be taught, not
   formally or theologically, but implicitly, in a kind of child's
   version, which the confessions commonly do not give. Thus depravity in
   Adam, the fall of the race, the atonement by Christ in any view that
   makes it a ground of forgiveness, regeneration itself as a
   metaphysically defined change in character--none of these can be taught
   as a doctrine for young children. And yet they can all be taught
   implicitly. Thus we may represent to children that we are all sinners,
   and that God is displeased with us whenever we do or think what is
   wrong; that we want a better auld a clean heart, so that we shall love
   to do what is right, and that Christ came down into the world to give
   it to us; that when we feel sorry for wrong he loves to forgive us, and
   that when we feel weak and are much tempted he will help us, hearing
   our prayer, and coming to us by his Spirit, to give us strength.
   Meantime we must not omit teaching that Jesus had a most dear love to
   children, took them in his arms, blessed them, loved them even the more
   tenderly because of the bad world into which they are come; and that
   breathing his own love into them, he was able to say that of such is
   the kingdom of heaven. Proceeding in this manner, let the call be to
   the child to become good, and to be always trusting Christ to make him
   so, and he will get the force, implicitly, of a whole gospel, in this
   very simple and summary version.

   While the whole teaching centers at this point, the mind of the child
   will not be wearied, of course, by a continual reiteration of the same
   very simple matter, but it will be led about, into free ranges and
   excursions, among the facts and very dramatic incidents of the
   Scripture history. Little debates will be raised about duties in common
   matters; characters will be held up for approbation, or to be
   condemned. The matters of creation, from the sky downward, will come
   into notice, and be used to show God's wisdom and greatness. And so
   there will be a rotary movement of inquiry and teaching, all round the
   great central point of being good, and the readiness of Christ to help
   us in it.

   Due care will be taken also not to thrust religious subjects on the
   child, when he is excited by other things, in a manner to make it
   unwelcome. His times of thought and appetite must be watched. Play with
   him when he wants to play, teach him when he wants to be taught.
   Untimely intrusions of religion will only make it odious--the child can
   not be crammed with doctrine.

   Children often break upon their parents with very tough questions, and
   questions that wear a considerable looking towards infidelity. It
   requires, in fact, but a simple child to ask questions that no
   philosopher can answer. Parents are not to be hurried or flurried in
   such cases, and make up extempore answers that are only meant to
   confuse the child, and consciously have no real verity. It is equally
   bad, if the child is scolded for his freedom; for what respect can he
   have for the truth, when he may not so much as question where it is?
   Still worse, if the child's question is taken for an evidence of his
   superlative smartness, and repeated with evident pride in his hearing.
   In all such cases, a quiet answer should be given to the child's
   question where it can easily be done, and where it can not, some delay
   should be taken; wherein it will be confessed that not even his parents
   know every thing. Or, sometimes, if the question is one that plainly
   can not be answered by any body, occasion should be taken to show the
   child how little we know, and how many things God knows which are too
   deep for us--how reverently, therefore, we are to submit our mind to
   his, and let him teach us when he will, what is true. It is a very
   great thing for a child, to have had the busy infidel lurking in his
   questions, early instructed in regard to the necessary limits of
   knowledge, and accustomed to a simple faith in God's requirement, where
   his knowledge fails.

   Observe also, at just this point, the immense advantage that a
   Christian parent has in Jesus Christ, as regards the religious teaching
   of his children. I speak here of the fact that all truth finds in him
   the concrete form Truth is not less really incarnate in him, than God.
   Indeed he testifies, himself, that he is the truth. And he is so, not
   merely in the sense that he parabolizes the truth, and gets it thus
   into human conditions or analogies, but that his own person also and
   life are the eternal form of truth; that he lives it, acts it forth,
   groans it in his Gethsemane, sheds it from his veins in the bleeding of
   his cross. You may take your children along therefore, through his
   childhood, into his ministries of healing, on to his death-scene
   itself, and it will be as if you led them through a gallery, where all
   divinest, most life-giving truth is pictured. No abstractions will be
   wanted, no difficult reaches of comprehension required; you have
   nothing to do but to show them Jesus as he is, and the Great Teaching
   will be in them--all that is needed as the vital bread of their
   intelligence, and heart, and character. The blessed child's doctrine of
   the world is Christ. Have it then as your privilege to be always
   unfolding your child's understanding, and spiritual nature, by that
   which will be life and healing to both; even Jesus Christ, the Word of
   the Father's glory. Converse much of him and about him, make him
   familiar, and it will be strange if you do not find that both your
   conversation and theirs is in heaven, where he sitteth at the right
   hand of God.

   And of this you will be the more certain if you teach Christ not by
   words only, but by so living as to make your own life the interpreter
   of his. There is no feebler and more unpractical conception, than that
   children are faithfully taught, when they are abundantly lectured. If
   you will put in Christ, you must put him on. There is no such gospel
   for them, as that which flavors your own conduct, and fills your
   personal atmosphere with the Christly aroma.

   At the same time it should be the constant endeavor with children, to
   make the subject of religion an open subject, and keep it so, never to
   be otherwise. Nothing is wider of dignity, or more mischievous in its
   effects, than the remarkable shyness of religious conversation in most
   Christian families. It argues either some great neglect of the parents,
   in which they have let the subject fall out of range as a subject not
   to be named, or else it shows that, in trying to make it an open
   subject, so much of cant or untimely exhortation has been mixed with
   it, as to make it unwelcome. Rightly conceived, there is no subject of
   so great interest and such inexhaustible freshness, as that which
   pertains to the soul and the future life. Good conversation, too, upon
   it, in the house, is better than sermons. Why then should a Christian
   family, where every other subject is welcome, taboo this, requiring it
   to pass in silence, as if it were in fact the forbidden fruit of their
   intelligence?

   But I must speak, in closing, of what appears to be a somewhat general
   misconception, as respects the aim of Christian teaching in the case of
   very young children. According to the view I am here maintaining, it is
   not their conversion, in the sense commonly given to that term. That is
   a notion which belongs to the scheme that makes nothing of baptism and
   the organic unity of the house; that looks upon the children as being
   heathens, or aliens, requiring, of course, to be converted. But
   according to the scheme here presented, they are not heathens, or
   aliens; but they are in and of the household of faith, and their
   growing up is to be in the same. Parents therefore, in the religious
   teaching of their children, are not to have it as a point of fidelity
   to press them into some crisis of high experience, called conversion.
   Their teaching is to be that which feeds a growth, not that which stirs
   a revolution. It is to be nurture, presuming on a grace already and
   always given, and, for just that reason, jealously careful to raise no
   thought of some high climax to be passed. For precisely here is the
   special advantage of a true sacramental nurture in the promise, that it
   does not put the child on passing a crisis, where he is thrown out of
   balance not unlikely, and becomes artificially conscious of himself,
   but it leaves him to be always increasing his faith, and reaching
   forward, in the simplest and most dutiful manner, to become what God in
   helping him to be. On this point Dr. Tiersch says, with very great
   insight, both of the gospel and of children--

   "It is certainly not difficult to bring a child into a condition of
   emotion and anxiety, by representations of natural corruption, of the
   judgment, and of the influence of the enemy; and to fill him with
   doubts of his own salvation, thereby moving him to any thing that may
   be desired. It is possible that by these means, deep experiences of the
   communion of the soul have been brought to light. But these are
   consequences that should rather be objects of our fear than of our
   rejoicing. For here comes in the worst of all dangers, the early
   wasting of such impressions and experiences, and a creeping in of
   untruth, whilst the power vanishes and the forms of speech remain. For
   both the most delicate and the most solemn experiences become, after
   this method, objects of continual reflection and conversation, under
   which, at last, solemn earnestness, as well as all delicacy, is
   destroyed, and there remains either a continual self-deception, with
   the semblance of the reality of godliness, or a gnawing consciousness
   of an increasing untruthfulness, and of an inner unfruitfulness beneath
   a mass of phrases." [20]

   It is a delicate matter for children to navigate in this rough sea of
   conversional tossings, where the stormy wind lifteth up the waves, and
   they go up to the heaven, and go down again to the depth, and their
   soul is melted because of trouble. There is, for the little ones, a
   more quiet way of induction. Show them how to be good, and then, when
   they fail, how God will help them if they ask him and trust in him for
   help. In this manner they will be passing little conversion-like crises
   all the time. Rejoice with them and for them as they do, only do not
   put them on the consciousness, in themselves, of what you seem to see.
   Let them be accustomed to it as a fact of experience that they are
   happy when they are right, and are right when God helps them to be, and
   that he always helps them to be when they put their trust in him. The
   Spirit of God is nowhere so dovelike as he is in his gentle visitations
   and hoverings of mercy over little children.

   What is wanted is, to train them by a corresponding gentleness, and
   keep them in the molds of the Spirit. No spiritual tornado is wanted
   that will finish up the parental duties in a day; but there is to be a
   most tender and wise attention, watching always for them, and, at every
   turn or stage of advance, contributing what is wanted; enjoying their
   bright and happy times of goodness and peace with them, helping their
   weak times, drawing them out of their discouragements, and smoothing
   away their moods of recoil and bitterness; contriving always to supply
   the kind of power that is wanted, at the time when it is wanted. Very
   young children religiously educated, it will be remembered by almost
   every grown up person, have many times of great religious tenderness,
   when they are drawn apart in thoughtfulness and prayer. The effort
   should be to make these little, silent pentecosts and gentle openings
   God-ward scaling-times of the Spirit, and have the family always in
   such keeping, as to be a congenial element for such times; and to
   suffer no possible hindrance, or opposing influence, even should they
   come and go unobserved Under such kind of keeping and teaching, God,
   who is faithful to all his opportunities, as men are not, will be
   putting his laws into the mind and writing them in the heart, and the
   prophet's idea will be fulfilled to the letter; it will not be
   necessary to go calling the children to Christ, and saying, know the
   Lord; for they will know him, every one, the least as the greatest, and
   the greatest as the least, each by a knowledge proper to his age.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [20] Christian Family, p. 133.
     __________________________________________________________________

VII1.
FAMILY PRAYERS.

   "And it shall come to pass in that day, I will hear, saith the Lord, I
   will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth and the earth
   shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear
   Jezreel."--Hosea ii. 21-2.

   BY this very elaborate and poetically ingenious figure, the prophet
   appears to be giving a contrived representation of the fact, that when
   God brings in the promised day of his universal reign in the earth,
   there will be a grand convergency of causes to prepare it, and, like so
   many concurrent prayers, to make common suit for it before Him. Thus he
   figures the world as being the beautiful valley called Jezreel, which
   is the garden, so to speak, of the land. And it is to be as when the
   people of Jezreel get their harvest, by having every thing in a train
   of concurrent agency to prepare it--they make petition by their careful
   tillage to the corn, the grapes, and olives, that they will grow apace;
   these, in turn, make suit to the earth to give them nutriment; this
   again hears them, and lifts its petition to the heavens, asking rain
   and dew; whereupon, last of all, the heavens hand up the prayers to
   God, to furnish them water, and let them shed it down; which petition
   he graciously hears, and the harvest follows. So he conceives it will
   be, as the harvest of the world approaches. It will be as if all things
   were put striving together, and a prayer were going up for it through
   all the concurrent circles of Providence. God's counsel and kingdom are
   constructing always a perfect harmony, by their convergence on his
   perfect end. Then, as the perfect end is neared, and the harmony with
   it grows more complete, it will be as if more things were concurring in
   it and asking for it, and prayer, falling in as a cause among causes,
   will have them all praying with it, or handing up its request. In which
   we may see what holds good of all prayer, and how or by what law it
   prevails. In one view, the whole future is prayed in by the whole
   present, being such a future as the whole present demands. The more
   things, therefore, prayer can get into harmony with itself in its
   request, the more likely it is to prevail; and the more alone it is,
   and the more things it has opposite to it, in the field of causes, the
   less likely it is to prevail--even as Adam had less hope of success in
   praying for Cain, that the blood of Abel was crying to God against him
   from the ground.

   All prayer being under this general condition, family prayer will be of
   course; and of this I now propose to speak. I choose to handle the
   subject in this form, in the conviction that the prayers of families
   are so often defeated by the want of any such concert in the aims,
   plans, tempers, works, and aspirations of the house, as is necessary to
   a common suit before God; in other words, because the prayers, commonly
   so called, are defeated by the suit of so many causes contrary to them.

   We sometimes use the terms family worship and family prayers, without
   any reference at all to their spiritual acceptance with God, or to any
   gifts and benefits to be bestowed, in the way of answer to such
   prayers. We speak of the worship, or the prayers, as a kind of morning
   observance; a religious formality that is to have its value, under the
   laws of drill and habitual repetition; good therefore, in that sense,
   to be kept a going, and not expected to be good on the high ground of
   faith and living intercourse with God. That it is to be the opening of
   heaven and the keeping of it open to the family, under the conditions
   of prevailing prayer, is either not commonly supposed, or not made a
   point of practical endeavor. The benefits thought of are to be such as
   will come of mere observance itself, and the religious reverence
   impressed by it.

   Now that some such kind of benefit may be expected to follow, I am not
   about to question. Any such external observance, kept up in the family,
   must probably beget a deeper sense of religion, and prepare all the
   members to a readier admission of the great principles of faith, and
   spiritual devotion to God. And in that view, the observance of family
   worship is a matter of such consequence in a family, that the parent,
   who confessedly is not a Christian person, ought still to feel it
   incumbent on him to maintain that observance. And if such were the
   persons with whom I am dealing in this discussion, I should urge it
   upon them, as a matter indispensable, and never to be omitted. But my
   subject is different. I am addressing Christian parents, on the subject
   of the Christian training of their children; showing it to be the same
   thing as a training into Christ, and how that training will secure the
   real initiation of their children into a state of genuine discipleship.
   Having this aim therefore, I shall drop out of notice family worship as
   observance, and speak of it only as the open state of prayer and
   communion with God in the house. For, as the greater includes the less,
   we need not be careful about the less; but only about the greater. And
   I shall speak, in the conviction that a great and principal reason why
   the family religion of those who are really Christian believers,
   carries no saving benefit with it, is that they are content with the
   less when they ought to claim the greater; maintaining the family
   prayers, in the way of observance only, and not as an appeal of faith
   to God. They imagine some impossibility perhaps of maintaining the
   family religion on so high a key. It will not only be a wearisome and
   over-exhaustive painstaking for themselves, but they sometimes imagine
   that the children, too, will be finally drugged by such over-dosing, in
   the spiritual intensities of religion, and be only the more repelled
   from it.

   But they greatly mistake, in this kind of judgment, by mistaking first,
   in their conception of what is necessary to the prevalent effect of the
   family prayers, and the always open state of the house towards God. No
   rhapsodies are wanted, or flights of feeling, or heavings of passional
   intercession, as many are wont to assume, but simply that there should
   be a sober, calculated harmony between all the plans and appointments
   of life and the prayers or petitions made. The great difficulty in
   faith, after all, is to be faithful. God is not carried by shrieks of
   emotion, but by the honestly meant and soberly contrived ordering of
   things, to snake them work in with, and, if possible, work out the
   prayers. In this view, let me call your attention--

   I. To the manner in which prayers, of all kinds, get their answer from
   God. Two things are wanted, as conditions previous to the favoring
   answer. First, that the matter requested should agree with God's
   beneficent aims, or the ends of good to which his plans are built.
   Secondly, that the prayer should agree with as many other prayers, and
   as many other circles of causes as possible; for God is working always
   toward the largest harmony, and will not favor, therefore, the prayers
   of words, when every thing else in the life is demanding something
   else, but will rather have respect to what has the widest reach of
   things and persons making suit with it. It is at this latter point that
   prayers most commonly fail, viz: that they are solitary and contrary,
   having nothing put in agreement with them; as if some one person should
   be praying for fair weather when every body else wants rain, and the
   gaping earth, and thirsty animals, and withering trees, are all asking
   for it together. Or a man, we may conceive, prays for holiness, getting
   off his knees to go and defraud his neighbor; or that he may be
   prospered in some plan that requires industry, and, by indolence and
   inattention, leaves all the causes of nature making suit against him.
   God is for some largest harmony in the hearing of prayers, as in every
   thing else. All the prayers that he will hear too must, in some sense,
   be from Himself, which is the same as to say that they must chime with
   His ends, and the working of his plans generally.

   See how it is, for example, in the great realm of nature. The first
   thing here to be discovered is that every thing requires every thing;
   or, if we take the figure of prayer, that all events make suit for all.
   Omit any one, and there would be a shock of discord felt in the whole
   frame work. As regards the interior principle of causes, we know
   nothing; we only see them all playing into all, and all demanding all,
   and then, all together, making suit for a certain general future,
   somehow accordant with them and their harmonies. Thus it will be seen
   to hold, even scientifically, in the grand astronomic system of worlds,
   that all the innumerable parts have a perfect concurrence, demanding
   exactly every thing that comes to pass, in the motions, changes of
   position, perturbations of parts, and processions of the whole. The
   principle, every thing for every thing and all together one, is so
   exact, that every atom and tiniest insect feels the touch, in fact, of
   every heaviest, highest, and remotest orb, and every such orb a
   respectiveness of action reaching downward, after every such minim of
   matter and life.

   Such is nature, and it would be exactly so, were it not for sin, in the
   supernatural order, viz: in the wants, and works, and prayers, and
   heavenly gifts of God's spiritual empire. Sin harmonizes with nothing.
   It is a principle of general discord with all God's purposes, plans,
   and creations; refusing to be included in any terms of intellectual
   unity and order. But God is none the less intent on harmony here, that
   the constituent harmony of his realm is broken. All that He is doing as
   a world's Redeemer, is to gather together in one, all the loosened
   elements of discord, and settle the world again, in everlasting concord
   and unity. And toward this final issue he puts all things working
   together as for the same good issue.

   Thus it will be found that the Bible history shows a grand convergency
   of all the matters included in it, and that a mysterious concert weaves
   all its facts together, and keeps them working toward the same result.
   The ritual of Moses, and the forty years' march, and all the
   captivities and dispersions of the people, and the dispersions of the
   Greek and Roman languages, and all the philosophic exhaustions, and all
   the crumblings of the false religions, and all the great wars of the
   Romans, and all the fortunes of empire determined by those wars, and
   then the universal pacification of the world--by all these vast
   concurrences the world is made ready, and set waiting for Christ to be
   born. The students of history, looking over this field, are astonished
   by the vastness of the preparation, and it is to them, as if they heard
   all these world-wide powers voiced in prayer together for the coming of
   Jesus. Just here, then was the time for him to come. And thus, in fact,
   he came, in the exact fullness of time, when the largest harmony was
   asking for him.

   In the same way, it will be seen, descending to a lower field, that
   every conversion to God takes place when some largest harmony demands
   it. Not always, or commonly, when some friend, or wife, or good mother,
   prays it, wholly alone, but when others join them, or when, at least,
   there is a large concurrence of providences and causes, making the same
   suit, and joining in the general conspiracy of reasons. And so much is
   there in this, that the subject himself will almost always feel a
   conviction of some wonderful conjunction of means, and conditions, and
   prayers, just then brought together, to accomplish the otherwise
   difficult or impossible result.

   Other illustrations, without limit, could be cited from the processes
   of God's spiritual administration; for it is always working toward the
   largest harmony. But we come directly to the matter of prayer itself
   And here we meet the promise, first of all, that--"if we ask any thing
   according to his will he heareth us;" for the design is here to draw
   the petitioner into the most intimate acquaintance, and bring him into
   the most exact conformity with, God's purposes and ends. And probably
   the whole economy of prayer, or giving gifts to prayer, which might as
   well be given otherwise without prayer, is meant to promote this
   agreement of the petitioners with God. Next we have that peculiar
   phrasing of the doctrine of prayer, by Christ, when he says--"If two of
   you shall agree, on earth, as touching any thing, that they shall ask,
   it shall be done for them;" where the intent of the doctrine is to
   bring the petitioners into the largest possible circle of harmony among
   themselves. Hence the promise too--"Ye shall seek me and find me, if ye
   search for me with all your heart;" where the purpose is to bring each
   individual into the largest harmony with himself and not leave half his
   dispositions, or aspirations, or lustings, praying virtually against
   his prayers. Hence, again the command--"Watch and pray lest ye enter
   into temptation;" where the endeavor is to set the voluntary powers
   chiming with the prayers, and working toward a grand petitional harmony
   with them. By the whole economy of prayer, then, God is working toward
   the largest, most inclusive harmony, and prayer is to be successful.
   just according to the amount of concurrency there is in it. First,
   there is to be the completest possible concurrency with God; then a
   concurrency of one or two hundred, or, if so it may be, two hundred
   millions of petitioners in a common suit; and then all these are to be
   total in the suit, bringing all their lustings, affections, works,
   plans, properties, and self-sacrifices, into the petition; whereupon
   the prayer will grow strong, just in proportion to the amount of
   agreement, or concurrence there is in it.

   Under this great law, therefore, prayer, as a matter of fact, has been
   getting and will always be getting more strength by the larger
   harmonies it embodies. Noah prayed alone for his very ungodly times,
   and could not be heard--the blood of Abel was crying to God for justice
   over against him, and so were all the crimes of violence and murder in
   his own most bloody and cruel age. Abraham prayed for Sodom, but there
   were no fifty, forty, thirty, twenty, ten, or, as far as we know, more
   than one righteous man to pray with him; and therefore he fails,
   obtaining only the safety of that godly brother's family. Afterwards
   Daniel, in a matter of great peril, was able, going to his house to
   pray, to set his three friends praying with him, and he found the light
   on which even his life depended. Still farther on, Esther set all her
   countrymen in the city praying and fasting with her, and obtained, in
   that manner, the deliverance of her whole people, and their promotion
   to honor in the kingdom. And so, again, the more wonderful scene of
   power which inaugurates the church, on the day of Pentecost, is
   distinguished by this principal, all-determining fact, that the
   disciples are all with one accord in one place, praying for the
   heavenly gift.

   Not to extend these illustrations farther, we may safely put it down as
   a conclusion, that prayer wants the largest possible harmony praying
   with it; or what is the same, as many reasons, and causes, and wants,
   and conditions, and persons, as possible, chiming in the suit of it; so
   that God may answer it for harmony's sake, and not against harmony. It
   may seem that I have led you a long way to reach this conclusion,
   especially when my subject is family prayer. But we shall now be able--

   II. To dispatch that particular subject as much more briefly; and
   besides, I have been able to hit upon no other method, which promised
   to unfold the real conditions of family prayer, and show the reasons of
   utter failure and abortiveness in it so distinctly and impressively.

   The great infirmity of family prayers, or of what is sometimes called
   family religion, is that it stands alone in the house, and has nothing
   put in agreement with it. Whereas, if it is to have any honest reality,
   as many things as possible should be soberly and deliberately put in
   agreement with it; for indeed it is a first point of religion itself,
   that by its very nature, it rules presidingly over every thing desired,
   done, thought, planned for, and prayed for, in the life. It is never to
   finish itself up by words, or word-supplications, or even by
   sacraments; but the whole custom of life and character must be in it
   and of it, by a total consent of the man. And more depends on this, a
   hundred times, than upon any occasional fervors, or passional flights,
   or agonizings. The grand defect will, in almost all cases, be, in what
   is more deliberate, viz: in the want of any downright, honest, casting
   of the family in the type of religion, as if that were truly accepted
   as the first thing.

   See just what is wanted, by what is so very commonly not found. First
   of all, the mere observance kind of piety, that which prays in the
   family to keep up a reverent show, or acknowledgment of religion, is
   not enough. It leaves every thing else in the life to be an open space
   for covetousness, and all the gay lustings of worldly vanity. It even
   leaves out prayer; for the saying prayers is, in no sense, really the
   same thing as to pray. Contrary to this, there should be some real
   prayer, prayer for the meaning's sake, and not for the shell of
   religious decency in which the semblance may be kept. This latter kind
   looks, indeed, for no return of blessing from God, but only for a
   certain religious effect accomplished by the drill of repetitional
   observance. There is also another kind of drill sometimes attempted in
   the prayers of families, which is much worse, viz: when the prayer is
   made, every morning, to hit this or that child in some matter of
   disobedience, or some mere peccadillo into which he has fallen. Nothing
   can be more irreverent to God than to make the hour of prayer a time of
   prison-discipline for the subjects of it, and nothing could more
   certainly set them in a fixed aversion to religion and to every thing
   sacred. This kind of prayer prays, in fact, for exasperation's sake,
   and the effect will correspond.

   In the next place, what is prayed for in the house by the father, is,
   how commonly, not prayed for by the mother in her family tastes and
   tempers, and is even prayed against, in fact, by all the instigations
   of appearance, and pride, and show, which are raised by her motherly
   studies and cares. And this, too, not seldom, when her prayers
   themselves are burdened with much feeling, and bear the appearances of
   much earnest longing for the piety of her children. Her prayers sound
   well in the wording, and she verily thinks that she means what she asks
   for; but the notions of standing she is putting in the head of her son,
   or the dress she is just now getting up for her daughter, pray, a
   hundred fold harder than her prayers, only just the other way; calling
   in results of feeling and character that are selfish, worldly, earthly
   in the last degree.

   It is a matter of the greatest importance, too, as regards the
   successful training of children, that they should be inducted into ways
   and habits of prayer themselves, as very frequently they are not.
   Sometimes even Christian mothers, who pray much for their children,
   never lead them into the practice of prayer for themselves. They are
   kept from so doing, by the supposed orthodox belief, first, that their
   children are of course in the gall of bitterness, and secondly, that
   such can offer no prayer, which is not an abomination to the Lord; in
   both which conclusions they are, in fact, neither orthodox nor
   Christian, and what to the children, at least, is even worse than that,
   consent to let them grow up in no personal habit of religion. How then
   can they be reached by the prayers of the house, when they are
   deliberately put outside of the possibility, even of beginning to pray
   for themselves? Sometimes they are taught to pray only in the sense of
   saying prayers, or repeating some little formula appropriate to their
   age. And there is nothing ill in this, if they only do it occasionally.
   But the much better method, in general, is for the mother to word a
   simple prayer for them herself, and let them follow after in the
   repetition of it, sentence by sentence. The prayer in this case, will
   have respect to the particular matters of the day; what has been seen,
   felt, enjoyed, wanted, suffered, and needs to be forgiven. Very soon
   the child himself, practiced in this way, will begin to drop in a
   sentence, here or there that comes directly out of his feeling, and it
   will not be long before he will be able to word a whole prayer for
   himself, and will so be led along into the habit of praying with his
   mother, and be grown, so to speak, into the ruling desires and prayers
   of the house. In this method, regularly pursued, the child may be
   trained to a perfectly open state in the matter of prayer; so that when
   the father is absent, or is taken away by death, he will be ready, at a
   very early period on his way to manhood, to take his father's place.
   There will be nothing ghostly, or sanctimoniously separated from the
   common going on of life, in the way of prayer thus maintained. Having
   it for the element of childhood, and being grown into the practice of
   it, the very geniality, and sweetness, and good cheer of home, will
   seem to be lapped in it, and it will be so far natural, that, if it
   were taken away, the course of life itself would seem to be even
   painfully unnatural. A house without a roof, would scarcely be a more
   indifferent home than a family state unsheltered by God's friendship,
   and the sense of being always rested in his Providential care and
   guidance. No sweetness of life is so indispensable to a family, brought
   up thus, in the open state with God, as to have all the cares,
   affections, partings, sicknesses, afflictions, prosperities, marriages,
   deaths, and all kinds of works, habitually blessed, by the sense of God
   ap pealed to, and consciously witnessing in them.

   But this again, depends on yet another fact, where commonly the defect
   is manifold greater than it is in the points already referred to. It is
   not only necessary to the genuine state of family religion, or the open
   state of godly living in the house, that the prayers should be prayers
   and not observances, and that both the parents should be truly in them
   together, and the children carefully bred into them also as the common
   joy of their home; but it is necessary also that the practical ends,
   tastes, plans, aspirations, and works of the house, should all come
   into the same circle of concert, and join their petition to reinforce
   the suit of the prayers. And here, as I have already intimated, is the
   great cause of failure in family religion. It is not difficult to get a
   Christian father into such a strain of desire for his children, that he
   will faithfully maintain the prayers of the house, and press himself at
   times into great fervors in his suit for them. These fervors will, too
   often, be kindled, in fact, by the conviction of really great
   derelictions of duty, such as come between the family and all God's
   blessings upon them. No, the difficult thing here is, not to get even
   the fervors of prayer, but to get the life itself and its works into
   that honest and deliberate agreement with the prayers, that will give
   them a genuine power and meaning, without any such flights and
   passional vehemences. The difficulty is that almost nothing, in the
   arrangements, tempers, and practical ends of the house, agrees with the
   prayers. The father prays in the morning that his children may grow up
   in the Lord, and calls it even the principal good of their life, that
   they are to be Christians, living to God and for the world to come.
   Then he goes out into the field, or the shop, or the house of trade,
   and delving there, all day, in his gains, keeps praying from morning to
   night, without knowing it, that his family may be rich. His plans and
   works, faithfully seconded by an affectionate wife, pull exactly
   contrary to the pull of his prayers, and to all their common teaching
   in religion. Their tempers are worldly, and make a worldly atmosphere
   in the house. Pride, the ambition of show and social stand ing, envy of
   what is above, jealousy of what is below, follies of dress and fashion,
   and the more foolish elation felt when a son is praised, or a daughter
   admired in the matter of personal appearance, or what is no better, a
   manifest preparing and foretasting of this folly, when the son, or
   daughter, is so young as to be only the more certainly poisoned by the
   infection of it--O these unspoken, damning prayers! how many are they,
   and how totally do they fill up the days! The mornings open with a
   reverent, fervent-sounding prayer of words, and then the days come
   after piling up petitions of ends. aims, tempers, passions, and works,
   that ask for any thing and every thing, but what accords with the
   genuine rule of religion. The prayer of the morning is that the son,
   the daughter, all the sons, all the daughters, may be Christian; and
   then the prayers that follow are for any thing but that, or any thing,
   in fact, most contrary to that. Is it any wonder, when we consider this
   common disagreement between the prayers, even the fervent prayers of
   the family, and all the other concerns, enjoyments, and ends of the
   common life beside, that so many fine shows of family piety are yet
   followed, by so much of godless and even reprobate character, in the
   children!

   Here then, my brethren, is the great lesson of family religion; it is
   that religion, being the supreme end and law of life, is to have every
   thing put in the largest possible harmony with it. And this is to be
   done by no superlative fervors, or heats of piety and prayer, but by
   the sober, honest, practical arrangement of life and its plans. Thus,
   if your children are to grow up into Christ, that is to be made their
   prayer, and the prayer of both the parents, and the prayer of all the
   buildings, migrations, plans, toils, trades, and pleasures of the
   house. All these are to pray, in sober earnest, that the children, as
   the practically best thing possible, and most to be desired, may be
   Christian in their life. There is no difficulty in forming a whole
   family to God, when there is grace enough in the parents to make that
   really the object, and set every thing in the largest harmony with it.
   The only difficulty is in doing it, when the prayers and the family
   religion are one side of every thing else, in a department by
   themselves, and the whole body of life's practical works and ends is
   operating directly against the result desired and prayed for. Prayer,
   in a certain proper view of it, is only one of the great causes of the
   world, and all the causes, natural as well as supernatural, are, in a
   certain broad sense, prayers. What is wanted, therefore, is to put all
   the causes, all the prayers, into a common strain of endeavor, reaching
   after a common good, in God and his friendship. The religious
   affinities of the house then take the mold of the prayers, and become a
   kind of prayer themselves. The children grow into faith, as it were, by
   a process of natural induction--only it will be intensely supernatural,
   because their faith is both quickened and grown in the atmosphere of
   God's own Spirit, always filling the house. He molds the prayers to
   agreement with God's will, and the prayers of each to the prayers of
   all, and the works and plans and tastes of all to the prayers; and
   then, as a consequence, which is also an answer, fills the house with
   his ingrown sanctifying power, and seals the members with his seal of
   life.

   Let us stop here now, in our closing, and contemplate the dignity and
   power of a genuine family religion, thus maintained. Consistency and
   solid reality, we have seen, are its great distinction--the whole
   ordering of the house is worshipful, and faithfully chimes with the
   prayers. The very table is sanctified with, as well as by, the blessing
   invoked upon it; so that when the house are feeding animal enjoyments,
   and, so far, saying that they are animals, they do not become such.
   Their sensuality is kept under by a divine spirituality above it. It is
   not so much their bodies as their souls that are fed. By their holy
   charities and prayers, the family property is also sanctified, and all
   the industries by which it is obtained. The training of the house does
   not end in money, the conversation is not about money, the plans are
   not plans turning on the supreme good of money, the only losses dreaded
   or shunned are not losses of money. Their thoughts and affections
   therefore, mellowed by the family piety, do not clink in their souls,
   as we sometimes almost hear them with a hard-money sound. For the love
   of God penetrates and savors, all through, even the works of thrift and
   all the ennobled virtues of a genuine economy. The mental life also is
   raised by the family religion, for they live thoughtfully, as in
   contact with God, and all the highest themes of existence. Events,
   providences, nay even things themselves, take on senses related to
   intelligence, feeling, and the uses of faith. And so their very talent
   grows into volume, because it is never imprisoned, or stunted by the
   external measures of things; but is led forth, always, into what things
   signify, as related to the broader affinities and the half-poetic life
   of religion. They are refined, in this manner, without any ambition to
   copy the mannerisms of refinement; refined by the fining of their
   intelligence and feeling. They are not emasculated by their culture,
   but grow manlier in it; because of the good and great thoughts, and
   high subjects, into which they are trained by the sober, honest piety
   of their practice.

   The family is thus exalted, every way, by the family religion; because
   there is such reality and all-diffusive harmony in the scope of it. In
   the prayers of the day it recalls, in one way or another and with
   filial reverence, the ancestors that have gone before, and looks
   hopefully on to the great reunion of the future. Its births are so many
   arrivals, or presentations, at the gate of eternity; its baptisms and
   baptismal namings are titles recorded in the family register of God;
   its deaths are only the migrations of so many into life, to be followed
   by the migration of all; and the sense of a good future, to be their
   common heritage, imparts a trustful, quietly cheerful air to their
   waiting. For that bright gathering of the house, after the storms are
   over, gilds their adversities and sicknesses, and kindles a beautiful
   expectancy in their prayers--keeps them looking up and away, without
   any instigations of asceticism, or false antipathy to the world. The
   godly father dwells in such a house, even as the apostle pictures
   Abraham, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him
   of the same promise viz: that of a city that hath foundations. Heirs
   with him--not heirs of his fee-simple, not legatees in his will,
   waiting patiently or impatiently for him to die, but heirs with him of
   a great angelic future that rests in character and fruits of well
   doing, in which they bless, and by mankind as well as God, are blessed.

   What scene of family dignity is more to be admired? The highest
   splendors of wealth and show, have but a feeble glow-worm look in the
   comparison--a pale, faint glimmer of light, a phosphorescent halo,
   enveloping what is only a worm. Even the poor laboring man, thanking
   God, at his table, for the food he earned by the toil of yesterday,
   singing still, each morning, in his family hymn, of the glorious rest
   at hand, moving on thitherward with his children, by single day's
   journeys of prayer and praise, teaching them, even as the eagles do
   their young, to spread their wings with him and rise--this man, I say,
   is the prince of God in his house, and the poor garb, in which he
   kneels, outshines the robes of palaces.

   The beauty of such family scenes has not escaped the notice of poetry
   itself, or even of mere worldly observation. But we must not, for a
   moment, forget that the charm of all such family pictures depends on
   that sound reality of worship, which puts every thing in the house in
   keeping with the prayers, and carries back the meaning of the prayers
   into every thing in the house. A flourish of prayer in the morning,
   followed by all flourishings of vanity and prosperous selfishness, for
   the rest of the day, will not answer. We look in upon the Christian
   family, where every thing is on a footing of religion, and we see them
   around their own quiet hearth and table, away from the great public
   world and its strifes, with a priest of their own to lead them. They
   are knit together in ties of love that make them one; even as they are
   fed and clothed out of the same fund, interested in the same
   possessions, partakers in the same successes and losses, suffering
   together in the same sorrows, animated each by hopes that respect the
   future benefit of all. Into such a circle and scene it is that religion
   comes, each day, to obtain a grace of well-doing for the day. And it
   comes not by itself, as in the public assembly, not in a manner that is
   one side of life and its common affairs. There is no pretense, no show,
   no toilet practice going before, no reference of thought to fashion, or
   dress, or appearance. It leads in the day, as the dawn leads in the
   morning. It blends a heavenly gratitude with the joys of the table; it
   breathes a cheerful sense of God into all the works and tempers of the
   house; it softens the pillow for rest when the day is done. And so the
   religion of the house is life itself, the life of life; and having
   always been observed, it becomes an integral part even of existence,
   leaving no feeling that in a proper family it could ever have been
   otherwise. A family state, maintained without a fire, would not seem to
   be more impossible or colder. Home and religion are kindred words;
   names both of love and reverence; home, because it is the seat of
   religion; religion, because it is the sacred element of home.

   This training, in short, of a genuine, practically all-embracing,
   all-imbuing family religion, makes the families so many little
   churches, only they are as much better, in many points, as they are
   more private, closer to the life of infancy, and more completely
   blended with the common affairs of life. Here it is that chastity,
   modesty, temperance, industry, truth--all the virtues that give beauty,
   and worth, and majesty, to character, get their root. Here it is, above
   all, that they who are born into life, are led up, in their gracious
   training, to knit the green tendrils of existence to God. And so, in
   all the future scenes of duty, and wrong, and grief; through which they
   are to pass, it will be found that they were furnished here, with
   supplies of grace, and armed with shields of confidence from God, to
   meet every encounter, bear every burden, and maintain every kind of
   well doing, till the victory of life is won.

   Holding, now, this conviction, as Christian parents, of the importance
   of a true family religion, allow yourselves never to forget the
   condition which alone makes it of so great value, viz: that it has such
   scope as to include and harmonize all the ways, and works, and cares of
   the house. See that you plan to be, in your undertakings, just what you
   pray to be in your prayers. Set the general concert of your affairs in
   God's own order, to accomplish only what is agreeable to his will, so
   to be always praying with you, and the prophet's rich valley, teeming
   with all fruits of abundance and luxury, will but feebly represent the
   unfailing, never blighted, always fruitful, piety of your children.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  A NEW BOOK BY DR. HOLLAND.

                                EVERYDAY TOPICS.

    BY J. C. HOLLAND,

   Author of "Sevenoaks," "Arthur Bonnicastle," "The Mistress of the
   Manse." " Kathrina," "Bitter Sweet," "Titcomb's Letters," "Gold Foil,"
   etc.

   ONE VOL. 12mo. PRICE $I.75.

   The same sound sense and practical wisdom as applied to the affairs of
   everyday life which secured for "Gold Foil" and "Lessons in Life" such
   wide and enduring popularity distinguish this volume in a still more
   marked degree. It contains careful selections from the articles written
   by Dr. Holland for the department "Topics of the Time" in Scribner's
   Monthly during the last five years.

   Only those papers furnishing permanent value and general interest here
   find a place, but the range of topics is surprisingly wide and
   extremely attractive--"Culture," "Literature and Literary Men," "The
   Popular Lecture," "The Common Moralities," "Woman," "American Life and
   Manners" are a few of the general subjects under which the different
   articles are grouped.

   Upon them all Dr. Holland expresses himself with that grace,
   directness, earnestness, and force which have given him so strong a
   hold upon such a multitude of readers.

   Copies sent post-paid by

   SCRIBNER, ARMSTRONG & CO.,

   743 and 745 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

                                   SEVENOAKS.

A STORY OF TO-DAY.

  BY J. G. HOLLAND,

   Author of "Arthur Bonnicastle," "The Mistress of the Manse." "
   Kathrina," "Bitter Sweet," "Titcomb's Letters," etc.

   With 2 full-page illustrations, after original designs by Sol. Eytinge.
   One volume, 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

   Dr. Holland in his latest novel, "The Story of Sevenoaks," has
   undertaken to present some typical American characters, and especially
   to throw light upon a phase of New York life, the outside of which, at
   least, is familiar to every reader. But it is not merely because the
   characters and scenes and incidents are thoroughly modern and familiar
   that the story has won so much attention during its serial publication
   in Scribner's Monthly. The progress of events is rapid, and graphically
   narrated; and it is seldom that an American Magazine Story has been
   followed from beginning to end by so large an audience, and with such
   eager and sustained interest. The book, too, is enlivened by those bits
   of out-of-door description, sympathetic touches of character, and
   genial philosophies, that his readers always find in Dr. Holland's
   stories, and which constitute no small part of their attraction.

   Dr. HOLLAND'S WORKS.

   Each in One Volume, 12mo.

   The MISTRESS of the MANSE $1 50 MISS GILBERT'S CAREER $3 00
   *BITTERSWEET; a Poem 1 50 BAY PATH 2 00
   *KATHRINA; a Poem 1 50 THE MARBLE PROPHECY and other Poems 1 50
   LETTERS TO YOUNG PEOPLE 1 50
   *GOLD FOIL hammered from Popular Proverbs 1 75 GARNERED SHEAVES.
   Complete Poetical Works, "Bitter Sweet," "Kathrina," "Marble Prophecy,"
   red line edition, beautifully illustrated. 4 00
   LESSONS IN LIFE 1 75
   *PLAIN TALKS on Familiar Subjects 1 75 ARTHUR BONNICASTLE 2 75
   LETTERS TO THE JONESES 1 75

   * These six volumes are issued in cabinet size (16mo), "Brightwood
   Edition," at the same prices as above.

   Copies sent post-paid by

   SCRIBNER, ARMSTRONG & CO.,

   743 and 745 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

THREE IMPORTANT THEOLOGICAL WORKS.

                                 THE PARACLETE

   An Essay on the Personality and Ministry of the Holy Ghost, with some
   Reference to Current Discussions.

   By JOSEPH PARKER, D.D., Author of "ECCE DEUS," etc. One vol., I2mo,
   cloth......... $1.50

   From the Church Journal.

   "It is written in a warm, devout, earnest manner, with much power of
   reasoning and wealth of illustration, and very much suggestiveness, as
   though the author were rather burdened with the amount he had to say
   and used necessary repression. The introduction, and the essays
   reviewing Mr. Huxley, at the end, are perhaps the best parts of the
   book."
     __________________________________________________________________

                       MODERN DOUBT AND CHRISTIAN BELIEF

   A SERIES OF APOLOGETIC LECTURES ADDRESSED TO EARNEST SEEKERS AFTER
   TRUTH. By THEODORE CHRISTLIEB, University Preacher and Professor of
   Theology at Bonn. One vol., 8vo, cloth,....... $3.00

   From the Presbyterian.

   "One rises from the reading of this volume with mind and heart expanded
   and enriched, feeling that he has seen the gigantic and imposing
   structure of skepticism shattered and the solid rock of Divine truth
   disclosed. He knows not which to admire most--the author's wide and
   thorough research, the exhaustiveness of his discussion, his
   even-balanced and judicial impartiality, or his clear and finished
   style. Every minister and every lay student of theology needs the work,
   and no one who saw and heard its gifted author while in this country
   will need urging to procure it."
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE
   SUPERHUMAN ORIGIN OF THE BIBLE
   INFERRED FROM ITSELF.

   By HENRY ROGERS, Author of "THE ECLIPSE OF FAITH," etc. One vol. 12mo,
   cloth,...... $2.00

   From the Congregationalist.

   "Mr. ROGERS has constructed a volume which is to outlive all his other
   writings. It is an instructive, stimulating, well-compacted book. Most
   of the considerations which he has marshaled in proof of his thesis
   have been presented by others, some of them with greater fulness and
   equal brilliancy. He has brought together what has been scattered In
   many treatises. He has freshened familiar illustrations and welded into
   one many common proofs, so that they carry a new persuasiveness, and he
   has added not a few subtle and suggestive and most satisfactory
   illustrations of the wonderful nature of that Word which abideth."

   The above books sent, postpaid, on receipt of the price, by the
   publishers,

   SCRIBNER, ARMSTRONG & CO., NEW YORK.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]18:19   [2]18:19

   Proverbs

   [3]22:6   [4]30:8-9

   Isaiah

   [5]54:13

   Jeremiah

   [6]7:18

   Lamentations

   [7]4:3

   Hosea

   [8]2:21-22

   Zechariah

   [9]7:5

   Malachi

   [10]2:15

   Acts

   [11]2:39   [12]16:1

   Romans

   [13]16:14

   1 Corinthians

   [14]1:16

   Ephesians

   [15]6:4   [16]6:4

   Colossians

   [17]1:2   [18]3:21

   1 Timothy

   [19]3:4

   2 Timothy

   [20]1:5   [21]2:14
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * crimen falsi: [22]1
     * fideles: [23]1
     * opus operatum: [24]1
     * punctum temporis: [25]1
     * sacramentum: [26]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [27]i  [28]ii  [29]iii  [30]iv  [31]v  [32]vi  [33]vii  [34]8  [35]9
   [36]10  [37]11  [38]12  [39]13  [40]14  [41]15  [42]16  [43]17  [44]18
   [45]19  [46]20  [47]21  [48]22  [49]23  [50]24  [51]25  [52]26  [53]27
   [54]28  [55]29  [56]30  [57]31  [58]32  [59]33  [60]34  [61]35  [62]36
   [63]37  [64]38  [65]39  [66]40  [67]41  [68]42  [69]43  [70]44  [71]45
   [72]46  [73]47  [74]48  [75]49  [76]50  [77]51  [78]52  [79]53  [80]54
   [81]55  [82]56  [83]57  [84]58  [85]59  [86]60  [87]61  [88]62  [89]63
   [90]64  [91]65  [92]66  [93]67  [94]68  [95]69  [96]70  [97]71  [98]72
   [99]73  [100]74  [101]75  [102]76  [103]77  [104]78  [105]79  [106]80
   [107]81  [108]82  [109]83  [110]84  [111]85  [112]86  [113]87  [114]88
   [115]89  [116]90  [117]91  [118]92  [119]93  [120]94  [121]95  [122]96
   [123]97  [124]98  [125]99  [126]100  [127]101  [128]102  [129]103
   [130]104  [131]105  [132]106  [133]107  [134]108  [135]109  [136]110
   [137]111  [138]112  [139]113  [140]114  [141]115  [142]116  [143]117
   [144]118  [145]119  [146]120  [147]121  [148]122  [149]123  [150]124
   [151]125  [152]126  [153]127  [154]128  [155]129  [156]130  [157]131
   [158]132  [159]133  [160]134  [161]135  [162]136  [163]137  [164]138
   [165]139  [166]140  [167]141  [168]142  [169]143  [170]144  [171]145
   [172]146  [173]147  [174]148  [175]149  [176]150  [177]151  [178]152
   [179]153  [180]154  [181]155  [182]156  [183]157  [184]158  [185]159
   [186]160  [187]161  [188]162  [189]163  [190]164  [191]165  [192]166
   [193]167  [194]168  [195]169  [196]170  [197]171  [198]172  [199]173
   [200]174  [201]175  [202]176  [203]177  [204]178  [205]179  [206]180
   [207]181  [208]182  [209]183  [210]184  [211]185  [212]186  [213]187
   [214]188  [215]189  [216]190  [217]191  [218]192  [219]193  [220]194
   [221]195  [222]196  [223]197  [224]198  [225]199  [226]200  [227]201
   [228]202  [229]203  [230]204  [231]205  [232]206  [233]207  [234]208
   [235]209  [236]210  [237]211  [238]212  [239]213  [240]214  [241]215
   [242]216  [243]217  [244]218  [245]219  [246]220  [247]221  [248]222
   [249]223  [250]224  [251]225  [252]226  [253]227  [254]228  [255]229
   [256]230  [257]231  [258]232  [259]233  [260]234  [261]235  [262]236
   [263]237  [264]238  [265]239  [266]240  [267]241  [268]242  [269]243
   [270]244  [271]245  [272]246  [273]247  [274]248  [275]249  [276]250
   [277]251  [278]252  [279]253  [280]254  [281]255  [282]256  [283]257
   [284]258  [285]259  [286]260  [287]261  [288]262  [289]263  [290]264
   [291]265  [292]266  [293]267  [294]268  [295]269  [296]270  [297]271
   [298]272  [299]273  [300]274  [301]275  [302]276  [303]277  [304]278
   [305]279  [306]280  [307]281  [308]282  [309]283  [310]284  [311]285
   [312]286  [313]287  [314]288  [315]289  [316]290  [317]291  [318]292
   [319]293  [320]294  [321]295  [322]296  [323]297  [324]298  [325]299
   [326]300  [327]301  [328]302  [329]303  [330]304  [331]305  [332]306
   [333]307  [334]308  [335]309  [336]310  [337]311  [338]312  [339]313
   [340]314  [341]315  [342]316  [343]317  [344]318  [345]319  [346]320
   [347]321  [348]322  [349]323  [350]324  [351]325  [352]326  [353]327
   [354]328  [355]329  [356]330  [357]331  [358]332  [359]333  [360]334
   [361]335  [362]336  [363]337  [364]338  [365]339  [366]340  [367]341
   [368]342  [369]343  [370]344  [371]345  [372]346  [373]347  [374]348
   [375]349  [376]350  [377]351  [378]352  [379]353  [380]354  [381]355
   [382]356  [383]357  [384]358  [385]359  [386]360  [387]361  [388]362
   [389]363  [390]364  [391]365  [392]366  [393]367  [394]368  [395]369
   [396]370  [397]371  [398]372  [399]373  [400]374  [401]375  [402]376
   [403]377  [404]378  [405]379  [406]380  [407]381  [408]382  [409]383
   [410]384  [411]385  [412]386  [413]387  [414]388  [415]389  [416]390
   [417]391  [418]392  [419]393  [420]394  [421]395  [422]396  [423]397
   [424]398  [425]399  [426]400  [427]401  [428]402  [429]403  [430]404
   [431]405  [432]406  [433]407  [434]408  [435]409  [436]410  [437]411
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=19#iii.iv-p29.1
   2. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=19#iv.ii-p1.1
   3. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=6#iii.vii-p42.1
   4. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=8#iv.iii-p1.1
   5. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=13#i-p2.1
   6. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=18#iii.iv-p1.1
   7. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iii.iii-p1.1
   8. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.viii-p1.1
   9. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=5#iv.vi-p1.1
  10. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.viii-p1.1
  11. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=39#iii.v-p1.1
  12. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iv.vii-p2.1
  13. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iii.vi-p20.1
  14. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.vi-p1.1
  15. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iii.i-p1.1
  16. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iii.ii-p1.1
  17. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.vii-p1.1
  18. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.iv-p1.1
  19. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.v-p1.1
  20. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.i-p1.1
  21. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.vii-p1.1
  22. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-p11.1
  23. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-p21.1
  24. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-p34.1
  25. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-p36.1
  26. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-p32.1
  27. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#i-Page_i
  28. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#i-Page_ii
  29. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#ii.i-Page_iii
  30. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#ii.i-Page_iv
  31. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#ii.i-Page_v
  32. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#ii.ii-Page_vi
  33. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#ii.ii-Page_vii
  34. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii-Page_8
  35. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii-Page_9
  36. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_10
  37. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_11
  38. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_12
  39. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_13
  40. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_14
  41. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_15
  42. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_16
  43. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_17
  44. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_18
  45. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_19
  46. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_20
  47. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_21
  48. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_22
  49. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_23
  50. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_24
  51. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_25
  52. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_26
  53. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_27
  54. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_28
  55. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_29
  56. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_30
  57. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_31
  58. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_32
  59. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.i-Page_33
  60. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_34
  61. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_35
  62. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_36
  63. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_37
  64. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_38
  65. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_39
  66. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_40
  67. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_41
  68. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_42
  69. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_43
  70. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_44
  71. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_45
  72. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_46
  73. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_47
  74. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_48
  75. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_49
  76. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_50
  77. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_51
  78. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_52
  79. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_53
  80. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_54
  81. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_55
  82. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_56
  83. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_57
  84. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_58
  85. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_59
  86. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_60
  87. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_61
  88. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_62
  89. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_63
  90. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_64
  91. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.ii-Page_65
  92. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_66
  93. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_67
  94. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_68
  95. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_69
  96. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_70
  97. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_71
  98. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_72
  99. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_73
 100. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_74
 101. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_75
 102. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_76
 103. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_77
 104. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_78
 105. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_79
 106. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_80
 107. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_81
 108. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_82
 109. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_83
 110. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_84
 111. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_85
 112. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_86
 113. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_87
 114. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_88
 115. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_89
 116. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iii-Page_90
 117. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_91
 118. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_92
 119. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_93
 120. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_94
 121. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_95
 122. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_96
 123. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_97
 124. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_98
 125. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_99
 126. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_100
 127. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_101
 128. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_102
 129. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_103
 130. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_104
 131. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_105
 132. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_106
 133. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_107
 134. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_108
 135. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_109
 136. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_110
 137. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_111
 138. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_112
 139. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_113
 140. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_114
 141. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_115
 142. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_116
 143. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_117
 144. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_118
 145. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_119
 146. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_120
 147. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_121
 148. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_122
 149. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.iv-Page_123
 150. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_124
 151. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_125
 152. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_126
 153. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_127
 154. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_128
 155. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_129
 156. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_130
 157. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_131
 158. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_132
 159. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_133
 160. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_134
 161. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_135
 162. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_136
 163. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_137
 164. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_138
 165. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_139
 166. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_140
 167. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_141
 168. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_142
 169. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_143
 170. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_144
 171. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.v-Page_145
 172. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_146
 173. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_147
 174. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_148
 175. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_149
 176. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_150
 177. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_151
 178. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_152
 179. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_153
 180. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_154
 181. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_155
 182. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_156
 183. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_157
 184. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_158
 185. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_159
 186. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_160
 187. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_161
 188. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vi-Page_162
 189. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_163
 190. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_164
 191. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_165
 192. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_166
 193. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_167
 194. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_168
 195. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_169
 196. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_170
 197. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_171
 198. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_172
 199. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_173
 200. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_174
 201. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_175
 202. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_176
 203. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_177
 204. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_178
 205. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_179
 206. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_180
 207. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_181
 208. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_182
 209. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_183
 210. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_184
 211. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_185
 212. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_186
 213. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_187
 214. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_188
 215. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_189
 216. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_190
 217. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_191
 218. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_192
 219. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_193
 220. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_194
 221. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.vii-Page_195
 222. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_196
 223. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_197
 224. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_198
 225. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_199
 226. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_200
 227. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_201
 228. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_202
 229. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_203
 230. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_204
 231. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_205
 232. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_206
 233. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_207
 234. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_208
 235. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_209
 236. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_210
 237. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_211
 238. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_212
 239. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_213
 240. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_214
 241. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_215
 242. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_216
 243. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_217
 244. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_218
 245. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_219
 246. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_220
 247. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_221
 248. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_222
 249. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_223
 250. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_224
 251. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iii.viii-Page_225
 252. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv-Page_226
 253. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv-Page_227
 254. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_228
 255. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_229
 256. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_230
 257. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_231
 258. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_232
 259. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_233
 260. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_234
 261. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_235
 262. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_236
 263. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_237
 264. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_238
 265. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_239
 266. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_240
 267. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_241
 268. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_242
 269. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_243
 270. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_244
 271. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_245
 272. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_246
 273. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_247
 274. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_248
 275. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_249
 276. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_250
 277. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_251
 278. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_252
 279. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.i-Page_253
 280. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_254
 281. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_255
 282. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_256
 283. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_257
 284. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_258
 285. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_259
 286. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_260
 287. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_261
 288. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_262
 289. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_263
 290. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_264
 291. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_265
 292. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_266
 293. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_267
 294. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_268
 295. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_269
 296. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_270
 297. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.ii-Page_271
 298. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_272
 299. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_273
 300. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_274
 301. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_275
 302. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_276
 303. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_277
 304. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_278
 305. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_279
 306. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_280
 307. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_281
 308. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_282
 309. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_283
 310. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_284
 311. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_285
 312. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_286
 313. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_287
 314. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_288
 315. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_289
 316. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_290
 317. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_291
 318. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_292
 319. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_293
 320. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iii-Page_294
 321. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_295
 322. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_296
 323. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_297
 324. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_298
 325. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_299
 326. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_300
 327. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_301
 328. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_302
 329. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_303
 330. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_304
 331. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_305
 332. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_306
 333. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_307
 334. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_308
 335. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_309
 336. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_310
 337. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_311
 338. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_312
 339. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_313
 340. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.iv-Page_314
 341. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_315
 342. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_316
 343. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_317
 344. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_318
 345. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_319
 346. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_320
 347. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_321
 348. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_322
 349. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_323
 350. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_324
 351. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_325
 352. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_326
 353. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_327
 354. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_328
 355. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_329
 356. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_330
 357. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_331
 358. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_332
 359. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_333
 360. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_334
 361. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_335
 362. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_336
 363. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_337
 364. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.v-Page_338
 365. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_339
 366. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_340
 367. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_341
 368. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_342
 369. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_343
 370. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_344
 371. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_345
 372. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_346
 373. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_347
 374. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_348
 375. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_349
 376. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_350
 377. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_351
 378. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_352
 379. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_353
 380. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_354
 381. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_355
 382. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_356
 383. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_357
 384. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_358
 385. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_359
 386. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_360
 387. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_361
 388. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_362
 389. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_363
 390. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_364
 391. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_365
 392. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vi-Page_366
 393. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_367
 394. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_368
 395. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_369
 396. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_370
 397. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_371
 398. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_372
 399. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_373
 400. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_374
 401. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_375
 402. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_376
 403. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_377
 404. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_378
 405. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_379
 406. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_380
 407. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_381
 408. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_382
 409. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_383
 410. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_384
 411. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.vii-Page_385
 412. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_386
 413. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_387
 414. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_388
 415. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_389
 416. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_390
 417. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_391
 418. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_392
 419. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_393
 420. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_394
 421. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_395
 422. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_396
 423. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_397
 424. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_398
 425. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_399
 426. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_400
 427. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_401
 428. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_402
 429. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_403
 430. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_404
 431. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_405
 432. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_406
 433. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_407
 434. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#iv.viii-Page_408
 435. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#v-Page_409
 436. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#v-Page_410
 437. file:///ccel/b/bushnell/nurture/cache/nurture.html3#v-Page_411
