     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Lively Oracles Given to Us: or the Christians Birth-right
                  and Duty in the Custody and Use of the Holy Scripture.
      Creator(s): Allestree, Richard (1619-1681)
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

    THE

                                 LIVELY ORACLES

GIVEN TO US.

    OR THE

Christians Birth-right

AND DUTY,

    In the custody and use of the

HOLY SCRIPTURE.
     __________________________________________________________________

   By the Author of
   The Whole Duty of Man, &c.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39.
     __________________________________________________________________

   At the Theater in Oxford, 1713

   Imprimatur.

   JO. NICHOLAS

   Vice-Cancell. Oxon.

   Junii 10, 1678.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE

PREFACE.

   IN the Treatise of the Government of the Tongue, publish'd by me
   heretofore, I had occasion to take notice among the exorbitances of
   that unruly part, which sets on fire the whole course of nature, and it
   self is set on fire from hell, Jam. 3. 6. of the impious vanity
   prevailing in this Age, whereby men play with sacred things, and
   exercise their wit upon the Scriptures by which they shall be judg'd at
   the last day, Joh. 12. 48.

   But that Holy Book not only suffering by the petulancy of the Tongue,
   but the malice of the Heart, out of the abundance whereof the mouth
   speaks, Matt. 12. 34. and also from that irreligion, prepossession, and
   supiness, which the pursuit of sensual pleasures certainly produces;
   the mischief is too much diffus'd and deeply rooted, to be controul'd
   by a few casual reflections. I have therefore thought it necessary,
   both in regard of the dignity and importance of the subject, as also
   the prevalence of the opposition, to attempt a profess'd and particular
   vindication of the Holy Scriptures, by displaying their native
   excellence and beauty, and enforcing the veneration and obedience that
   is to be paid unto them.

   This I design'd to do in my usual method, by an address to the
   affections of the Reader; soliciting the several passions of love,
   hope, fear, shame and sorrow, which either the Majesty of God in his
   Sublime Being, his goodness derived to us, or our ingratitude return'd
   to him, could actuate in persons not utterly obdurate.

   But whereas men when they have learn'd to do amiss, quickly dispute and
   dictate; I found my self concern'd to pass sometimes within the verge
   of controversy, and to discourse upon the principles of reason, and
   deductions from Testimony, which in the most important transactions of
   human life are justly taken for evidence. In which whole performance I
   have study'd to avoid the entanglements of Sophistry, and the ambition
   of unintelligible Quotations; and kept my self within the reach of the
   unlearned Christian Reader, to whose uses my labours have been ever
   dedicated.

   All that I require is that men would bring as much readiness to
   entertain the Holy Scriptures, as they do to the reading profane
   Authors, I am asham'd to to say, as they do to the incentives of vice
   and folly, nay, to the libels and invectives that are levell'd against
   the Scriptures.

   If I obtain this, I will make no doubt that I shall gain a farther
   point; that from the perusal of my imperfect conceptions, the Reader
   will proceed to the study of the Scriptures themselves: there tast and
   see how gracious the Lord is, Psal. 34. 8. and, as the Angel commands
   Saint John, Revelat. 10. 9. eat the Book: where he will experimentally
   find the words of David verify'd, Ps. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is an
   undefiled Law, converting the Soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure,
   and giveth wisdom to the simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right,
   and rejoyce the heart; the Commandment of the Lord is pure, and giveth
   light to the eyes. The Fear of the Lord is clean and endureth for ever,
   the Judgements of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. More to
   be desir'd are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold, sweeter also
   than hony and the hony-comb. Moreover by them is thy servant taught,
   and in keeping of them there is great reward.

   It is said of Moses, Exod. 34. 29. that having receiv'd the Law from
   God, and convers'd with him in Mount Sinai fourty days together, his
   face shone, and had a brightness fix'd upon it that dazled the
   beholders; a pledge and short essay not only of his appearance at Mount
   Tabor, Matt. 17. 1. where, at the Transfiguration he again was seen in
   glory: but of that greater, and yet future change when he shall see
   indeed his God face to face, and share his glory unto all eternity. The
   same Divine Goodness gives still his Law to every one of us. Let us
   receive it with due regard and veneration; converse with him therein,
   instead of fourty days, during our whole lives, and so anticipate and.
   certainly assure our interest in that great Transfiguration, when all
   the faithful shall put off their mortal flesh, be translated from glory
   to glory, eternally behold their God, see him as he is, and so enjoy
   him.

   Conversation has every where an assimilating power; we are generally
   such as are the Men, and Books, and business that we deal with: but
   surely no familiarity has so great an influence on Life and Manners, as
   when Men hear God speaking to them in his Word. That Word which the
   Apostle Hebr. 4. 12. declares to be quick and powerful, sharper than
   any two-edg'd sword, piercing to the dividing asunder of soul and
   spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
   thoughts and intent of the heart.

   The time will come when all our Books however recommended for subtilty
   of discourse, exactness of method, variety of matter, eloquence of
   Language; when all our curious Arts, like those mention'd Acts 19. 19.
   shall be brought forth, and burnt before all men: When the great Book
   of nature, and heaven it self shall depart as a scroul roll'd together,
   Revel. 6. 14. At which important season 'twill be more to purpose to
   have study'd well, that is, transcrib'd in practice this one Book, than
   to have run thro' all besides, for then the dead, small and great,
   shall stand befere God, and the Books shall be open'd, and another Book
   shall be open'd which is the Book of Life, and the dead shall be judg'd
   out of those things which were written in the Books according to their
   works, Revel. 20. 21.

   In vain shall men alledge the want of due conviction, that they did not
   know how penal it would be, to disregard the Sanctions of Gods Law,
   which they would have had enforc'd by immediate miracle; the apparition
   of one sent from the other world who might testify of the place of
   torment. This expectation the Scripture charges every where with the
   guilt of tempting God, and indeed it really involves this insolent
   proposal, that the Almighty should be oblig'd to break his own Laws,
   that men might be prevail'd with to keep his. But should he think fit
   to comply herein, the condescension would be as successless in the
   event, as 'tis unreasonable in the offer. Our Saviour assures, that
   they who hear not Moses and the Prophets, the instructions and commands
   laid down in holy Scripture, would not be wrought upon by any other
   method, would not be persuaded by that which they allow for
   irresistable conviction, tho' one rose again from the dead, Luke 16.
   31.
     __________________________________________________________________

    THE

                                 LIVELY ORACLES

  GIVEN TO US,

   Or the Christians Birth-right and Duty in the custody and use of the

                                HOLY SCRIPTURE.

                                    SECT. I.

   The several Methods of Gods communicating the knowledge of himself.

   GOD, as he is invisible to human eyes, so he is unfathomable by human
   understandings; the perfection of his nature, and the impotency of
   ours, setting us at too great a distance to have any clear perception
   of him. Nay, so far are we from a full comprehension, that we can
   discern nothing at all of him, but by his own light; those discoveries
   he hath been pleas'd to make of himself.

   2. THOSE have been of several sorts; The first was by infusion in mans
   creation, when God interwove into mans very constitution and being the
   notions and apprehensions of a Deity: and at the same instant when he
   breath'd into him a living soul, imprest on it that native religion,
   which taught him to know and reverence his Creator, which we may call
   the instinct of humanity. Nor were those principles dark and confus'd,
   but clear and evident, proportionable to the ends they were design'd
   to, which were not only to contemplate the nature, but to do the will
   of God; practice being even in the state of innocence preferable before
   an unactive speculation.

   3. BUT this Light being soon eclips'd by Adams disobedience, there
   remain'd to his benighted posterity, only some faint glimmerings, which
   were utterly insufficient to guide them to their end, without fresh
   aids, and renew'd manifestations of God to them. It pleas'd God
   therefore to repair this ruine, and by subsequent revelations to
   communicate himself to the Patriarchs in the first Ages of the World:
   afterwards to Prophets, and other holy men; till at last he revealed
   himself yet more illustriously in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.
   6.

   4. THIS is the one great comprehensive Revelation wherein all the
   former were involv'd, and to which they pointed; the whole mystery of
   Godliness being compris'd in this of Gods being manifested in the
   flesh, and the consequents thereof, 1 Tim. 3. 16. whereby our Saviour
   as he effected our reconciliation with God by the sacrifice of his
   death; so he declar'd both that, and all things else that it concern'd
   man to know in order to bliss, in his doctrine and holy life. And this
   Teacher being not only sent from God, Jo. 3. but being himself God
   blessed for ever, it cannot be that his instructions can want any
   supplement. Yet that they might not want attestation neither to the
   incredulous world; he confirm'd them by the repeated miracles of his
   life, and by the testimony of those who saw the more irrefragable
   conviction of his Resurrection and Ascension. And they also might not
   want credit and enforcement, the holy Spirit set to his seal, and by
   his miraculous descent upon the Apostles, both asserted their
   commission, and enabled them for the discharge of it, by all gifts
   necessary for the propagating the Faith of Christ over the whole World.

   5. THESE were the waies by which God was pleased to reveal himself to
   the Forefathers of our Faith, and that not only for their sakes, but
   ours also, to whom they were to derive those divine dictates they had
   receiv'd. St. Stephen tells us, those under the Law receiv'd the lively
   Oracles to deliver them down to their posterity, Acts 7. 38. And those
   under the Gospel, who receiv'd yet more lively Oracles from him who was
   both the Word and the Life, did it for the like purpose; to transmit it
   to us upon whom the ends of the world are come. By this all need of
   repeated Revelations is superseded, the faithful deriving of the
   former, being sufficient to us for all things that appertain to life
   and godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3.

   6. AND for this, God (whose care is equal for all successions of men)
   hath graciously provided, by causing Holy Scriptures to be writ; by
   which he hath deriv'd on every succeeding Age the illuminations of the
   former. And for that purpose endowed the Writers not only with that
   moral fidelity requisite to the truth of History, but with a divine
   Spirit, proportionable to the great design of fixing an immutable rule
   for Faith and Manners. And to give us the fuller security herein, he
   has chosen no other penmen of the New Testament, than those who were
   the first oral Promulgers of our Christian Religion; so that they have
   left to us the very same doctrine they taught the Primitive Christians;
   and he that acknowledges them divinely inspir'd in what they preach'd,
   cannot doubt them to be so in what they writ. So that we all may enjoy
   virtually and effectively that with of the devout Father, who desir'd
   to be St. Paul's Auditor: for he that hears any of his Epistles read,
   is as really spoke to by Saint Paul, as those who were within the sound
   of his voice. Thus God, who in times past spak: at sundry times, and in
   diverse manners to our Fathers by the Prophets, and in the latter days
   by his Son, Heb. 1. 1, 2. continues to speak to us by these inspir'd
   Writers; and what Christ once said to his Disciples in relation to
   their preaching is no less true of their writings: He that despiseth
   you, despiseth me, Luk. 10. 16. All the contempt that is at any time
   flung on these sacred Writings, rebounds higher, and finally devolves
   on the first Author of those doctrines, whereof these are the Registers
   and Transcripts.

   7. BUT this is a guilt which one would think peculiar to Infidels and
   Pagans, and not incident to any who had in their Baptism lifted
   themselves under Christs banner: yet I fear I may say, of the two
   parties, the Scripture has met with the worst treatment from the
   latter. For if we measure by the frequency and variety of injuries, I
   fear Christians will appear to have out-vied Heathens: These bluntly
   disbelieve them, neglect, nay perhaps scornfully deride them. Alas,
   Christians do this and more; they not only put contempts, but tricks
   upon the Scripture, wrest and distort it to justify all their wild
   phancies, or secular designs; and suborn its Patronage to those things
   it forbids, and tells us that God abhors.

   8. INDEED so many are the abuses we offer it, that he that considers
   them would scarce think we own'd it for the words of a sensible man,
   much less of the great omniscient God. And I believe 'twere hard to
   assign any one so comprehensive and efficacious cause of the universal
   depravation of manners, as the disvaluing of this divine Book, which
   was design'd to regulate them. It were therefore a work worthy another
   inspired writing, to attempt the rescue of this, and recover it to its
   just estimate. Yet alas, could we hope for that, we have scoffers who
   would as well despise the New as the Old; and like the Husbandmen in
   the Gospel, Mat. 21. 36. would answer such a succession of messages by
   repeating the same injuries.

   9. To such as these 'tis I confess vain for man to address; nay 'twere
   insolence to expect that human Oratory should succeed where the divine
   fails yet the spreading infection of these renders it necessary to
   administer antidotes to others. And besides, tho' (God be blest) all
   are not of this form, yet there are many who, tho' not arriv'd to this
   contempt, yet want some degrees of that just reverence they owe the
   sacred Scriptures, who give a confus'd general assent to them as the
   Word of God, but afford them not a consideration and respect answerable
   to such an acknowledgment. To such as these, I shall hope it may not be
   utterly vain to attempt the exciting of those drowsy notions that lie
   unactive in them; by presenting to them some considerations concerning
   the excellence and use of the Scripture: which being all but necessary
   consequences of that principle they are supposed to own, viz. that they
   are Gods word, I cannot much question their assent to the speculative
   part: I wish I could as probably assure my self of the practick.

   10. INDEED were there nothing else to be said in behalf of holy Writ,
   but that it is Gods word, that were enough to command the most awful
   regard to it. And therefore it is but just we make that the first and
   principal consideration in our present discourse. But then 'tis
   impossible that that can want others to attend it; since whatsoever God
   saies, is in all respects compleatly good. I shall therefore to that of
   its divine original add secondly the consideration of its subject
   Matter; thirdly, of its excellent and no less diffusive end and design;
   and fourthly, of its exact propriety and fitness to that design: which
   are all such qualifications, that where they concur, nothing more can
   be requir'd to commend a writing to the esteem of rational men. And
   upon all these tests, notwithstanding the cavil of the Romanists and
   others, whose force we shall examin with the unhappy issue of contrary
   counsels, this Law of God will be found to answer the Psalmists
   character of it Ps. 19. 7. The Law of God is perfect: and 'twill appear
   that the custody and use thereof is the Birth-right and Duty of every
   Christian. All which severals being faithfully deduced, it will only
   remain that I add full cautions as will be necessary to the due
   performance of the aforesaid duty, and our being in some degree
   render'd perfect, as this Law of God, and the Author thereof himself is
   perfect, Matt. 5. 48.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   SECT. II.

   The Divine Original, Endearments and Authority of the Holy Scripture.

   MENS judgments are so apt to be bias'd by their affections, that we
   often find them readier to consider who speaks, than what is spoken: a
   temper very unsafe, and the principle of great injustice in our
   inferior transactions with men; yet here there are very few of us that
   can wholly divest our selves of it, whereas, when we deal with God ( in
   whom alone an implicit faith may securely be reposed ) we are nice and
   wary, bring our scales and measures, will take nothing upon his word
   which holds not weight in our own balance. 'Tis true, he needs not our
   partiality to be justified in his sayings, Psal. 51. 4. His words are
   pure, even as the silver tried seven times in the fire, Psalm. 12. 6.
   able to pass the strictest test that right reason (truly so called) can
   put them to. Yet it shews a great perverseness in our nature that we
   who so easily resign our understandings to fallible men, stand thus
   upon our guard against God make him dispute for every inch he gains on
   us; nor will afford him what we daily grant to any credible man, to
   receive an affirmation upon trust of his veracity.

   2. I am far from contradicting our Saviours Precept, of Search the
   Scriptures Jo. 7. or Saint Pauls, of proving all things, 1 Thes. 5. 21.
   we cannot be too industrious in our inquest after truth, provided we
   still reserve to God the decisive vote, and humbly acquiesce in his
   sense, how distant soever from our own; so that when we consult
   Scripture (I may add reason either) 'tis not to resolve us whether God
   be to be believed or no in what he has said, but whether he hath said
   such and such things: for if we are convinc'd he has, reason as well as
   Religion commands our assent.

   3. WHATEVER therefore God has said, we are to pay it a reverence merely
   upon the account of its Author, over and above what the excellence of
   the matter exacts: and to this we have all inducements as well as
   obligation: there being no motives to render the words of men estimable
   to us, which are not eminently and transcendently applicable to those
   of God.

   4. THOSE motives we may reduce to four: first, the Authority of the
   Speaker; secondly, his Kindness; thirdly, his Wisdom, and fourthly, his
   Truth. First, for that of Authority: that may be either native, or
   acquired; the native is that of a parent, which is such a charm of
   observance, that we see Solomon, when he would impress his counsels,
   assumes the person of a Father; Hear O my children the instructions of
   a Father, Prov. 4. 1. And generally thro' that whole Book he uses the
   compellation of my Son, as the greatest endearment to engage attention
   and reverence. Nay so indispensible was the obligation of children in
   this respect, that we see the contumacious child that would not hearken
   to the advice of his Parents; was by God himself adjudged to death,
   Deut. 21. 20.

   5. NOR have only Gods, but mens Laws exacted that filial reverence to
   the dictates of Parents. But certainly no Parent can pretend such a
   title to it as God, who is not only the immediate Father of our
   persons, but the original Father of our very nature; not only of our
   flesh, but of our spirits also, Heb. 12. 9. So that the Apostles
   Antithesis in that place is as properly applied to counsels as
   corrections; and we may as rightly infer, that if we give reverence to
   the advices of our earthly Parents; much more ought we to subject our
   selves to this Father of our spirits. And we have the very same reason
   wherewith to enforce it: for the Fathers of our flesh do as often
   dictate, as correct according to their own pleasures, prescribe to
   their children not according to the exact measures of right and wrong,
   but after that humor which most predominates in themselves. But God
   alwaies directs his his admonitions to our profit, that we may be
   partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10. So that we are as unkind to our
   selves, as irreverent towards him, whenever we let any of his words
   fall to the ground; whose claim to this part of our reverence is much
   more irrefragable than that of our natural Parents.

   6. BUT besides this native Authority there is also an acquired; and
   that we may distinguish into two sorts: the one of dominion, the other
   of reputation. To the first kind belongs that of Princes, Magistrates,
   Masters, or any that have coercive power over us. And our own interest
   teaches us not to slight the words of any of these, who can so much to
   our cost second them with deeds. Now God has all these titles of
   jurisdiction; He is the great King, Psal. 48. 2. Nor was it only a
   complement of the Psalmists; for himself owns the stile, I am a great
   King, Mal. 1. He is the judge of all the World, Gen. 18. yea, that
   Ancient of days, before whom the Books were open'd, Dan. 7. 13. He is
   our Lord and Master by right both of Creation and Redemtion; and this
   Christ owns even in his state of inanition; yea, when he was about the
   most servile employment, the washing his Disciples feet, when he was
   most literally in the form of a servant; yet he scruples not to assert
   his right to that opposite title; You call me Master, and Lord; and ye
   say well, for so 1 am; Jo. 13. 13. Nor are these empty names, but
   effectively attended with all the power they denote. Yet so stupid are
   we, that whilst we awfully receive the dictates of our earthly
   Superiors, we slight and neglect the Oracles of that God who is King of
   Kings, and Lord of Lords. When a Prince speaks, we are apt to cry out
   with Herods Flatterers, the voice of a God, and not of a man, Acts 12.
   Yet when it is indeed the voice of God, we choose to listen to any
   thing else rather than it. But let us saddy remember, that
   notwithstanding our contempts, this word shall (as our Saviour tells
   us) judge us at the last day, Jo. 12. 48.

   7. A second sort of acquir'd Authority is that of reputation. When a
   man is famed for some extraordinary excellencies, whether moral or
   intellectual, men come with appetite to his discourses, greedily suck
   them in, nor need such a one bespeak attention; his very name has done
   it for him, and prepossess'd him of his Auditors regard. Thus the
   Rabbies among the Jews, the Philosophers among the Greeks, were
   listened to as Oracles, and to cite them was (by their admiring
   Disciples) thought a concluding Argument. Nay, under Christianity, this
   admiration of mens persons has been so inordinate, that it has crumbled
   Religion away in little insignificant parties; whilst not only Paul,
   Apollo or Cephas, but names infinitely inferior, have become the
   distinctive characters of Sects and separate Communions. So easily alas
   are we charm'd by our prepossessions, and with itching ears run in
   quest of those doctrines which the fame of their Authors, rather than
   the evidence of truth, commends to us.

   8. AND hath God done nothing to get him a repute among us? has he no
   excellencies to deserve our esteem? is he not worthy to prescribe to
   his own creatures? if we think yes, why is he the only person to be
   disregarded? or why do we so unseasonably depart from our own humour,
   as not to give his Word a reverence proportionable to that we pretend
   for him; nay, which we actually pay to men of like passions with our
   selves? A contempt so absurd as well as impious, that we have not the
   example of any the most barbarous people to countenance us. For tho'
   some of them have made very wild mistakes in the choice of their
   Deities, yet they have all agreed in this common principle, that
   whatever those Deities said, was to be receiv'd with all possible
   veneration; yea, such a deference gave they to all significations of
   the divine will, that as they would undertake no great enterprize
   without consulting their Auguries; so upon any inauspicious signs they
   relinquish'd their attempts. And certainly if we had the same reverence
   for the true God which they had for the false, we should as frequently
   consult him. We may do it with much more ease and certainty: we need
   not trust to the entrails of Beasts, or motion of Birds we need not go
   to Delphos, or the Lybian Hammon for the resolving our doubts: but what
   Moses said to Israel is very applicable to us, the Word is nigh thee,
   Deut. 30. 14. That Word which David made his Counsellor, Psal. 119. 24,
   his Comforter, ver. 50. his Treasure, ver. 72. his Study, ver. 99. And
   had we those awful apprehensions of God which he had, we should pay the
   like reverence to his Word. Did we well ponder how many titles of
   Authority he has over us, we should surely be asham'd to deny that
   respect to him in whom they all conspire, which we dare not deny to
   them separately in humane Superiors.

   9. A second motive to esteem mens words, is the kindness of the
   speaker. This has such a fascinating power, as nothing but extreme ill
   nature can resist. When a man is assur'd of the kindness of him that
   speaks, whatever is spoken is taken in good part. This is it that
   distinguishes the admonitions of a friend from the reproaches of an
   enemy; and we daily in common conversation receive those things with
   contentment and applause from an intimate and familiar, which spoken by
   a stranger or enemy would be despis'd or stomach'd. So insinuating a
   thing is kindness, that where it has once got it self believ'd, nothing
   it says after is disputed; it supples the mind, and makes it ductile
   and pliant to any impressions.

   10. BUT what human kindness is there that can come in any competition
   with the Divine? it surpasses that of the nearest and dearest
   relations; Mothers may forget, yet will I not forget thee, Isa. 49. 15.
   And the Psalmist found it experimentally true, When my Father and my
   Mother forsake me, the Lord taketh me up, Ps. 27. 10. The tenderest
   bowels compared to his are adamant and flint: so that 'tis a most
   proper epithet the Wise man gives him, O Lord thou lover of souls, Wis.
   11. 26. Nor is this affection merely mental: but it attests it self by
   innumerable effects. The effects of love are all reducible to two
   heads, doing and suffering; and by both there God has most eminently
   attested his love to us.

   11. FOR the first, we cannot look either on our bodies or our souls, on
   the whole Universe about us, or that better World above us; but we
   shall in each see the Lord hath done great things for us, Psal. 126.
   Nay, not only our enjoyments, but even the capacity to enjoy, is his
   bounty. Had not he drawn mankind out of his original clay, what had we
   been conscern'd in all the other works of his Creation? So that if we
   put any value either upon what we have or what we are, we cannot but
   account our selves so much indebted to this his active love. And tho'
   the passive was not practicable by the divine Nature simply and apart,
   yet that we might not want all imaginable evidences of his love, he who
   was God blessed for ever, linkt his impassible to, our passible nature;
   assum'd our humanity, that he might espouse our sorrows, and was born
   on purpose that he might die for us. So that sure we may say in his own
   words, greater love than this hath no man; Jo. 15. 13.

   12. AND now 'tis very hard, if such an unparallel'd love in God, may
   not as much affect us, as the slight benefactions of every ordinary
   friend; if it cannot so much recommend him to our regard, as to rescue
   his word from contempt, and dispose us to receive impressions from it;
   (especially when his very speaking is a new act of his kindness, and
   design'd to our greatest advantage.)

   13. BUT if all he has done and suffer'd for us cannot obtain him so
   much from us, we must surely confess, our disingenuity is as
   superlative as his love. For in this instance we have no plea for our
   selves. The discourses of men 'tis true may sometimes be so weak and
   irrational, that tho' kindness may suggest pity, it cannot reverence;
   But this can never happen in God, whose wisdom is as infinite as his
   love. He talks not at our vain rate who often talk only for talkings
   sake; but his words are directed to the most important ends and
   address'd in such a manner as befits him in whom are all the treasures
   of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. And this is our third consideration,
   the wisdom of the Speaker.

   14. HOW attractive a thing Wisdom is, we may observe in the instance of
   the Queen of Sheba, who came from the utmost parts of the earth, as
   Christ faies Mat. 12. 42. to hear the Wisdom of Solomon. And the like
   is noted of the Greek Sages, that they were address'd to from all
   parts, by persons of all ranks and qualities, to hear their Lectures.
   And indeed the rational nature of man does by a kind of sympathetick
   motion close with whatever hath the stamp of reason upon it. But alas,
   what is the profoundest wisdom of men, compar'd with that of God? He is
   the essential reason; and all that man can pretend to is but an
   emanation from him; a ray of his Sun, a drop of his Ocean: which as he
   gives, so he can also take away. He can infatuate the most subtil
   designers; And (as he saies of himself) makes the diviners mad: turns
   the wise men back, and makes their wisdom foolishness, Esay 44. 25.

   15. HOW impious a folly is it then in us, to Idolize human Wisdom with
   all its imperfections, and despise the divine? yet this every man is
   guilty of, who is not attracted to the study of sacred Writ by the
   supereminent wisdom of it's Author. For such men must either affirm
   that God has not such a supereminency, or that, tho' he has in himself;
   he hath not exerted it in this writing; The former is down-right
   blasphemy; and truly the latter is the same, a little varied. For that
   any thing, but what is exactly wise can proceed from infinite wisdom,
   is too absurd for any man to imagine. And therefore he that charges
   Gods Word with defect of wisdom must interpretatively charge God so
   too. For tho' 'tis true, a wise man may sometimes speak foolishly; yet
   that happens through that mixture of ignorance, or passion which is in
   the most knowing of mortals: but in God, who is a pure act, and
   essential wisdom, that is an impossible supposition.

   16. NAY, indeed it were to tax him of folly beyond what is incident to
   any sensible man; who will still proportion his instruments to the work
   he designs. Should we not conclude him mad, that should attempt to fell
   a mighty Oak with a Pen-knife, or stop a Torrent with a whisp of Straw?
   And sure their conceptions are not much more reverend of God, who can
   suppose that a writing design'd by him for such important ends, as the
   making men wise unto salvation, 2 Tim. 3. 15. the casting down all that
   exalts it self against the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. should it
   self be foolish and weak: or that he should give it those great
   attributes of being sharper than a two edged-sword, piercing even to
   the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, of the joints and marrow, Heb.
   4. 14. if its discourses were so flat and insipid as some in this
   profane Age would represent them.

   17. 'TIS true indeed, 'tis not, as the Apostle speaks the wisdom of
   this world, 1 Cor. 2. 6. The Scripture teaches us not the arts of
   undermining governments, defrauding and circumventing our Brethren; but
   it teaches us that which would tend much more even to our temporal
   felicity; and as reason prompts us to aspire to happiness, so it must
   acknowledge that is the higher wisdom which teaches us to attain it.

   18. AND as the Holy Scripture is thus recommended to us by the wisdom
   of its Author; so in the last place is it by his truth, without which
   the other might rather raise our jealousy than our reverence. For
   wisdom without sincerity degenerates into serpentine guile; and we
   rather fear to be ensnar'd than hope to be advantag'd by it. The most
   subtil addresses, and most cogent arguments prevail not upon us, where
   we suspect some insidious design. But where wisdom and fidelity meet in
   the same person, we do not only attend, but confide in his counsels.
   And this qualification is most eminently in God. The children of men
   are deceitful upon the weights, Psal. 62. 9. Much guile often lurks
   indiscernably under the fairest appearances: but Gods veracity is as
   essentially himself, as his wisdom, and he can no more deceive us, than
   he can be deceiv'd himself. He is not man that he should lie, Numb. 23.
   19. He designs not (as men often do) to sport himself with our
   credulity; and raise hopes which he never means to satisfy: he saies
   not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain, Exod. 45. 19. but all his
   promises are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. He is perfectly sincere in all
   the proposals he makes in his word: which is a most rational motive for
   us to advert to it, not only with reverence but love.

   19. AND now when all these motives are thus combined; the authority,
   the kindness, the wisdom, the veracity of the speaker, what can be
   requir'd more to render his words of weight with us? If this four-fold
   cord will not draw us, we have sure the strength, not of men, but of
   that Legion we read of in the Gospel, Mat. 5. 1. For these are so much
   the cords of man, so adapted to our natures, nay to our constant usage
   in other things, that we must put off much of our humanity, disclaim
   the common measures of mankind, if we be not attracted by them. For I
   dare appeal to the breast of any sober, industrious man, whether in
   case a person, who he were sure had all the fore-mention'd
   qualifications, should recommend to him some rules as infallible for
   the certain doubling, or trebling his estate, he would not think them
   worth the pursuing; nay, whether he would not plod and study on them,
   till he comprehended the whole Art. And shall we then when God, in whom
   all those qualifications are united, and that in their utmost
   transcendencies, shall we, I say, think him below our regard, when he
   proposes the improving our interests, not by the scanty proportions of
   two or three; but in such as he intimated to, Abraham, when he shew'd
   him the Stars, as the representative of his numerous off-spring, Gen.
   5. 15. when he teaches us that highest, and yet most certain Alchymy,
   of refining, and multiplying our enjoyments, and then perpetuating
   them?

   20. ALL this God do's in Scripture; and we must be stupidly
   improvident, if we will take no advantage by it. It was once the
   complaint of Christ to the Jews, I am come in my Fathers name, and ye
   receive me not: if another shall come in his own name, him ye will
   receive, Jo. 5. 43. And what was said by him the eternal essential
   Word, is no less applicable to the written; which coming in the name,
   and upon the message of God, is despis 'd and slighted, and every the
   lightest composure of men preferr'd before it. As if that signature of
   Dignity it carries, served rather as a Brand to stigmatize and defame,
   than adorn and recommend it. A contempt which strikes immediatly at God
   himself, whose resentments of it, tho' for the present supprest by his
   longsuffering, will at last break out upon all who persevere so to
   affront him, in a judgment worthy of God, Wisd. 12. 26.

   21. BUT after all that has been said, I foresee some may say, that 1
   have all this while but beaten the air, have built upon a principle
   which some flatly deny, others doubt of, and have run away with a
   supposition that the Bible is of divine Original, without any attempt
   of proof. To such as these I might justly enough object the extreme
   hard measure they offer to Divinity above all other Sciences. For in
   those, they still allow some fundamental maxims, which are presupposed
   without proof; but in this they admit of no Postulata, granted
   principle on which to superstruct. If the same rigor should be extended
   to secular cases, what a damp would it strike upon commerce? For
   example, a man expects fair dealing from his Neighbour, upon the
   strength of those common notions of Justice he presumes writ in all
   mens hearts: but according to this measure, he must first prove to
   every man he deals with, that such notions there are, and that they are
   obligatory: that the wares expos'd to sale are his own; that dominion
   is not founded on grace, or that he is in that state, and so has a
   property to confer upon another that the person dealt with paies a just
   price; do's it in good money; and that it is his own, or that he is in
   the state of grace, or needs not be so, to justify his purchase: and at
   this rate the Market will be as full of nice questions as the Schools.
   But because complaints and retortions are the common refuge of causes
   that want better Arguments, I shall not insist here; but proceed to a
   defence of the question'd Assertion, that the Bible is the Word of God.

   22. IN which I shall proceed by these degrees. First, I shall lay down
   the plain grounds upon which Christians believe it. Secondly, I shall
   compare those with those of less credibility which have generally
   satisfied mankind in other things of the like nature. And thirdly, I
   shall consider whether those who are dissatisfied with those grounds,
   would not be equally so with any other way of attestation.

   23. BEFORE I enter upon the first of these, I desire it may be
   consider'd, that matters of fact are not capable of fuch rigorous
   demonstrative evidences, as mathematical propositions are. To render a
   thing fit for rational belief, there is no more requir'd, but that the
   motives for it do over poise those against it; and in that degree they
   do so, so is the belief stronger or weaker.

   24. NOW the motives of our belief in the present case, are such as are
   extrinsick, or intrinsick to the Scriptures; of which the extrinsick
   are first, and preparative to the other; and indeed all that, can
   reasonably be insisted on to a gain-saier, who must be suppos'd no
   competent judge of the latter. But as to the former, I shall adventure
   to say, that the Divine Original of the Scripture hath as great grounds
   of credibility as can be expected in any thing of this kind. For that
   God inspir'd the Pen-men of Holy Writ, is matter of fact, and being so,
   is capable of no other external evidence but that of testimony: and
   that matter of fact being also in point of time so remote from us, can
   be judg'd of only by a series of Testimonies deriv'd from that Age
   wherein the Scriptures were written, to this: and the more credible the
   testifiers, and the more universal the Testimony, so much the more
   convincing are they to all considering men.

   25. AND this attestation the Scripture hath in the highest
   circumstances, it having been witnes'd to in all Ages, and in those
   Ages by all persons that could be presum'd to know any thing of it.
   Thus the Old Testament was own'd by the whole Nation of the Jews, as
   the writings of men inspir'd by God, and that with such evidence of
   their mission, as abundantly satisfied those of that Age, of their
   being so inspir'd; and they deriv'd those Writings with that
   attestation to their posterity. Now that those of the first Ages were
   not deceiv'd, is as morally certain as any thing can be suppos'd. For
   in the first part of the Bible is contain'd the history of those
   miracles wherewith God rescued that people out of Egypt, and instated
   them in Canaan, Now if they who liv'd at that time, knew that such
   miracles were never done, 'tis impossible they could receive an evident
   Fable as an inspir'd truth. No single person, much less a whole Nation
   can be suppos'd so stupid. But if indeed they were eye-witnesses of
   those miracles, they might with very good reason conclude, that the
   same Moses who was by God impower'd to work them, was so also for the
   relating them; as also all those precedent events from the Creation
   down to that time, which are recorded by him.

   26. SO also for the preceptive parts of those Books, those that saw
   those formidable solemnities, with which they were first publish'd, had
   sure little temptation to doubt that they were the dictates of God,
   when written. Now if they could not be deceiv'd themselves, 'tis yet
   less imaginable that they should conspire to impose a cheat upon their
   posterities; nor indeed were the Jews of so easy a credulity, that 'tis
   at all probable the succeeding Generations would have been so impos'd
   on: their humour was stubborn enough, and the precepts of their Law
   severe and burdensome enough to have tempted them to have cast off the
   yoak, had it not been bound upon them by irresistible convictions of
   its coming from God. But besides this Tradition of their Elders, they
   had the advantage of living under a Theocracy, the immediate guidance
   of God; Prophets daily were rais'd up among them, to fore-tell events,
   to admonish them of their duty, and reprove their back-slidings yet
   even these gave the deference to the written Word; nay, made it the
   test by which to try true inspirations from false: To the Law and to
   the Testimony; if they speak not according to it, there is no light in
   them, Esay 18. 20. So that the veneration which they had before
   acquir'd, was still anew excited by fresh inspirations, which both
   attested the old, and became new parts of their Canon.

   27. NOR could it be esteem'd a small confirmation to the Scriptures, to
   find in succeeding Ages the signal accomplishments of those prophecies
   which were long before registred in those Books; for nothing less than
   divine Power and Wisdom could foretell, and also verify them. Upon
   these grounds the Jews universally thro' all successions receiv'd the
   Books of the Old Testament as divine Oracles, and look'd upon them as
   the greatest trust that could be committed to them: and accordingly
   were so scrupulously vigilant in conserving them, that their Masorits
   numbred not only the sections, but the very Words, nay Letters, that no
   fraud or inadvertency might corrupt or defalk the least iota of what
   they esteem'd so sacred. A farther testimony and sepiment to which,
   were the Samaritan, Chaldee, and Greek Versions: which being made use
   of in the Synagogues of Jews, in their dispersions, and by the
   Samaritans at Sichem, could not at those distances receive an uniform
   alteration, and any other would be of no effect. Add to this, that the
   Original exemplar of the Law, was laid up in the Sanctuary, that the
   Prince was to have a Copy of it alwaies by him, and transcribe it with
   his own hand; that every Jew was to make it his constant discourse and
   meditation, teach it his Children, and wear part of it upon his hands
   and forehead. And now sure 'tis impossible to imagine any matter of
   fact to be more carefully deduced, or irrefragably testified, nor any
   thing believ'd upon stronger evidence.

   28. THAT all this is true in reference to the Jews, that they did thus
   own these Writings as divine, appears not only by the Records of past
   Ages, but by the Jews of the present, who still own them, and cannot be
   suspected of combination with the Christians. And if these were
   reasonable grounds of conviction to the Jews, (as he must be most
   absurdly sceptical that shall deny) they must be so to Christians also,
   who derive them from them: and that with this farther advantage to our
   Faith, that we see the clear completion of those Evangelical prophecies
   which remain'd dark to them, and consequently have a farther Argument
   to confirm us, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament are certainly
   divine.

   29. THE New has also the like means of probation: which as it is a
   collection of the doctrine taught by Christ and his Apostles, must if
   truly related be acknowledged no less divine than what they orally
   deliver'd. So that they who doubt its being divine, must either deny
   what Christ and his Apostles preach'd to be so; else distrust the
   fidelity of the relation The former strikes at the whole Christian
   faith; which if only of men, must not only be fallible but is actually
   a deceit, whilst it pretends to be of God, and is not. To such
   Objectors we have to oppose those stupendous miracles with which the
   Gospel was attested such as demonstrated a more than human efficacy.
   And that God should lend his omnipotence to abet the false pretensions
   of men, is a conceit too unworthy even for the worst of men to
   entertain.

   30. 'TIS true, there have been by God permitted lying miracles, as well
   as true ones have been done by him; such as were those of the Magicians
   in Egypt, in opposition to the other of Moses; but then the difference
   between both was so conspicuous, that he must be more partial and
   disingenuous, than even those Magicians were, who would not acknowledge
   the disparity, and confess in those which were truely supernatural the
   finger of God, Exod. 8. 19. Therefore both in the Old and New Testament
   it is predicted, that false Prophets should arise, and do signs and
   wonders, Deut. 13. 1. Matt. 24. 11, 24. as a trial of their fidelity
   who made profession of Religion; whether they would prefer the few and
   trivial sleights which recommend a deceiver, before those great and
   numberless miracles which attested the sacred Oracles deliver'd to the
   sons of men by the God of truth. Whether the trick of a Barchochebas,
   to hold fire in his mouth; that of Marcus the Heretick, to make the
   Wine of the Holy Sacrament appear blood; or that of Mahomet, to bring a
   Pidgeon to his ear, ought to be put in balance against all the Miracles
   wrought by Moses, our Saviour, or his Apostles. And in a word; whether
   the silly stories which Iamblichus solemnly relates of Pythagoras, or
   those Philostratus tells of Apollonius Tyaneus, deserve to rival those
   of the Evangelists. It is a most just judgment, and accordingly
   threatned by Almighty God that they who would not obey the truth should
   believe a lie, 2 Thes. 2. 11. But still the Almighty, where, any man or
   devil do's proudly, is evidently above him, Exod. 18. 11. will be
   justified in his sayings, and be clear when he is judged, Rom. 3. 4.

   31. BUT if men will be Scepticks, and doubt every thing, they are to
   know that the matter call'd into question, is of a nature that admits
   but two waies of solution; probability, and testimony. First for
   probability, let it be consider'd, who were the first promulgers of
   Christs Miracles. In his life time they were either the patients on
   whom his Miracles were wrought, or the common people, that were
   spectators: the former, as they could not be deceiv'd themselves, but
   must needs know whether they were cur'd or no; so what Imaginable
   design could they have to deceive others? Many indeed have pretended
   impotency as a motive of compassion; but what could they gain by owning
   a cure they had not? As for the Spectators, as their multitude adds to
   their credibility; (it being morally impossible that so many should at
   once be deluded in a matter so obvious to their senses) so do's it also
   acquit them from fraud and combination. Cheats and forgeries are
   alwaies hatch'd in the dark, in close Cabals, and private Junctos. That
   five thousand men at one time, and four thousand at another, should
   conspire to say, that they were miraculously fed, when they were not;
   and all prove true to the fiction, and not betray it, is a thing as
   irrational to be suppos'd, as impossible to be parallel'd.

   32. BESIDES, admit it possible that so many could have join'd in the
   deceit, yet what imaginable end could they have in it? Had their lie
   been subservient to the designs of some potent Prince that might have
   rewarded it, there had been some temptation: but what could they expect
   from the reputed Son of a Carpenter, who had not himself where to lay
   his head? Nay, who disclaim'd all secular power; convey'd himself away
   from their importunities, when they would have forced him to be a King:
   And consequently, could not be look'd on as one that would head a
   Sedition, or attempt to raise himself to a capacity of rewarding his
   Abettors. Upon all thee considerations, there appears not the least
   shadow of probability, that either those particular persons who
   publish'd the cures they had receiv'd, or those multitudes who were
   witnesses and divulgers of those, or his other miracles, could do it
   upon any sinister design, or indeed upon any other motive but gratitude
   and admiration.

   33. IN the next place, if we come to those miracles which succeeded
   Christs death, those most important; and convincing of his Resurrection
   and Ascension, and observe who were the divulgers of those, we shall
   find them very unlikely to be men of design; a set of illiterate men,
   taken from the Fisher-Boats, and other mean occupations: and such as
   needed a miracle as great as any of those they were to assert (the
   descent of the Holy Ghost) to fit them for their office. What alas
   could they drive at, or how could they hope that their testimony could
   be received, so much against the humour and interest of the present
   Rulers; unless they were assur'd not only of the truth of the things,
   but also of some supernatural aids to back and fortify them?
   Accordingly we find, that till they had receiv'd those; till by the
   descent of the Holy Ghost they were endued with power from on high,
   Luk. 24. 49. they never attempted the discovery of what they had seen:
   but rather hid themselves, kept all their assemblies in privacy and
   concealment, for fear of the Jews, Jo. 20. 10. and so were far enough
   from projecting any thing besides their own safety. Afterwards, when
   they began to preach, they had early Essays, what their secular
   advantages would be by it; threatnings and revilings, scourgings and
   imprisonments, Act. 4. 20. 5. 18, 40. And can it be imagined, that men
   who a little before had shewed themselves so little in love with
   suffering, that none of them durst stick to their Master at his
   apprehension, but one forswore, and all forsook him; can it, 1 say, be
   imagin'd that these men should be so much in love with their own Fable,
   as to venture all sorts of persecution for the propagating it? Or if
   they could, let us in the next place consider what probability there
   could be of success.

   34. THEIR preaching amounted to no less than the Deifying of one, whom
   both their Roman and Jewish Rulers, nay, the generality of the people
   had executed as a malefactor: so that they were all engag'd, in defence
   of their own Act, to lift their testimony with all the rigour that
   conscious jealousy could suggest. And where were so many concern'd
   inquisitors, there was very little hope for a forgery to pass. Besides
   the avow'd displeasure of their Governours made it a hazardous thing to
   own a belief of what they asserted. Those that adher'd to them could
   not but know, that at the same time they must espouse their dangers and
   sufferings. And men use not to incur certain mischiefs, upon doubtful
   and suspicious grounds.

   35. YET farther, their doctrine was design'd to an end to which their
   Auditors could not but have the greatest reluctancy: they were to
   struggle with that rooted prepossession which the Jews had for the
   Mosaical Law, which their Gospel out-dated; and the Gentiles for the
   Rites and Religion of their Ancestors; and, which was harder than
   either, the corruptions and vices of both: to plant humility and
   internal sanctity, so contrary to that ceremonial holiness, upon which
   the Jews so valued themselves, and despis'd others: and Temperance,
   Justice, and Purity, so contrary to the practice, nay, even the
   religion of the Heathen: and to attempt all this with no other
   allurement, no other promise of recompence but what they must attend in
   another world, and pass too through reproaches and afflictions,
   torments and death; These were all such invincible prejudices, as they
   could never hope to break thorough with a lie; nay, which they could
   not have encounter'd even with every common truth, but only with that,
   which being divine, brought its aids with it; without which 'twas
   utterly impossible for all the skill or oratory of men to overcome such
   disadvantages.

   36. AND yet with all these did these rude inartificial men contest, and
   that with signal success: no less than three thousand Proselytes made
   by Saint Peter's first Sermon; and that in Jerusalem, the Scene where
   all was acted; and consequently where 'twas the most impossible to
   impose a forgery. And at the like miraculous rate they went on, till as
   the Pharisees themselves complain, they had filled Jerusalem with their
   doctrine, Acts 5. 28. nor did Judea set bounds to them; their sound
   went out into all Nations, Rom. 10. 18, and their doctrine spread it
   self through all the Gentile world.

   37. AND sure so wonderful an event, so contrary to all humane measures,
   do's sufficiently evince there was more than man in it. Nothing but the
   same creative Power that produc'd light out of darkness, could bring
   forth effects so much above the proportion of the cause. Had these weak
   instruments acted only by their natural powers, nothing of this had
   been achiev'd. Alas could these poor rude men learn all Languages
   within the space of fifty days, which would take up almost as many
   years of the most industrious Student? and yet had they not been able
   to speak them, they could never have divulg'd the Gospel to the several
   Nations, nor so effectually have convinc'd the by-standers, Acts 2.
   that they acted by a higher impulse. And to convince the world they did
   so, they repeated their Masters miracles as well as his doctrine;
   heal'd the sick cast out devils, rais'd the dead. And where God
   communicated so much of his power, we may reasonably conclude he did it
   to promote his own work, not the work of the devil, as it must have
   been if this whole Scene were a lie.

   38. WHEN all this is weigh'd, I presume there will remain little ground
   to suspect that the first planters of Christian Faith had any other
   design than what they avowed, viz. the bringing men to holiness here,
   and salvation hereafter. The suspicion therefore, if any, must rest
   upon latter times; and accordingly some are willing to perswade
   themselves and others, that the whole Scheme of our Religion is but a
   lately devis'd Fable to keep the world in awe, whereof Princes have
   made some use, but Clergy-men more; and that Christ and his Apostles
   are only actors whom themselves have conjured up upon the Stage to
   pursue their plot.

   39. 1N answer to this bold, this blasphemous suggestion, I should first
   desire these Surmisers to point out the time when, and the persons who
   began this design; to tell us exactly whence they date this politick
   Religion, as they are pleas'd to suppose it. If they cannot, they are
   manifestly unjust to reject our account of it when they can give none
   themselves; and fail very much of that rigid demonstration they require
   from others. That there is such a profession as Christianity in the
   world, is yet (God be blest) undeniable; (though at the rate it has of
   late declin'd, God knows how long it will be so:) we say it came by
   Christ, and his Apostles, and that it is attested by an uninterrupted
   testimony of all the intervening Ages, the suffrage of all Christian
   Churches from that day to this. And sure they who embraced the
   Doctrine, are the most competent witnesses from whence they receiv'd
   it.

   40. YET lest they should be all thought parties to the design, and
   their witness excepted against, it has pleas'd God to give us
   collateral assurances, and make both Jewish and Gentile Writers give
   testimony to the Antiquity of Christianity. Josephus do's this, lib.
   20. chap. 8. and lib. 18. chap. 4. where, after he has given an account
   of the crucifixion of Christ exactly agreeing with the Evangelists he
   concludes, And to this day the Christian people, who of him borrow
   their name, cease not to increase. I add not the personal elogium which
   he gives of our Saviour; because some are so hardy to controul it: also
   I pass by what Philo mentions of the religious in Egypt, because
   several Learned men refer it to the Essens, a Sect among the Jews, or
   some other. There is no doubt of what Tacitus and other Roman
   Historians speak of Christ as the Author of the Christian doctrine;
   which it had been impossible for him to have done, if there had then
   been no such doctrine, or if Christ had not been known as the Founder
   of it. .So afterward Pliny gives the Emperour Trajan an account both of
   the manners, and multitude of the Christians; and makes of the
   innocence of the one, and the greatness of the other, an Argument to
   slacken the persecution against them. Nay, the very bloody Edicts of
   the persecuting Emperors, and the scoffs and reproaches of Celsus,
   Porphyry, Lucian, and other profane opposers of this Doctrine, do
   undeniably assert its being. By all which it appears, that Christianity
   had in those Ages not only a being, but had also obtain'd mightily in
   the world, and drawn in vast numbers to its profession: and vast indeed
   they must needs be, to furnish out that whole Army of Martyrs, of which
   profane, as well as Ecclesiastick writers speak. And if all this be not
   sufficient to evince that Christianity stole not clancularly into the
   world, but took its rise from those times and Persons it pretends, we
   must renounce all faith of Testimony, and not believe an inch farther
   than we see.

   41. I suppose I need say no more to shew that the Gospel, and all those
   portentous miracles which attested it, were no forgeries, or stratagems
   of men. I come now to that doubt which more immediately concerns the
   Holy Scripture, viz. whether all those transactions be so faithfully
   related there, that we may believe them to have been dictated by the
   spirit of God. Now for this, the process need be but short, if we
   consider who were the Pen-men of the New Testament; even for the most
   part of the Apostles themselves: Matthew, and John who wrote two of the
   Gospels were certainly so: and Mark, as all the Ancients aver, was but
   the Amanuensis to Saint Peter, who dictated that Gospel. Saint Luke
   indeed comes not under this first rank of Apostles; yet is by some
   affirm'd to be one of the seventy Disciples: however an Apostolical
   person 'tis certain he was, and it was no wonder for such to be
   inspir'd. For in those first Ages of the Church men acted more by
   immediate inflation of the Spirit than since. And accordingly we find
   Stephen, tho' but a Deacon, had the power of Miracles and preach'd as
   divine as the prime Apostles, Acts 7. And the gift of the Holy Ghost
   was then a usuial concomitant of conversion, as appears in the Story of
   Cornelius, Acts 10. 45, 46. Besides, Saint Luke was a constant
   attendant on Saint Paul (who deriv'd the Faith not from man, but by the
   immediate revelation of Jesus Christ, as himself professes, Galat. 1.
   12.) and is by some said to have wrote by dictate from him, as Mark did
   from Saint Peter. Then as to the Epistles they all bear the names of
   Apostles, except that to the Hebrews, which yet is upon very good
   grounds presum'd to be Saint Paul`s. Now these were the Persons
   commissionated by Christ to preach the Christian doctrine, and were
   signally assisted in the discharge of that office; so that as he tells
   them, it was not they, who speak, but the spirit of the Father that
   spake in them, Matt. 13. 11. And if they spake by Divine Inspiration,
   there can be no question that they wrote so also. Nay, indeed of the
   two, it seems more necessary they should do the latter. For had they
   err'd in any thing they orally deliver'd, they might have retracted and
   cured the mischief: but these Books being design'd as a standing
   immutable rule of Faith and Manners to all successions, any errour in
   them would have been irreparable, and have entail'd it self upon
   posterity: which agreed neither with the truth, nor goodness of God to
   permit.

   42. NOW that these Books were indeed writ by them whose names they
   bear, we have as much assurance as 'tis possible to have of any thing
   of that nature, and that distance of time from us. For however some of
   them may have been controverted, yet the greatest part have admitted no
   dispute; whole Doctrines agreeing exactly with the others, give
   testimony to them. And to the bulk of those writings, it is notorious
   that the first Christians receiv'd them from the Apostles, and so
   transmitted them to the ensuing Ages, which receiv'd them with the like
   esteem and veneration. They cannot be corrupted, faies Saint Austin in
   the thirty second Book against Faustis the Manich. c. 16. because they
   are and have been in the hands of all Christians. And whosoever should
   first attempt an alteration, he would be confuted by the inspection of
   other ancienter Copies. Besides, the Scriptures are not in some one
   Language, but translated into many: so that the faults of one Book
   would be corrected by others more ancient, or in a different Tongue.

   43. AND how much the body of Christians were in earnest concern'd to
   take care in this matter, appears by very costly evidences; multitudes
   of them choosing rather to part with their lives than their Bibles. And
   indeed 'tis a sufficient proof, that their reverence of that Book was
   very avowed and manifest; when their Heathen persecutors made that one
   part of their persecution. So that as wherever the Christian Faith was
   receiv'd, this Book was also, under the notion we now plead for, viz.
   as the writings of men inspir'd by God: so it was also contended for
   even unto death: and to part with the Bible was to renounce the Faith.
   And now, after such a cloud of testimonies, we may sure take up that
   (ill apply'd) saying of the High Priest, Matt. 26. 65. what farther
   need have we of witnesses.

   44. YET besides these, another sort of witnesses there are, I mean
   those intrinsick evidences which arise out of the Scripture it self;
   but of these I think not proper here to insist, partly because the
   subject will be in a great degree coincident with that of the second
   general consideration; and partly because these can be argumentative to
   none who are not qualified to discern them. Let those who doubt the
   Divine Original of Scripture, well digest the former grounds which are
   within the verge of reason; and when by those they are brought to read
   it with due reverence, they will not want Arguments from the Scripture
   it self to confirm their veneration of it.

   45. IN the mean time, to evince how proper the former discourse is to
   found a rational belief that the Scripture is the word of God, I shall
   compare it with those measures of credibility upon which all humane
   transactions move, and upon which men trust their greatest concerns
   without diffidence or dispute.

   46. THAT we must in many things trust the report of others, is so
   necessary, that without it humane society cannot subsist. What a
   multitude of subjects are there in the world, who never saw their
   Prince, nor were at the making of any Law? if all these should deny
   their obedience, because they have it only by hear-say, that there is
   such a man, and such Laws, what would become of Government? So also for
   property, if nothing of testimony may be admitted, how shall any man
   prove his right to any thing? All pleas must be decided by the sword,
   and we shall fall into that state (which some have fancied the
   primitive) of universal hostility. In like manner for traffick and
   commerce; how should any Merchant first attempt a trade to any foreign
   part of the world, if he did not believe that such a place there was?
   and how could he believe that, but upon the credit of those who have
   been there? Nay, indeed how could any man first attempt to go but to
   the next Market Town, if he did not from the report of others, conclude
   that such a one there was? so that if this universal diffidence should
   prevail, every man should be a kind of Plantagnus, fix'd to the soil he
   first sprung up in. The absurdities are indeed so infinite, and so
   obvious, that I need not dilate upon them.

   47. BUT it will perhaps be said, that in things that are told us by our
   contemporaries, and that relate to our own time, men will be less apt
   to deceive us, because they know 'tis in our power to examine and
   discover the truth. To this I might say, that in many instances it
   would scarce quit cost to do so, and the inconveniences of tryal would
   exceed those of belief. But 1 shall willingly admit this probable
   argument, and only desire it may be applied to our main question, by
   considering whether the primitive Christians who receiv'd the Scripture
   as divine, had not the same security of not being deceiv'd, who had as
   great opportunities of examining, and the greatest concern of doing it
   throughly, since they were to engage, not only their future hopes in
   another world, but (that which to nature is much more sensible) all
   their present enjoyments, and even life it self upon the truth of it.

   48. BUT because it must be confess'd that we who are so many Ages
   remov'd from them, have not their means of assurance; let us in the
   next place consider, whether an assent to those testimonies they have
   left behind them, be not warranted by the common practice of mankind in
   other cases. Who is there that questions there was such a man as
   William the Conqueror in this Island? Or, to lay the Scene farther, who
   doubts there was an Alexander, a Julius Csar, an Augustus? Now what
   have we to found this confidence on besides the Faith of History? And I
   presume even those who exact the severest demonstrations for
   Ecclesiastick story, would think him a very impertinent Sceptick that
   should do the like in these. So also, as to the Authors of Books; who
   disputes whether Homer writ the Iliads, or Virgil the neids, or Csar
   the Commentaries, that pass under their names? yet none of these have
   been attested in any degree like the Scripture. 'Tis said indeed, that
   Csar ventured his own life to save his Commentaries, imploying one
   hand to hold those above the water, when it should have assisted him in
   swiming. But whoever laid down their lives in attestation of that, or
   any humane composure, as multitudes of men have done for the Bible?

   49. BUT perhaps 'twill be said, that the small concern men have, who
   wrote these, or other the like Books, inclines them to acquiesce in the
   common opinion. To this I must say, that many things inconsiderable to
   mankind have oft been very laboriously discuss'd, as appears by many
   unedifying Volumes, both of Philosophers and School-men. But whatever
   may be said in this instance, 'tis manifest there are others, wherein
   mens real and greatest interests are intrusted to the testimonies of
   former Ages. For example, a man possesses an estate which was bought by
   his great Grandfather, or perhaps elder Progenitor: he charily
   preserves that deed of purchase, and never looks for farther security
   of his title: yet alas, at the rate that men object against the Bible,
   what numberless Cavils might be rais'd against such a deed? How shall
   it be known that there was such a man as either Seller or Purchaser? if
   by the witnesses they are as lyable to doubt as the other; it being as
   easie to forge the attestation as the main writing: and yet
   notwithstanding all these possible deceits, nothing but a positive
   proof of forgery can invalidate this deed. Let but the Scripture have
   the same measure, be allowed to stand in force, to be what it pretends
   to be, till the contrary be (not by surmises and possible conjectures)
   but by evident proof evinc'd and its greatest Advocates will ask to
   more.

   50. A like instance may be given in publick concerns; the immunities
   and rights of any Nation, particularly here of our Magna Charta,
   granted many Ages since, and deposited among the publick Records: to
   make this signify any thing, it must be taken for granted, that this
   was without falsification preserved to our times; yet how easy were it
   to suggest that in so long a succession of its keepers, some may have
   been prevail'd on by the influence of Princes to abridge and curtail
   its concessions; others by a prevailing faction of the people to
   amplify and extend it? Nay, if men were as great Scepticks in Law, as
   they are in Divinity, they might exact demonstrations that the whole
   thing were not a forgery. Yet, for all these possible surmises, we
   still build upon it, and should think he argued very fallaciously, that
   should go to evacuate it, upon the force of such remote suppositions.

   51. NOW I desire it may be consider'd whether our security concerning
   the holy Scripture be not as great, nay, greater than it can be of
   this. For first, this is a concern only of a particular Nation, and so
   can expect no foreign attestation; and secondly, it has all along
   rested on the fidelity of its keepers; which has been either a single
   person, or at best some small number at a time; whereas the Scriptures
   have been witness'd to by persons of all Nations; and those not single,
   but collective Bodies and Societies, even as many as there have been
   Christian Churches throughout the world. And the same that are its
   Attestors have been its Guardians also, and by their multitudes made it
   a very difficult, if not an impossible thing to falsify it in any
   considerable degree; it being not imaginable, as I shew'd before from
   St. Austin, all Churches should combine to do it: and if they did not,
   the fraud could not pass undetected: and if no eminent change could
   happen, much less could any new, any counterfeit Gospel be obtruded,
   after innumerable Copies of the first had been translated into almost
   all Languages, and dispers'd throughout the world.

   52. THE Imperial Law compil'd by Justinian, was soon after his death,
   by reason of the inroads of the Goths, and other barbarous Nations,
   utterly lost in the Western world; and scarce once heard of for the
   space of five hundred years, and then came casually to be retriv'd upon
   the taking of Amalsis by the Pisans, one single copy being found there
   at the plundering of the City. And the whole credit of those Pandects,
   which have ever since govern'd the Western world, depends in a manner
   on that single Book, formerly call'd the Pisan; and now, after that
   Pisa was taken by the Florentines, the Florentine Copy. But
   notwithstanding this, the body of the Civil Law obtains; and no man
   thinks it reasonable to question its being really what it pretends to
   be, notwithstanding its single, and so long interrupted derivation. I
   might draw this parallel thro' many other instances, but these may
   suffice to shew, that if the Scripture might find but so much equity,
   as to be tried by the common measures of other things, it would very
   well pass the test.

   53. BUT men seem in this case (like our late Legislators) to set up new
   extraregular Courts of Justice, to try those whom no ordinary rules
   will cast, yet their designs require should be condemn'd: And we may
   conclude, 'tis not the force of reason, but of prejudice, that makes
   them so unequal to themselves as to reject the Scripture, when they
   receive every thing else upon far weaker grounds. The bottom of it is,
   they are resolv'd not to obey its precepts; and therefore think it the
   shortest cut to disavow its authority; for should they once own that,
   they would find themselves intangled in the most inextricable dilemma;
   that of the Pharisees about John Baptist: If we say from heaven, he
   will say, why then did you not believe him? Matt. 21. 25. If they
   confess the Scriptures divine, they must be self-condemn'd in not
   obeying them. And truly men that have such preingagements to their
   lusts, that they must admit nothing that will disturb them; do but
   prevaricate when they call for greater evidence and demonstrations: for
   those bosom Sophisters will delude the most manifest conviction; and
   like Juglers make men disbelieve even their own senses. So that any
   other waies of evidence will be as disputable with them, as those
   already offer'd: which is the third thing I proposed to consider.

   54. IT has been sometimes seen in popular mutinies, that when blanks
   have been sent them they could not agree what to ask: and were it
   imaginable that God should so far court the infidelity of men, as to
   allow them to make their own demands, to set down what waies of proof
   would perswade them; I doubt not there are many have obstinacy enough
   to defeat their own methods, as well as they do now Gods. 'Tis sure
   there is no ordinary way of conviction left for them to ask. God having
   already (as hath also been shew'd) afforded that. They must therefore
   resort to immediate revelation, expect instant assurances from heaven,
   that this Book we call the Bible is the word of God.

   55. MY first question then is, in what manner this revelation must be
   made to appear credible to them. The best account we .have of the
   several waies of revelation is from the Jews, to whom God was pleas'd
   upon new emergencies signally to reveal himself. These were first
   dreams; secondly, visions; by both which the Prophets receiv'd their
   inspirations. Thirdly, Urim and Thummim. Fourthly, the Bath-col (as
   they term it) Thunder and voice from Heaven. Let us consider them
   distinctly, and see whether our Sceptical men may not probably find
   somewhat to dispute in every one of these. And first for dreams, it is
   among us so hard to distinguish between those that arise from
   constitution, prepossession of phancy, diabolical, or divine infusion,
   that those that have the most critically consider'd them, do rather
   difference them by their matter, than any certain discriminating
   circumstances: and unless we had some infallible way of discerning, our
   dependence on them may more probably betray than direct us. 'Tis
   unquestionable that dually phancy has the greatest stroke in them. And
   if he that should commit himself to the guidance of his waking phancy,
   is not like to be over-wisely govern'd, what can we expect from his
   sleeping? All this and more may doubtless be soberly enough objected
   against the validity of our common dreams.

   56. BUT admit there were now such divine dreams as brought their
   evidence along with them; yet sure 'tis possible for prejudic'd, men to
   resist even the clearest convictions. For do we not see some that have
   made a shift to extinguish that natural light, those notions which are
   interwoven into the very frame and constitution of their minds, that so
   they may sin more at ease, and without reluctancy? and sure 'tis as
   possible for them to close their eyes against all raies from without
   too, to resist revelation as well as instinct and more likely, by how
   much a transient cause is naturally less operative than a permanent. An
   instance of this we have in Balaam, who being in these nightly
   visitations prohibited by God to go to Balak; and tho' he knew then
   what he afterwards saies, Num. 23. 19. that God was not a man that he
   should lie, nor the son of man that be should repent; yet he would not
   take God at his firm word, but upon a fresh bait to his covetousness,
   tries again for an answer more indulgent to his interest. Besides, if
   God should thus reveal himself to some particular persons, yet 'tis
   beyond all president or imagination, that he should do it to every man;
   and then how shall those who have these dreams, be able to convince
   others that they are divine?

   53. 'TIS easy to guess what reception a man that produces no other
   authority would have in this ludicrous Age: he would certainly be
   thought rather to want sleep, than to have had revelations in it. And
   if Jacob and the Patriarchs, who were themselves acquainted with divine
   dreams, yet did not believe Josephs; any man that should now pretend in
   that kind, would be sure to fall under the same irony that he did, to
   be entertain'd with a behold this dreamer cometh, Gen. 37. 19.

   58. THE second way of revelation by vision was, where the man was wrapt
   into an extasy, his spirit for a while suspended from all sensible
   communication with the body, and entertain'd with supernatural light.
   In these the Prophets saw emblematical representations of future
   events, receiv'd knowledge of divine Mysteries, and commission and
   ability to discharge the whole prophetick office. Now suppose God
   should now raise us Prophets, and inspire them after this manner; what
   would the merry men of this time say to it? Can we think that they who
   rally upon all that the former Prophets have writ, would look with much
   reverence on what the new ones should say? Some perhaps would construe
   their raptures to be but like Mahomets Epilepsy others a fit of frenzy,
   others perhaps a being drunk with new wine Acts. 2. 13. but those that
   did the most soberly consider it, would still need a new revelation to
   attest the truth of this: there being far more convincing arguments to
   prove the Scriptures divine, than any man can alledge to prove his
   inspiration to be so. And 'tis sure a very irrational method, to
   attempt the clearing of a doubt by somewhat which is it self more
   doubtful.

   59. A third way, was by Urim and Thummin, which Writers tell us was an
   Oracle resulting from the Letters which were graven in the High Priests
   Pectoral, to which in all important doubts the Jews of those Ages
   resorted, and receiv'd responses; but whether it were by the suddain
   prominency, or resplendency of the letters, or by any other way, is not
   material in this place to enquire: one: one thing is certain, that the
   Ephod, and consequently the Pectoral was in the Priests custody, and
   that he had the administration of the whole affair. Now I refer it to
   consideration, whether this one circumstance would not (to those
   prejudic'd men I speak of) utterly evacuate the credit of the Oracle.
   They have taught themselves to look on Priest-hood, whether Legal or
   Evangelical, only as a better name for imposture and cosenage: and they
   that can accuse the Priests for having kept up a cheat for so many
   Ages, mud needs think them such omnipotent Juglers, that nothing can be
   fence against their Legerdemain: and by consequence, this way of
   revelation would rather foment their displeasure at the Ecclesiatticks,
   than satisfy their doubts of the Scripture.

   60. LASTLY, for the fourth way, that of thunder and voice from Heaven,
   tho' that would be a signal way of conviction to unprejudiced men, yet
   it would probably have as little effect as the rest upon the others:
   men that pretend to such deep reasoning, would think it childish to be
   frighted out of their opinion by a clap of Thunder; some Philosophical
   reason shall be found out, to satisfy them that 'tis the effect only of
   some natural cause, and any the most improbable shall serve turn to
   supplant the fear of its being a divine testimony to that which they
   are so unwilling should be true. As for the voice from Heaven, it must
   either be heard by others, and related to them; or else immediatly by
   themselves: if the former, 'twill lie under the same prejudice which
   the Bible already do's, that they have it but by hearsay: and reporters
   would fall under the reproach either of design or frenzy; that they
   meant to deceive, or were themselves deceiv'd by their own distemper'd
   phancy. But if themselves should be Auditors of it; 'tis odds but their
   bottomless jealousies in divine Matters would suggest a possibility of
   fraud, tho' they knew not how to trace it: nay 'tis more than possible
   that they will rather disbelieve their own senses, than in this
   instance take their testimony with all its consequences.

   61. NOR is this a wild supposition for we see it possible for not only
   single men but, multitudes to disbelieve their senses through an excess
   of credulity witness the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Why may it not
   then be as possible for others to do the like thro' a greater excess of
   incredulity? Besides mens prepossessions and affections have a strange
   influence on their Faith: men many times will not suffer themselves to
   believe the most credible things, if they cross their inclination. How
   often do we see irregular Patients that will not believe any thing that
   their appetite craves will do them hurt, tho' their Physicians, nay,
   their own even sensitive experience attest it to them? And can we think
   that a diseas'd mind, gasping with an Hydropick thirst after the
   pleasures of sin, will ever assent to those premises, whose conclusion
   will engage to the renouncing them? Will not a luxurious voluptuous
   person be willing rather to give his ears the lie, to disbelieve what
   he hears, than permit them more deeply to disoblige his other senses,
   by bringing in those restraints and mortifications which the Scripture
   would impose upon them?

   62. THUS we see how little probability there is, that any of these
   waies of revelation would convince these incredulous men. And indeed,
   those that will not believe upon such inducements as may satisfy men of
   sober reason, will hardly submit to any other method, according to that
   Assertion of Father Abraham, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
   neither will they be perswaded, tho' one rose from the dead Luk. 16.
   31. Now at this rate of infidelity, what way will they leave God to
   manifest any thing convincingly to the world? which is to put him under
   an impotency greater than adheres to humanity for we men have power to
   communicate our minds to others, tell whetherto we own such or such a
   thing to which we are intitled; and we can satisfy our Auditors that it
   is indeed we that speak of them: but if every method God uses, do's
   rather increase than satisfy mens doubts, all intercourse between God
   and man is intercepted; and he must do that of necessity, which
   Epicurus fancied he did of his choice; viz. keep himself unconcern'd in
   the affairs of mortals, as having no way of communicating with them.
   Nay (what is yet, if possible, more absurd) he must be suppos'd to have
   put the works of his Creation out of his own reach, to have given men
   discoursive faculties, and left himself no way of address to them.

   63. THESE inferences how horridly soever they sound, yet 1 see not how
   they can be disclaim'd by those, who are unsatisfied with all those
   waies by which God hath hitherto reveal'd himself to the world. For can
   it be imagin'd that God who created man a reasonable creature, that
   himself might be glorified in his free and rational obedience: (when
   all other creatures obey upon impulse and instinct) can it, I say, be
   imagin'd, that he should so remisly pursue his own design, as to let so
   many Ages pass since the Creation, and never to acquaint mankind with
   the particulars wherein that obedience was to be exercis'd. This sure
   were so disagreeable to his wisdom and goodness, that it cannot be
   charged upon his will: and consequently they who own not that he has
   made any such revelation, must tacitly tax him of impotence, that he
   could not do it. But if any man will say he has, and yet reject all
   this which both Jews and Christians receive as such, let him produce
   his testimonies for the others, or rather (to retort his own measure)
   his demonstrations. And then let it appear whether his Scheme of
   Doctrine, or ours, will need the greater aid of that easy credulity he
   reproaches us with.

   64. 1 have now gone thro' the method I proposed for evincing the Divine
   Original of the Scriptures, and shall not descend to examine those more
   minute and particular Cavils which profane men make against them; the
   proof of this, virtually superseding all those. For if it be reasonable
   to believe it the Word of God, it must be reasonable also to believe it
   of perfection proportionable to the Author; and then certainly it must
   be advanced beyond all our objections. For to those who except to the
   stile, the incoherence, the contradictions, or whatever else in
   Scripture; I shall only ask this one question, whether it be not much
   more possible that they (who can pretend to be nothing above fallible
   men) may misjudge, than that the infallible God should dictate any
   thing justly liable to those charges: I am sure they must depart as
   much from Reason as Religion, to affirm the contrary. But alas, instead
   of this implicit submission to Gods Word, men take up explicit
   prejudices against it; condemn it without ever examining the truth of
   the allegation. 'Tis certain, that in a writing of such Antiquity,
   whose original Language has Idioms and Phrases so peculiar, whose
   Country had customs so differing from the rest of the world; 'tis
   impossible to judge of it without reference to all those circumstances.
   Add to this, that the Hebrew has been a dead Language for well nigh two
   thousand years, no where in common use: nor is there any other ancient
   Book now extant in it, besides those (yet not all neither,) of the Old
   Testament.

   65. NOW of those many who defame Holy Writ, how few are there that have
   the industry to enquire into those particulars? And when for want of
   knowledge, some passages seem improper, or perhaps contradictory the
   Scripture must bear the blame of their ignorance, and be accus'd as
   absurd and unintelligible, because themselves are stupid and negligent.
   It were therefore methinks but a reasonable proposal, that no man
   should arraign it, till they have used all honest diligence, taken in
   all probable helps for the understanding it and if this might be
   obtain'd, I believe most of its Accusers would like those of the Woman
   in the Gospel Jo. 8. 9, drop away, as conscious of their own
   incompetency: the loudest out-cries that are made against it, being
   commonly of those who fall upon it only as a fashionable theme of
   discourse, and hope to acquire themselves the reputation of wits by
   thus charging God foolishly. But he that would candidly and uprightly
   endeavour to comprehend before he judges, and to that end industriously
   use those means which the providence of God by the labours of pious men
   hath afforded him, will certainly find cause to acquit the Scripture of
   those imputations which our bold Criticks have cast upon it. I do not
   say that he shall have all the obscurities of it perfectly clear'd to
   him; but he shall have so many of them as are for his real advantage,
   and shall discern such reasons why the rest remain unfathomable, as may
   make him not only justify, but celebrate the wisdom of the Author.

   66. YET this is to be expected only upon the fore-mention'd condition,
   viz. that he come with sincere and honest intentions; for as for him
   that comes to the Scripture with design, and wishes to find matter of
   cavil and accusations; there is little doubt but that spirit of impiety
   and profaneness which sent him thither, will meet him there as a spirit
   of delusion, and occecation. That Prince of the Air will cast such
   mists, raise such black vapours; that as the Apostle speaks, the light
   of the glorious Gospel of Christ shall not shine unto him, 2 Cor. 4. 5.
   Indeed were such a man left only to the natural efficacy of prejudice,
   that is of it self so blinding, so infatuating a thing, as commonly
   fortifies against all conviction. We see it in all the common instances
   of life; mens very senses are often enslav'd by it: the prepossession
   of a strong fancy will make the objects of sight or hearing appear
   quite different from what they are. But in the present case, when this
   shall be added to Satanical illusions, and both left to their
   operations by Gods withdrawing his illuminating grace, the case of such
   a man answers that description of the Scripture, They have eyes and see
   not, ears have they and hear not, Rom. 11. 8. And that God will so
   withdraw his grace, we have all reason to believe, he having promis'd
   it only to the meek, to those who come with malleable ductile spirits,
   to learn, not to deride or cavil. Saint Peter tells us, that the
   unlearned and unstable wrest the Scripture to their own destruction 2
   Pet. 3. 16. And if God permit such to do so, much more will he the
   proud and malicious.

   67. 1 say not this, to deter any from the sturdy of Holy Scripture, but
   only to caution them to bring a due preparation of mind along with
   them; Gods Word being like a generous soveraign medicament, which if
   simply and regularly taken, is of the greatest benefit; but if mix'd
   with poison, serves only to make that more fatally operative. To
   conclude, he that would have his doubts solv'd concerning Scripture,
   let him follow the method our blessed Lord has prescrib'd: Let him do
   the will of God, and then he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be
   of God, Jo. 7. 17. Let him bring with him a probity of mind, a
   willingness to assent to all convictions he shall there meet with; and
   then he will find grounds sufficient to assure him that it is Gods
   Word, and consequently to be receiv'd with all the submission and
   reverence, that its being so exacts.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   SECT. III.

   Subject matter treated of in the Holy Scripture, is excellent, as is
   also its end and deign.

   WE have hitherto consider'd the holy Scripture only under one notion,
   as it is the Word of God; we come now to view it in the subject matter
   of it, the several parts whereof it consists; which are so various and
   comprehensive, that they shew the whole is deriv'd from him who is all
   in all. 1 Cor. 15. 28. But that we may not speak only loosely, and at
   rovers we will take this excellent frame in pieces, and consider its
   most eminent parts distinctly. Now the parts of Holy Writ seem to
   branch themselves into these severals: First, the Historical; secondly,
   the Prophetick; thirdly, the Doctrinal; fourthly, the Preceptive;
   fifthly, the Minatory; sixthly, the Promissory. These are the several
   veins in this rich Mine, in which he who industriously labours, will
   find the Psalmist was not out in his estimate, when he pronounces them
   more to be desir'd than gold, yea, than much fine gold, Psal. 19. 10.

   2. To speak first of the Historical part; the things which chiefly
   recommend a History, are the dignity of the subject, the truth of the
   relation, and those pleasant or profitable observations which are
   interwoven with it. And first, for the dignity of the subject, the
   History of the Bible must be acknowledged to excell all others: those
   shew the rise and progress of some one people or Empire; this shews us
   the original of the whole Universe; and particularly of man, for whose
   use and benefit the whole Creation was design'd. By this mankind is
   brought into acquaintance with it self; made to know the elements of
   its constitution, and taught to put a differing value upon that Spirit
   which was breath'd into it by God, Gen. 2. 7. and the flesh whose
   foundation is in the dust, Job 4. 19. And when this Historical part of
   Scripture contracts and draws into a narrow channel, when it records
   the concerns but of one Nation, yet it was that which God had dignified
   above all the rest of the world, mark'd out for his own peculiar; made
   it the repository of his truth, and the visible stock from whence the
   Messias should come, in whom all the Nations of the earth were to be
   blessed, Gen. 18. 18. so that in this one people of the Jews, was
   virtually infolded the highest and most important interests of the
   whole world; and it must be acknowledg'd, no Story could have a nobler
   subject to treat of.

   3. SECONDLY, as to the truth of the relation, tho' to those who own it
   Gods Word there needs no other proof; yet it wants not human Arguments
   to confirm it. The most undoubted symptom of sincerity in an Historian
   is impartiality. Now this is very eminent in Scripture writers: they do
   not record others faults, and baulk their own; but indifferently accuse
   themselves as well as others. Moses mentions his own diffidence and
   unwillingness to go on Gods message, Ex. 4. 14. his provocation of God
   at the waters of Meribah, Numb. 20. Jonah records his own sullen
   behaviour towards God, with as great aggravations as any of his enemies
   could have done. Peter in his dictating Saint Marks Gospel, neither
   omits nor extenuates his sin; all he seems to speak short in, is his
   repentance, Saint Paul registers himself as the greatest of sinners.

   4. AND as they were not indulgent to their own personal faults, so
   neither did any nearness of relation, any respect of quality bribe them
   to a concealment: Moses relates the offence of his Sister Miriam in
   mutining. Numb. 12. 1. of his Brother Aaron in the matter of the Calf,
   Exod. 32. 4, with as little disguise as that of Korah and his Company.
   David, tho' a King, hath his adultery and murder display'd in the
   blackest Characters: and King Hezekiahs little vanity of shewing his
   treasures do's not escape a remark. Nay, even the reputation of their
   Nation could not biass the Sacred Writers; but they freely tax their
   crimes: the Israelites murmurings in the wilderness, their Idolatries
   in Canaan, are set down without any palliation or excuse. And they are
   as frequently branded for their stubborness and ingratitude, as the
   Canaanites are for their abominations. So that certainly no History in
   the world do's better attest it's truth by this evidence of
   impartiality.

   5. IN the last place it commends it self both by the pleasure and
   profit it yields. The rarity of those events it records, surprizes the
   mind with a delightful admiration; and that mixture of sage Discourses,
   and well-couch'd Parables wherewith it abounds, do's at once please and
   instruct. How ingeniously apt was Nathans Apologue to David, whereby
   with Holy artifice he ensnar'd him into repentance? And it remains
   still matter of instruction to us, to shew us with what unequal scales
   we are apt to weigh the same crime in others and our selves. So also
   that long train of smart calamities which succeeded his sin, is set out
   with such particularity, that it seems to be exactly the crime reverst.
   His own lust with Bathsheba was answer'd with Amnons towards Thamar;
   his murder of Uriah with that of Amnon; his treacherous contrivance of
   that murder, with Absoloms traitorous conspiracy against him. So that
   every circumstance of his punishment was the very Echo and
   reverberation of his guilt. A multitude of the like instances might be
   produc'd out of Holy Writ; all concurring to admonish us, that God
   exactly marks, and will repay our crimes; and that commonly with such
   propriety, that we need no other clue to guide us to the cause of our
   sufferings, than the very sufferings themselves. Indeed innumerable are
   the profitable observations arising from the Historical part of
   Scripture, that flow so easily and unconstrain'd, that nothing but a
   stupid inadvertence in the reader can make him baulk them: therefore
   'twould be impertinent here multiply instances.

   6. LET us next consider the Prophetick part of Scripture, and we shall
   find it no less excellent in its kind. The Prophetick Books are for the
   most part made up (as the Prophetick Office was) of two parts:
   prediction and instruction. When God rais'd up Prophets, 'twas not only
   to acquaint men with future events, but to reform their present
   manners: and therefore as they are called Seers in one respect, so they
   are Watch-men and Sheepherds in another. Nay, indeed the former was
   often subservient to the other as to the nobler end; their gift of
   fore-telling was to gain them authority, to be as it were the seal of
   their commission, to convince men that they were sent from God: and so
   to render them the more pliant to their reproofs and admonitions. And
   the very matter of their prophecies was usually adapted to this end:
   the denouncing of judgements being the most frequent Theme, and that
   design'd to bring men to repentance; as appears experimentally in the
   case of Nineveh. And in this latter part of their office, the Prophets
   acted with the greatest incitation and vehemence.

   7. WITH what liberty and zeal do's Elijah arraign Ahab of Naboth's
   murder, and foretell the fatal event of it, without any fear of his
   power, or reverence of his greatness? And Samuel, when he delivers Saul
   the fatal message of his rejection, do's passionately and convincingly
   expostulate with him concerning his sin, 1 Sam. 15. 17. Now the very
   same Spirit still breaths in all the prophetick Writings, the same
   truth of prediction, and the same zeal against vice.

   8. FIRST for the predictions, what signal completions do we find? How
   exactly are all the denunciations of judgments fulfill'd, where
   repentance has not interven'd? He that reads the 28. chap. of Deut. and
   compares it with the Jews calamities, both under the Assyrians and
   Babylonians, and especially under the Romans, would think their
   oppressors had consulted it, and transcrib'd their severities thence.
   And even these Nations, who were the instruments of accomplishing those
   dismal presages, had their own ruins foretold, and as punctually
   executed. And as in Kingdoms and Nations, so to private persons none of
   the prophetick threatnings ever return'd empty. The sentence pronounc'd
   against Ahab, Jezebel, and their posterity, was fulfill'd even to the
   most minute circumstances of place and manner; as is evident by
   comparing the denunciation of Elijah, 1 Kings 21. 19. 23. with their
   tragical ends recorded in the following chapters. And as for Jehu,
   whose service God was pleased to use in that execution, tho' he
   rewarded it with entailing the Crown of Israel on him for four
   descents, yet he fore-told those should be the limits: and accordingly
   we find Zachariah, the fourth descendent of his line, was the last of
   it that fate on that throne, 2 Kings 15. 10. So also the destruction of
   Achitophel and Judas, the one immediate, the other many hundred years
   remote, are foretold by David, Psal. 109. and we find exactly answer'd
   in the event.

   9. NOR was this exactness confin'd only to the severe predictions, but
   as eminent in the more gracious. All the blessings which God by
   himself, or the Ministry of his Prophets promis'd, were still
   infallibly made good. At the time of life God return'd and visited
   Sarah with conception, notwithstanding those natural improbabilities
   which made her not only distrust, but even deride and laugh at the
   promise, Gen. 18. The posterity of that Son of Promise, the whole race
   of Abraham was deliver'd from the Egyptian bondage, and possess'd of
   Canaan, at the precise time which God had long before signified to
   Abrabam, Gen. 15. So likewise the return of the Jews from the
   Babylonish captivity was fore-told many years before their deportation,
   and Cyrus named for their restorer, before he had either name or being
   save only in Gods prescience, Is. 44. 28. But I need not multiply
   instances of national or personal promises. The earliest and most
   comprehensive promise of all was that of the Messiah, in whom all
   persons and Nations of the world were to be blest, Gen. 22. 11. that
   seed of the woman that should bruise the Serpents head, Gen. 3. 15. To
   him give all the Prophets witness, as Saint Peter observes, Acts 10.
   And he who was the subject, made himself also the expounder of those
   prophecies in his walk to Emmaus with the two Disciples, Luk. 24. 13.
   beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded to them in all
   the Scriptures, the things concerning himself.

   10. THIS as it was infinitely the greatest blessing afforded mankind,
   so was it the most frequently and eminently predicted; and that with
   the most exact particularity as to all the circumstances. His
   immaculate conception, the union of his two natures implied in his name
   Immanuel; Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call
   his name Immanuel; is most plainly fore-told by Isaiah chap. 7. 14.
   Nay, the very place of his birth so punctually fore-told, that the
   Priests and Scribes could readily resolve Herods Question upon the
   strength of the Prophecy, and assure him Christ must be born in
   Bethlehem, Mat. 2. 5. As for the whole business and design of his life,
   we find it so describ'd by Isaiah, chap. 61. as Christ himself owns it,
   Luke 4. 18. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath
   appointed me to preach good tidings to the meek; hath sent me to bind
   up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
   recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
   bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

   11. IF we look farther to his death, the greatest part of the Old
   Testament has a direct aspect on it. All the Levitical oeconomy of
   Sacrifices and Ablutions were but prophetick Rites, and ocular
   Predictions of that one expiatory Oblation. Nay most of Gods
   providential dispensations to the Jews, carried in them types and
   prefigurations of this. Their rescue from Egypt, the sprinkling of
   blood to secure them from the destroying Angel; the Manna with which
   they were fed, the Rock which supplied them water: these and many more
   referr'd to Christ, as their final and highest signification.

   12. BUT besides these darker adumbrations, we have (as the Apostle
   speaks) a more sure word of prophecy. Saint Peter in his calculation
   begins with Moses, takes in Samuel, and the whole succession of
   Prophets after him, as bearing witness to this great event of Christs
   passion, Acts 4. 22. 24. And indeed he that reads the Prophets
   consideringly, shall find it so punctually describ'd, that the
   Evangelists do not much more fully instruct him in the circumstances of
   it. Daniel tells us his death, as to the kind of it, was to be violent:
   The Messiah shall be cut off; and as to the design of it 'twas not for
   himself; Dan. 9. 26. But the Prophet Isaiah gives us more than a bare
   negative account of it; and expressly saies, he was wounded for our
   transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of
   our peace was on him, and by his stripes we were healed, chap. 53. 5.
   And again, ver. 10. Thou shalt make his Soul an offering for sin; and
   ver. 11. my righteous Servant shall justify many, for he shall bear
   their iniquities. Nor is Job, an Idumean, much short of even this
   Evangelical Prophet; in that short Creed of his, wherein he owns him as
   his Redeemer, I know that my Redeemer liveth, &c. Job. 19. 25.

   13. AND as the end, so the circumstances of his sufferings are most of
   them under prediction: His extention upon the Cross is mention'd by the
   Psalmist: They pierced my hands, and my feet; I may tell all my bones,
   Psal. 22. 16, 17. As for his inward dolours, they are in that Psalm so
   pathetically describ'd that Christ chose that very form to breath them
   out in: My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? ver. 1. So his
   revilers did also transcribe part of their reproaches from ver. 8. He
   trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him, Matt. 27.
   43. That Vinegar which was offered him on the Cross, was a completion
   of a Prophecy; In my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink, Psal. 69.
   21. the piercing of his side was expressly fore-told by Zachary: they
   shall look on him whom they have pierced, Zach. 10. 12. The company in
   which he suffer'd, and the interment be had, are also intimated by
   lsaiah, He made his Grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
   death, Isai. 53. 9. Nay even the disposal of his Garments was not
   without a Prophecy: they parted my Garments among them, and upon my
   Vesture did they cast Lots Psalm 22. 18. Here are a cloud of witsnesses
   which as they serve eminently to attest the truth of the Christian
   Religion; so do they to evince the excellency of the Sacred Scripture,
   as to the verity of the Prophetick part.

   14. AS to the admonitory part of the Prophetick Writings, they are in
   their kind no way inferiour to the other. The reproofs are
   authoritative and convincing. What piercing exprobations do we find of
   Israels ingratitude? How often are they upbraided with the better
   examples of the brute Creatures? with the Ox and the Ass by Isaiah
   Chap. 1. 3. with the Stork, and the Crane and the Swallow, by Jeremiah,
   Chap. 8. 7. Nay the constancy of the Heathen to their false Gods is
   instanc'd to reproach their revolt from the true. Hath a Nation chang'd
   their Gods which yet are no Gods? but my People have chang'd their
   Glory for that which doth not profit, Jer. 2. 11. What awful, what
   Majestick representations do we find of Gods power, to awake their
   dread! Fear ye not me saith the Lord? will ye not tremble at my
   presence who have plac'd the Sands for the bounds of the Sea by a
   perpetual decree, that it cannot pass over? and tho' the Waves thereof
   toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; tho' they roar, yet can they
   not pass over it, Jer. 22. And again; Thus saith the High and lofty one
   that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is Holy: I dwell in the High and
   Holy Place, Is. 57. 15. So we find him describ'd as a God Glorious in
   Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders, Exod. 15. 11. These and
   many other the like heights of Divine eloquence we meet with in the
   Prophetick Writings: which cannot but strike us with an awful reverence
   of the Divine Power.

   15. NOR are they less Pathetick in the gentler strains. What instance
   is there of the greatest tenderness and love, which God has not adopted
   to express his by? He personates all the nearest and most endearing
   relations: that of a Husband; I will Marry thee to my self, Hos. 2. 19.
   of a Father; I am a Father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first Born:
   nay, he vies Bowels with the tender Sex, and makes it more possible for
   a Mother to renounce her compassions towards the Son of her Womb, than
   for him to with-draw his, Isa. 49. 15. By all these endearments, these
   cords of a man, these bands of love, as himself stiles them, Hos. 11.
   4. endeavouring to draw his people to their duty, and their happiness.
   And when their perversness frustrates all this his Holy Artifice; how
   passionately do's he expostulate with them? how solemnly protest his
   aversness to their ruin? Why will ye die O House of Israel? for I have
   no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God, Ezek.
   18. 31, 32. with what regrets and relenting do's he think of abandoning
   them? How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee
   Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim?
   my Heart is turn'd within me, my repentings are kindled together; Hos.
   11. 8. In short, 'twere endless to cite the places in these Prophetick
   Books, wherein God do's thus condescend to solicit even the sensitive
   part of man; and that with such moving Rhetorick, that I cannot but
   wonder at the exception some of our late Criticks make against the
   Bible, for its defect in that particular; for Oratory is nothing but a
   dextrous application to the affections and passions of men. And
   certainty we find not that done with greater advantage any where than
   in Sacred Writ.

   16. YET it was not the design of the Prophets (no more than of the
   Apostle) to take men with guile; 2 Cor. 12. 16. to inveigle their
   affections unawares to their understandings; but they address as well
   to their reasons, make solemn appeals to their judicative faculties.
   And now judge I pray between me and my Vineyard, says Isa. 5. 3. Nay,
   God by the Prophet Ezekiel solemnly pleads his own cause before them,
   vindicates the equity of his proceedings from the aspersions they had
   cast on them; and by most irrefragable Arguments refutes that injurious
   Proverb which went current among them; and in the close appeals to
   themselves, O House of Israel are not my ways equal? are not your ways
   unequal? Ezek. 18. the evidences were so clear that he remits the
   matter to their own determination. And generally we shall find that
   among all the Topicks of disswasion from sin, there is none more
   closely prest, than that of the folly of it. Idolatry was a sin to
   which Israel had a great propension, and against which most of the
   Prophets admonitions were directed. And certainly it can never be more
   expos'd, and the sottish unreasonableness of it better display'd, than
   we find it in the 44. Chap. of Isaiah. In like manner we may read the
   Prophet Jeremy disswading from the same sin by Arguments of the most
   irrefragable conviction, Jer. 10.

   17. AND as the Prophets omitted nothing as to the manner of their
   address, to render their exhortations effectual, the matter of them was
   likewise so considerable as to command attention. It was commonly
   either the recalling them from their revolts and Apostacies from God by
   Idolatry, or else to convince them of the insignificancy of all those
   legal Ceremonial performances they so much confided in, when taken up
   as a supersedens to moral duties. Upon this account it is, that they
   often depreciate, and in a manner prohibit the solemnest of their
   Worships. To what purpose are the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me?
   bring no more vain Oblations: incense is an abomination to me; the new
   Moons and sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with: if
   Iniquity even your solemn meetings, &c. Is. 1. 11. 13. Not that these
   things were in themselves reprovable; for they were all commanded by
   God; but because the Jews depended so much on these external
   observances that they thought by them to commute for the weightier
   matters of the Law (as our Saviour after stiles them) Judgement, Mercy
   and Faith, Mat. 23. 23. look'd on these rites which discriminated them
   from other Nations, as dispensations from the universal obligations of
   nature and common justice.

   18. THIS deceit of theirs is sharply upbraided to them by the Prophet
   Jeremy; where he calls their boasts of the Temple of the Lord, the
   Temple of the Lord, lying words; and on the contrary, lays the whole
   stress of their obedience, and expectation of their happiness on the
   justice and innocence of their conversation, Ch. 7. 4. And after do's
   smartly reproach their insolence in boldly resorting to that house,
   which by bringing their sins along with them, they made but an Asylum,
   and Sanctuary for those crimes. Will ye steal, murder and commit
   adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal, and walk after
   other Gods whom ye know not, and come and stand before me in this
   house? Is this house which is called by my name become a Den of robbers
   in your eyes? Chap. 7. 9, 10, 11. Indeed all the Prophets seem to
   conspire in this one design, of making them look thro' shadows and
   ceremonies, to that inward purity, Justice and Honesty, which they were
   design'd to inculcate, not to supplant. And this design as it is in it
   self most excellent, most worthy the command of God, and the nature of
   man; so we have seen that it has been pursued by all the most apt, and
   most powerful mediums, that the thing or persons addrest to were
   capable of; and so that the Prophets are no less eminent for the
   discharge of this exhortatory part of their office, than they were in
   the former, of the predicting.

   19. THE next part of Scripture we are to consider, is the Doctrinal; by
   which I shall not in this place understand the whole complex of Faith
   and Manners together; but restrain it only to those Revelations which
   are the object of our Belief; and these are so sublime, as shews flesh
   and blood never reveal'd them. Those great mysteries of our Faith, The
   Trinity, the Incarnation, the Hypostatical union, the Redemption of the
   world by making the offended party the Sacrifice for the offence, are
   things of so high and abstruse speculation, as no finite understanding
   can fully fathom. I know their being so is by some made an Argument for
   disbelief; but doubtless very injustly for (not to insist upon the
   different natures of Faith and Science, by which that becomes a proper
   object of the one which is not of the other) our noncomprehension is
   rather an indication that they have a higher rise, and renders it
   infinitely improbable that they could spring from mans invention. For
   'twere to suppose too great a disproportion between human faculties to
   think men could invent what themselves could not understand. Indeed
   these things lye so much out of the road of human imagination, that I
   dare appeal to the breasts of the most perverse gain-sayers, whether
   ever they could have fallen into their thoughts without suggestion from
   without. And therefore 'tis a malicious contradiction to reject these
   truths because of their dissonancy from human reason, and yet at the
   same time to ascribe their original to man. But certainly there can be
   nothing more inconsistent with mere natural reason, than to think God
   can be, or do no more than man can comprehend. Never any Nation or
   person that own'd a Deity, did ever attempt so to circumscribe him: and
   it is proportionable only to the licentious profaneness of these latter
   days, thus to measure immensity and omnipotence by our narrow
   scantling.

   20. THE more genuine and proper effect of these supernatural truths is,
   to raise our admiration of that Divine Wisdom, whose ways are so past
   finding out; and to give us a just sense of that infinite distance
   which is between it, and the highest of that reason wherein we so pride
   our selves. And the great propriety these Doctrines have to that end
   may well be reckon'd as one part of their excellency.

   21. INDEED there is no part of our holy Faith, but is naturally
   productive of some peculiar virtue; as the whole Scheme together
   engages us to be universally Holy in all manner of conversation. 1 Pet.
   1. 15. And it is the supereminent advantage true Religion hath over all
   false ones, that it tends to so laudable an end.

   22. THE Theology of the Heathens was in many instances an extract and
   quintessence of vice. Their most solemn Rites, and Sacred'st Mysteries
   were of such a nature, that instead of refining and elevating, they
   corrupted and debased their Votaries; immers'd them in all those
   abominable pollutions which sober nature abhorr'd. Whereas the
   principles of our Faith serve to spiritualize and rectifie us, to raise
   us as much above mere manhood as theirs cast them below it.

   23. AND as they are of this vast advantage to us, so also are they just
   to God, in giving us right notions of him. What vile unworthy
   apprehensions had the Heathen of their Deities, intitling them not only
   to the passions but even to the crimes of men, making Jupiter an
   adulterer, Mercury a thief, Bacchus a drunkard, &c, proportionably of
   the rest? Whereas our God is represented to us as an essence, so
   spiritual, and incorporeal, that we must be unbodied our selves before
   we can perfectly conceive what he is: so far from the impotent
   affections and inclinations of men, that he has neither parts, nor
   passions; and is fain to veil himself under that disguise, to speak
   sometimes as if he had, merely in condescention to our grosser
   faculties. And again, so far from being an example, a patron of vice,
   that his eyes are too pure to behold iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. Holiness is
   an essential part of his nature, and he must deny himself to put it
   off.

   24. THE greatest descent that ever he made to humanity was in the
   incarnation of the second person: yet even in that, tho' he was linked
   with a sinful nature, yet he preserv'd the person immaculate; and while
   he had all the sins of the world upon him by imputation, suffer'd not
   any one to be inherent in him.

   To conclude, the Scripture describes our God to us by all those
   glorious Attributes of infinity, Power and Justice, which may render
   him the proper object of our Adorations and Reverence and it describes
   him also in those gentler Attributes of Goodness, Mercy and Truth,
   which may excite our love of, and dependence on him. These are
   representations something worthy of God, and such as impress upon our
   mind great thoughts of him.

   26. BUT never did the Divine Attributes so concur to exert themselves,
   as in the mystery of our Redemption: where his Justice was satisfied
   without diminution to his Mercy; and his Mercy without entrenching on
   his Justice: his Holiness most eminent in his indignation against sin,
   and yet his Love no less so in sparing sinners: these contradictions
   being reconcil'd, this discord compos'd into harmony by his infinite
   Wisdom. This is that stupendous Mystery into which the Angels desir'd
   to look, 1 Pet. 1. 12. And this is it which by the Gospel is preach'd
   unto us; as it follows, vers. 25.

   27. AND as the Scripture gives us this knowledge of God, so it do's
   also of our selves; in which two, all profitable knowledge is
   comprised. It teaches us how vile we were in our original dust; and how
   much viler yet in our fall, which would have sunk us below our first
   principles, sent us not only to earth, but hell. It shews the impotence
   of our lapsed estate; that we are not able of our selves so much as to
   think a good thought: and it shews us also the dignity of our renovated
   estate, that we are heirs of God, and fellow heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.
   17. yet lest this might puff us up with mistaken hopes, it plainly
   acquaints us with the condition on which this depends; that it must be
   our obedience both alive and passive, which is to intitle us to it:
   that we must be faithful to death, if we mean to inherit a crown of
   Life, Rev. 2. 10. and that we must suffer with Christ, if we will be
   glorified with him, Rom. 8. 17. And upon supposition that we perform
   our parts of the condition, it gives us the most certain assurance,
   engages Gods veracity that he will not fail on his. By this it gives us
   support against all the adversities of life assuring us the sufferings
   of it are not worthy to be compared with the glory we expect, Rom. 8.
   18. yea, and against the terrors of death too; by assuring us that what
   we look on as a dissolution, is but a temporary parting and we only put
   off our bodies, that they may put off corruption, and be cloathed with
   immortality.

   28. THESE and the like are the Doctrines the Holy Scripture offers to
   us: and we may certainly say, they are faithful sayings, and worthy of
   all acceptation, 1 Tim. 4. 9. The notions it gives us of God are so
   sublime and great, that they cannot but affect us with reverence, and
   admiration; and yet withal, so amiable and endearing that they cannot
   but raise love and gratitude, affiance and delight.

   29. AND, which is yet more, the milder Attributes are apt to inspirit
   us with a generous ambition of assimilation; excite us to transcribe
   all his imitable excellencies in which the very Heathens could discern
   consisted the accomplishment of human felicity.

   30. AND then the knowledge it gives us of our selves do's us the
   kindest office imaginable; keeps us from those swelling thoughts we are
   too apt to entertain, and shews us the necessity of bottoming our hopes
   upon a firmer foundation: and then again keeps us from being lazy or
   secure, by shewing us the necessity of our own endeavours. In a word,
   it teaches us to be humble and industrious, and whoever is so ballasted
   can hardly be shipwrack'd.

   31. THESE are the excellencies of the Doctrinal part of the Scriptures,
   which also renders them most aptly preparative for the preceptive. And
   indeed, so they were design'd: the Credenda and the Agenda being such
   inseparable relations, that whoever parts them, forfeits the advantage
   of both. The most solemn profession of Christ, the most importunate
   invocations, Lord, Lord, will signifie nothing to them which do not the
   things which he says, Mat. 7. And how excellent, how rational those
   precepts are which the Scripture proposes to us from him is our next
   point of consideration.

   32. THE first Law which God gave to mankind was that of nature. And
   tho' the impressions of it upon the mind be by Adams fall exceedingly
   dimm'd and defac'd; yet that derogates nothing from the dignity and
   worth of that Law, which God has been so far from cancelling, that he
   seems to have made it the rule and square of his subsequent Laws so
   that nothing is injoin'd in those, but what is consonant and agreeable
   to that. The Moral Law given in the Decalogue to the Jews, the
   Evangelical Law given in the Gospel to Christians, have this natural
   Law for their basis and foundation. They licence nothing which that
   prohibits, and very rarely prohibit any thing which it licences.

   33. 'TIS true, Christ in his Sermon on the Mount, raises Christians to
   a greater strictness than the Jews thought themselves oblig'd to; but
   that was not by contradicting either the natural, or moral Law, but by
   rescuing the latter from those corruptions which the false glosses of
   the Scribes and Pharisees had mix'd with it; and reducing it to its
   primitive integrity, and extent. In a word, as the Decalogue was given
   to repair the Defacings, and renew the impressions of the natural Law:
   so the precepts of the Gospel were design'd to revive and illustrate
   both. And accordingly we find Christ, in the matter of Divorce, calls
   them back to this natural Law; In the beginning it was not so Mat. 19.
   8; I say not but that even these natural notions are in some instances
   refin'd and elevated by Christ; the second Adam being to repair the
   fall of the first with advantage but yet he still builds upon that
   ground-work, introduces nothing that is inconsistent with it.

   34. AND this accordance between there several Laws is a circumstance
   that highly recommends Scripture precepts to us. We cannot imagine but
   that God who made man for no other end but to be an instrument of his
   glory, and a recipient of all communicable parts of his happiness,
   would assign him such rules and measures as were most conducive to
   those ends. And therefore since the Scripture injunctions are of the
   same mould, we must conclude them to be such as tend to the perfection
   of our being; the making us what God originally intended us; and he
   that would not be that, will certainly chuse much worse for himself.

   31. I know there have been prejudices taken up against the precepts of
   Christ, as if they impos'd unreasonable, unsupportable strictnesses
   upon men: and some have assum'd liberty to argue mutinously against
   them; nay, against God too for putting such natural appetites into men,
   and then forbidding them to satisfie them.

   36. BUT the ground of this cavil is the not rightly distinguishing of
   natural appetites, which are to be differenc'd according to the two
   states of rectitude and depravation: those of the first rank are the
   appetites God put into man; and those were all regular and innocent,
   such as tended to the preservation of his being: nature in its first
   integrity measuring its desires by its needs. Now Christs prohibitions
   are not directed against these, he forbids no one kind of these
   desires. And tho' the precept of self-denial may sometimes restrain us
   in some particular acts; yet that is but proportionable to that
   restraint Adam was under in relation to the forbidden Tree, a
   particular instance of his obedience, and fence of his safety. So that
   if men would consider nature under this its first and best notion, they
   cannot accuse Christ of being severe to it.

   37. BUT 'tis manifest they take it in another acceptation, and mean
   that corruption of nature which inordinately inclines to sensitive
   things; and on this account they call their riots, their luxuries,
   appetites put into them by God: whereas 'tis manifest these were
   superinduced from another coast: The wise man gives us its true
   pedigree in what he says of death, which is its twin-sister: By the
   envy of the devil came death into the world, Wisd. 2. 24. And can they
   expect that Christ who came to destroy the works of the devil, 1 Joh.
   3. 8. should frame Laws in their favour, make Acts of toleration and
   indulgence for them? This were to annul the whole design of his coming
   into the world, which was to restore us from our laps'd estate, and
   elevate us to those higher degrees of purity which he came not only to
   prescribe, but to exemplifie to us.

   38. BUT in this affair men often take nature in a yet wider and worse
   notion; and under natural desires comprehend whatever upon any sort of
   motive they have a mind to do. The awe of a Superior, the importunity
   of a companion, custom, and example, make men do many ill things, to
   which their nature would never prompt them; nay, many times such as
   their nature relucts to, and abhors. 'Tis certainly thus in all
   debauchery and excess. 'Tis evident, it gratifies no mans nature to be
   drunk, or to lie under undigested loads of meats: these are out-rages
   and violences upon nature, take it only in the most sensitive notion,
   such as the struggles to avert: and yet men make her bear, not only the
   oppression, but the blame too.

   39. BUT besides to be consider'd, that the nature of a man includes
   reason as well as sense; and to this all sorts of luxury are yet more
   repugnant, as that which clouds the mind, and degrades the man (who in
   his constitution is a rational being) and sets him in the rank of mere
   Animals: and certainly these can be no appetites of nature, which thus
   subvert it.

   40. THE like may be said concerning revenge, particularly that
   absurdest sort of it, Duels; which certainly are as great
   contradictions to nature as can be imagin'd, the unravelling and
   cancelling its very first principle of self-preservation (which in
   other instances men bring in bar against duty.) And yet men will say
   the generosity of their natures compels them to it so making their
   nature a kind of felo de se to prompt the destroying it self: when alas
   'tis only the false notion they have got of honour that so gages them.
   And if men would but soberly consider, they must be convinc'd that
   there is nothing more agreeable to reason than that precept of Christ
   of not retaliating injuries; which is in effect but to bid us to chuse
   a single inconvenience before a long train of mischiefs. And certainly
   if nature even in its deprav'd estate were left to determine, it would
   resolve it a better bargain to go off with a reproachful word, than to
   lose a limb, perhaps a life in the revenge of it. There being no maxim
   more indisputable than that of evils the least is to be chosen. And the
   innate principle of self-love do's more strongly biass nature to
   preserve, than any external thing can to destroy it self.

   41. I know, 'twill be said to this, that revenge is a natural appetite:
   but I say still, self-preservation is more so; and would prevail
   against as much of revenge as is natural, were it not heightned and
   fortified by fancy, and that Chimera of point of honour, which, as it
   is now stated, is certainly one of the most empty nothings that ever
   was brought in balance with solid interests. And indeed 'tis to belie
   nature, and suppose it to have forfeited all degrees of reason, as well
   as vertue, to fasten so absurd a choice upon her. But admit revenge to
   be never so much the dictate of corrupt nature; 'tis certain 'tis not
   of primitive regular nature. Revenge is but a relative to injury: and
   he that will say God put the appetite of revenge into man, must say he
   put the appetite of injury into him also: which is such an account of
   the sixth days creation, as is hardly consistent with Gods own
   testimony of its being very good, Gen. 1.

   42. BESIDES, 'tis certain all the desires God infus'd into human nature
   were such as tended to its preservation; but this of revenge is of all
   other the most destructive, as is too sadly attested by the daily
   tragical effects of it. In short, the wise-man gives us a good luminary
   of the whole matter God made man upright, but he sought out many
   inventions, Eccl. 7. 29.

   43. NOW if man has by his own voluntary act deprav'd himself, it would
   be neither just nor kind in God to warp his Laws to mans now distorted
   frame; but it is both, to keep up the perfect rectitude of those, and
   call upon man to reduce himself to a conformity with them: and when to
   this is added such a supply of grace as may silence the plea of
   disability, there can nothing be imagn'd more worthy of God, or more
   indulgent to man.

   44. AND all this Christ do's in the Gospel, in those precepts which the
   blind world makes the subject of their cavil or scorn. It were an easie
   task to evince this in every particular precept of the Gospel; but I
   shall content my self with the instances already given, and not swell
   this Tract by insisting upon what has already been the subject of so
   many pious and excellent discourses, as must already have convinc'd all
   but the obstinate.

   45. WE proceed therefore to a view of the promissory parts of
   Scripture; in which we are first in general to observe the great
   goodness of God, in making any promises at all to us; and next to
   examine of what nature and excellence these promises are. And first if
   we consider how many titles God has to our obedience, we must
   acknowledge he may challenge it as his undoubted right. We are the work
   of his hands; and if the Potter has power over the clay (the materials
   whereof are not of his making) much more has God over his creatures,
   whose matter as well as form is wholly owing to him. We are the price
   of his blood; and if men account purchase an indefeisible title, God
   must have absolute dominion over what he has bought, and at so dear a
   price too as his own blood. Lastly we depend upon him for the support
   of that being he has given us: we live merely upon his bounty, spend
   upon his stock. And what Patron will not expert observance from one who
   thus subsists by him?

   46. YET as if God had none of these claims, these preingagements upon
   us, he descends to treat with us as free-men by way of Article and
   compact; buy's his own of us, and engages to reward that obedience,
   which he might upon the utmost penalties exact: which is such an
   astonishing indulgence as our highest gratitude cannot reach: and of
   this the Sacred Scriptures are the evidences and records; and therefore
   upon that account deserve at once our reverence, and our joy.

   47. BUT this will yet farther appear, if we look in the second place
   into the promises themselves; which are so extensive as to take in both
   our present and future state: according to that of the Apostle
   Godliness hath the promise of this Life, and of that which is to come,
   1 Tim. 4. 8. For the present, they are proportion'd to the several
   parts of our composition; the body, and the mind, the outward and the
   inward man; so stretching themselves to all we can really be concern'd
   for in this world.

   48. AND first for the body, the Old Testament abounds in promises of
   this sort. The first part of the 28. of Deut. contains a full catalogue
   of all temporal blessings; and those irreversibly entail'd upon the
   Israelites obedience, ver. 1. The Psalmist tells us, they that fear the
   Lord shall lack nothing, Ps. 34. 9. that they shall not be confounded
   in the perillous time, and in the days of dearth they shall have
   enough, Ps. 37. 19. And Solomon, that the Lord will not suffer the
   righteous to famish, Pro. 10. 3. And tho' under the Gospel, the
   promises of temporal affluence seem not so large; (its design being to
   spiritualize us, and raise our minds to higher enjoyments;) yet it
   gives us ample security of so much as is really good for us. It
   supersedes our care for our selves by alluring us all these things
   shall be added to us, Mat. 6. 33. that is, all those things which our
   heavenly Father know we have need of, ver. 32. which is all the
   limitation the context gives. And certainly we have little temptation
   to fear want, who have him for our provider; whose are all the beasts
   of the Forrest, and the cattel upon a thousand hills, Ps. 50. 10.

   49. AND when we are thus secur'd of all things necessary, it may
   perhaps be an equal mercy to secure us from great abundance; which at
   the best, is but a lading ones self with thick clay, in the Prophets
   phrase, Hab. 2. 6. but is often a snare as well as a burden.

   50. BESIDES, the Gospel by its precepts of temperance and self-denial,
   do's so contract our appetites, that a competence is a more adequate
   promise to them, than that of superfluity would have been; and 'tis
   also the measure wherein all the true satisfaction of the senses
   consists; which are gratified with moderate pleasures, but suffocated
   and overwhelm'd with, excessive. The temperate man tastes and relishes
   his portion, whilst the voluptuous may rather be said to wallow in his
   plenty than enjoy it.

   51. AND as the necessaries of life, so life it self; and the
   continuance of that, is a Scripture promise. The fifth Commandment
   affixes it to one particular duty but it is in a multitude of places in
   the Old Testament annex'd to general obedience. Thus it is, Deut. 11.
   9. and again, vers. 21. And Solomon proposes this practical wisdom as
   the multiplier of days By me thy days shall be multiplied, and the
   years of thy life shall be increased, Pro. 9. 11. and chap. 3. Length
   of days is in her right hand, vers. 16. And tho' we find not this
   promise repeated in the New Testament, yet neither is it retracted:
   'tis true; the Gospel bids us be ready to lay down our lives for
   Christs sake, but tells us withal, that he that will lose his life,
   shall save it: which tho' it be universally true only in the spiritual
   sense, yet it often proves so in a literal. It did so eminently in the
   destruction of Jerusalem, where the most resolute Christians escap'd,
   while the base compliers perish'd together with those they sought to
   endear. This is certain, that if the New Testament do's not expressly
   promise long life, yet it do's by its rules of temperance and sobriety,
   contentedness and chearfulness, very much promote it: and so do's
   virtually and efficaciously ratifie those the Old Testament made.

   52. THE next outward blessing is reputation: and this also is a
   Scripture promise. The wise shall inherit glory, Prov. 3. 35. And the
   vertuous woman Solomon describes is not only blessed by her children
   and husband, but she is prais'd in the gate, Prov. 31. ult. Nay, this
   blessing is extended even beyond life: The memory of the just shall be
   blessed, Prov. 10. 7. Nor do's the Gospel evacuate this promise; but
   rather prompts us to the ways of having it made good to us, by advising
   us to abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thes. 5. 22. to provide
   for honest things, not only in the sight of God, but also in the sight
   of men, 2 Cor. 8. 21.

   53. 'TIS true indeed, Christ fore-warns his Disciples that they shall
   be revil'd, and have all manner of evil spoken against them falsly, for
   his names sake: but then the cause transform'd the sufferings, and made
   it so honourable, that they were to count it matter of joy, Matt. 5.
   11, 12. Neither was this any paradox even in relation to their
   reputation; which tho' sullied by a few ill men of that age, yet has
   been most illustrious among all Ages since. Their sufferings and
   indignities gave them a new title of honour, and added the Martyr to
   the Apostle. And the event has been proportionable in all successions
   since: Those Holy men that fill'd up the Pagan prisons, fill'd up the
   Churches Diptycks also, and have been had as the Psalmist speaks, in
   everlasting remembrance, Ps. 1. 2. 6.

   54. AND as Scripture-promises thus take in all the concerns of the
   outward man, so do they also of the inward. The fundamental promise of
   this kind is that of sending Christ into the world, and in him
   establishing the new Covenant, which we find, Jer. 31. 31. and is
   referr'd to by the Author to the Hebrews, I will put my Laws in their
   hearts, and write them in their minds; and their sins and iniquities
   will I remember no more, Heb. 10. 16.

   55. AND this is so comprehensive a promise as includes all the concerns
   of the inward man. The evils incident to the mind of man may be reduc'd
   to two; impurity, and inquietude: and here is a cure to both. The
   divine Law written in the heart drives thence all those swarms of
   noysom lusts, which like the Egyptian Frogs over-run and putrifie the
   soul. Where that is feared and enshrin'd, those can no more stand
   before it, than Dagon before the Ark. This repairs the divine Image in
   us (in which consists the perfection of our nature) renews us in the
   spirits of our minds, Ephes. 4. 23. and purges our consciences from
   dead works, Heb. 9. 14. which all the Catharticks and Lustrations among
   the Heathen, all the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Law, were not
   able to do.

   56. SECONDLY, this promise secures the mind from that restlessness and
   unquietness, which attends both the dominion and guilt of sin. To be
   subject to a mans lusts and corrupt appetites is of all others the
   vilest vassalage: they are the cruellest task-masters, and allow their
   slaves no rest, no intermission of their drudgery. And then again, the
   guilt that tortures and racks the mind with dreadful expectations keeps
   it in perpetual agitation and tumult which is excellently describ'd by
   the Prophet Isaiah, The wicked is like the troubled sea, when it cannot
   rest; whose waters cast out mire and dirt: there is no peace saith my
   God to the wicked, Is. 48. 22. How prosperous soever vice may seem to
   be in the world, yet there are such secret pangs and horrors that dog
   it, that as Solomon says, even in laughter the heart is sorrowful,
   Prov. 14. 13.

   57. BUT this Evangelical promise of being merciful to our iniquities,
   and remembering our sins no more, calms this tempest, introduces peace
   and serenity into the mind, and reconciles us at once to God and our
   selves. And sure we may well say with the Apostle, these are great and
   precious promises 2 Pet. 1. 4.

   58. THERE are besides many other which spring from these principles, as
   suckers from the root: such are the promises of fresh supplies of grace
   upon a good imployment of the former. To him that hath shall be given,
   Mat. 25. 29. Nay even of the source and fountain of all grace. He shall
   give the Holy spirit to them that ask him, Mat. 7. 11. Such is that of
   supporting us in all difficulties and assaults: the not suffering us to
   be tempted above that we are able, 1 Cor. 10. 13. which like Gods bow
   set in the clouds, Gen. 9, is our security, that we shall not be
   over-whelm'd by any deluge of temptation: and (to instance no more)
   such is that comprehensive promise of hearing our prayers, Ask and it
   shall be given you, Mat. 7. 7. This puts all good things within reach,
   gives us the key of Gods Storehouse, from whence we may furnish our
   selves with all that is really good for us. And if a few full Barns
   could tempt the rich man in the Gospel to pronounce a Requiem to his
   soul; what notes of acquiescence may they sing, who have the command of
   an inexhaustible store; that are supplied by him whose is the earth,
   and the fulness thereof?

   59. AND certainly, all the promises together must be (to use the
   Apostles phrase) strong consolation; such as may quiet and calm all the
   fears and griefs, all the tumults and perturbations of the mind, in
   relation to its present mate. But then there are others relating to the
   future of a much higher elevation: those glories and felicities of
   another world, which are so far beyond our narrow conceptions, that the
   comprehension and injoyment must begin together. The Scripture shadows
   it out to us by all the notions we have of happiness: by glory, Rom. 8.
   18. by a kingdom, Mat. 25. 14. by joy, Mat. 25. 21. and which
   comprehends all, by being with the Lord, 1 Thes. 4. 17. seeing him face
   to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. being like to him, 1 Jo. 3. 2. In a word 'tis
   bliss in the utmost extent: immense for quantity, and eternal for
   duration.

   60. AND Purely this promise is so excellent in its kind, so liberal in
   its degree, so transcendently great in all respects, that did it stand
   single, strip'd of all those that relate to this life, it alone would
   justifie the name of Gospel, and be the best tidings that ever came to
   mankind. For alas, if we compare the hopes that other Religions propose
   to their Votaries with these, how base, how ignoble are they! The
   Heathens Elysium, the Mahumetan Paradise, were but higher
   gratifications of the sensual part and consequently were depressions
   and debasements of the rational. So that in effect they provided a
   heaven for the beast, and a hell for the man. We may therefore
   confidently resume our conclusion, and pronounce the Scripture promises
   to be so divine and excellent, that they could as little have been
   made, as they can be perform'd by any but an Holy and Almighty Author.

   61. NOR is their being conditional any impeachment to their worth, but
   an enhancement. Should God have made them (as some fancy he has his
   decrees) absolute and irrespective; he had set his promises at war with
   his precepts, and there should have superseded what those injoyn. We
   are all very niggardly towards God, and should have been apt to have
   ask'd Judas's question to what purpose is this waste Mat. 26. 8. What
   needs the labour of the course if the prize be certain? And it must
   have been infinitely below the wisdom and majesty of the supreme
   Legislator, to make Laws, and then evacuate them by dispencing rewards
   without any respect to their observance. 'Tis the Sanction which
   inspirits the Law, without which the divine, as well as the human,
   would to most men be a dead letter.

   62. BUT against this God has abundantly provided, not only by the
   conditionality of the promises, but by the terrour of his threats too;
   which is the last part of Scripture which falls under consideration.
   And these are of the most direful kinds; and cannot better be
   illustrated than by the opposition they stand in to the promises: for
   as those included all things that might make men happy either as to
   this life or the next; so these do all that may make them miserable. If
   we make our reflection on all the particulars of the promises we shall
   find the threats answering them as their reverse or dark shadow.

   63. AND first as concerning the outward state, if we look but into the
   28. of Deut. we shall find, that after all the gracious promises which
   begun the chapter, it finally ends in thunder, in the most dreadful
   denunciations imaginable; and those adapted by a most peculiar
   opposition to the former promises: as the Reader may see at large in
   that Chapter. And the whole tenour of the Scripture go's in the like
   stile. Thus, Psal. 140. 11. A wicked person shall not prosper in the
   earth, evil shall hunt the wicked man to overthrow him. The Lord will
   not suffer the righteous to famish, but he casteth out the substance of
   the wicked; Pro. 10. 3. And again, the righteous eateth to the
   satisfying of his soul, but the belly of the wicked shall want, Prov.
   13. 25. Multitudes of like general threatnings of temporal improsperity
   there are every where scatter'd throughout the Scripture; and many more
   applied to particular vices, as sloth, unmercifulness, luxury, and the
   the like; which would be here too long to enumerate.

   64. AND although these threatnings may seem sometimes to be litterally
   confuted by the wealth and opulency of wicked men, yet they never miss
   of being really and vertually verified. For either their prosperities
   are very short and only preparative to a more eminent ruin, which was
   the Psalmists resolution of this doubt, Psalm 73. or else if God leave
   them the matter of temporal happiness, yet he subtracts the vertue and
   spirit of them, renders them empty and unsatisfying. This is well
   express'd by the Psalmist in the case of the Israelites: He gave them
   their desire, and sent leaness withal into their soul, Ps. 106. 15. and
   by Zophar, Job 20. 22. where speaking of the wicked, he saith; In the
   fulness of his sufficiency shall he be in straits. And to this Solomon
   seems to refer, when he saith, the blessing of the Lord maketh rich and
   he addeth no sorrow with it, Prov. 10. 22.

   65. NEITHER is it only the comfort of life, but life it self that is
   threatned to be taken from wicked men: untimely death is throughout the
   Old Testament frequently mention'd as the guerdon of impiety: 'tis
   often assign'd judicially in particular cases: He shall be cut off from
   his people, being the usual sentence upon most offenders under the
   Levitical Law. But tis also menaced more generally as an immediate
   judgment from God The blood-thirsty and deceitful men shall not live
   out half their days, Psal. 55. 23. Farther yet, their names shall
   putrifie as soon as their Carkasses: the name of the wicked shall rot;
   Prov. 10. 7. Nay both their infamy and their ruin are intail'd upon
   their posterity. The seed of the evil doers shall never be renown'd.
   Prepare slaughter for his children, for the iniquity of their fathers;
   Isa. 14. 20, 21.

   66. IF now we look on Scripture threatnings in relation to the mind of
   man, we shall find them yet more severe: wilful impenitent sinners
   being cut off from the benefits of the new Covenant; nor barely so, but
   look'd upon as despisers of it, and that blood of Christ in which it
   was seal'd; Heb. 10. 29. nay as those murtherous Wretches that shed it:
   They Crucifie to themselves the Son of God afresh; Heb. 6. 6. And this
   is the fatallest sentence that can fall on any man in this life; to be
   thus disfranchised of all the privileges of the Gospel, and rank'd as
   well in punishment as guilt, with the most criminous of mankind.

   67. FROM hence 'tis consequent, that the mind remains not only in its
   native impurity, but in a greater and more incurable one; whilst that
   blood which alone could cleanse it, serves but to embrue and pollute
   it; and as it were flush, and excite it to all immanities and
   vilenesses: and he that is thus filthy, 'tis the doom pronounc'd
   against him, that he shall be filthy still, Rev. 22. 11.

   68. AND then in the second place, what calm can there be to such a
   mind? what remains to such a person, but that fearful expectation of
   wrath and fiery indignation, which the Apostle mentions, Hebrews 10.
   27? Indeed, were there none but temporal mischiefs to fear, yet it were
   very unpleasant to think ones self, like Cain, out-law'd from the
   presence and protection of God; to be afraid that every man that meets
   us shall slay us, Gen. 4. 14. Nay, those confus'd indistinct fears of
   indefinite evils which attend guilt are very unquiet, uneasie inmates
   in the mind. This is excellently describ'd by Moses; The Lord shall
   give thee a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind,
   and thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shalt fear day
   and night; in the morning thou shalt say, would God it were evening,
   and in the evening, would God it were morning, Deut. 28. 65, 66. 67.

   69. AND what can be more wretched than to have a mind thus agitated and
   tost, rack'd and tortur'd; especially when thro' all these clouds it
   sees a glimpse of the eternal Tophet; and knows, that from the billows
   of this uneasie state, it must be tost into that Lake of fire. And this
   is indeed the dregs of the cup of Gods wrath, the dreadfullest and most
   astonishing of all Scripture denunciations. This comprehends all that
   the nature of man is capable of suffering. Divines distinguish it into
   the pain of sense, and of loss: that of sense is represented to us in
   Scripture by fire; and that accended, and render'd noisom as well as
   painful by brimstone, that afflicts the smell as well as the touch;
   sometimes by outer darkness, wailing and gnashing of teeth, to grate
   the ears, and consume the eyes; by intolerable thirst to torment the
   palate. Not that we are to think the sensitive pains of Hell do not
   infinitely exceed all these; but because these are the higher measures
   our present capacities can make, and are adequate to those senses for
   whose carnal satisfactions we incur them.

   70. THE pain of loss is yet more dismal; as being seated in the Soul,
   whose spiritual, nature will then serve it only to render its torments
   more refin'd, and acute. With what anguish will it then see it self
   banish'd from the presence of God, and consequently from all that may
   give satisfaction and bliss to the creature? But yet with how much
   deeper anguish will it reflect on it self as the Author of that
   deprivation? How will it recollect the many despis'd tenders of grace,
   the easie terms on which salvation might have been had? And how sadly
   will conscience then revenge all its stifled admonitions by an
   unsilenceable clamor, that worm which never dies, Mar. 9. 48. How
   wounding will it then be to see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the
   Saints in the Kingdom of God, Luk. 13. 28. (nay, that poor Lazarus whom
   here men turn'd over to the charity of their dogs) and it self in the
   company of the devil and his angels, who will then upbraid what they
   once entic'd to?

   71. NATURE abhors nothing more than to have our misery insulted over by
   those who drew us into it: yet that no circumstance may be lacking to
   their torment, this must be the perpetual entertainment of damn'd
   souls. And to all this, Eternity is the dismal adjunct; which is of all
   other circumstances the most disconsolate, as leaving not so much as a
   glimpse of hopes; which here uses still to be the reserve, and last
   resort of the miserable.

   72. THIS Eternity is that which gives an edge, infuses a new acrimony
   into the torments: and is the highest strain, the vertical point of
   misery. These are those terrors of the Lord, with which the Scripture
   acquaints us: and sure we cannot say that these are flat contemptible
   menaces; but such as suit the dreadful Majesty of that God who is a
   consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. So that these are as aptly accommodated
   for the exciting our dread, as the promises were of our love: both
   jointly concur to awaken our industry.

   73. FOR God has been so good to mankind, as to make the threats
   conditional as well as the promises so that we as well know the way to
   avoid the one, as we do to attain the other. Nor has he any other
   intendment or end in proposing them, but that we may do so. See to this
   purpose, with what solemnity he protests it by Moses; I call heaven and
   earth to record against you this day that I have set before you life
   and death, blessing and cursing; therefore chuse life, that both thou
   and thy seed may live, Deut. 30. 19.

   74. I have now run thro' the several parts of Scripture I proposed to
   speak of. And tho' I have in each given rather short instances and
   essays than an exact description, yet even in these contracted
   lineaments the exquisite proportions may be discern'd. And if the
   Reader shall hence be encourag'd to extend his contemplations, and as
   he reads Holy Scripture, observe it in all its graces, and full
   dimensions; I doubt not he will pronounce from his experience, that the
   matter of the Divine Book is very correspondent to the Author: which is
   the highest Eulogy imaginable.

   75. IN the next place we are to consider the Holy Scripture in relation
   to its end and design; in proportion to which every thing is more or
   less valuable. The most exquisite frame, and curious contrivance, that
   has no determinate end or use, is but a piece of industrious folly, a
   Spiders web, as the Prophet speaks, Is. 59. 5. Now those designs have
   always been esteem'd the most excellent that have had the most worthy
   subjects, and been of the greatest extent. Accordingly, those who have
   projected the obliging and benefiting of other men (tho' but within a
   private Sphere) have always been look'd on as men of generous and noble
   designs. Those who have taken their level higher, and directed their
   aim to a more publick good, tho' but of a City or Nation; have
   proportionably acquired a greater esteem. But those who have aspired to
   be universal benefactors; to do something for the common benefit of the
   world, their fame has commonly reach'd as far as their influence; men
   have reverenc'd, nay sometimes (according to the common excesses of
   mans nature) ador'd them. Many of the Heathen deities (especially their
   Demigods) having been only those persons, who by introducing some
   useful Art, or other part of knowledge, had oblig'd mankind. So we see
   what a natural gratitude men are apt to pay to worthy and generous
   designs. And if we will be content but to stand to this common award of
   our nature, the Scripture will have the fairer claim imaginable to our
   reverence and thankfulness, upon this very account of the excellency of
   its designs.

   76. NOR need we borrow the balance of the Sanctuary to weigh them in,
   we may do it in our own scales; for they exactly answer the two
   properties above mention'd, of profit and diffusiveness, which in
   secular concerns are the standard rules of good designs. For first, it
   is the sole scope and aim of Scripture, the very end for which 'twas
   writ, to benefit and advantage men; and that secondly, not only some
   small select number, some little angle or corner of the world, but the
   whole race of mankind, the entire Universe; and he that can imagine a
   more diffusive design, must imagine more worlds also.

   77. NOW for the first of these, that it is the design of the Scripture
   to benefit men, we need appeal but to Scripture it self; which surely
   can give the best account to what ends 'tis directed; and that tells
   us, it is to make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Tim. 3. 15. In which is
   comprehended the greatest benefit that mans nature is capable of: the
   making us wise while we live here, and the saving us eternally. And
   this sure is the most generous, the most obliging design, that 'tis
   possible even for the Creator to have upon the creature: and this is it
   which the Holy Scripture negotiates with us.

   78. AND first, the making us wise is so inviting a proposal to
   humanity, that we see when that was much wiser than now it is, it
   caught at a fallacious tender of it; the very sound of it, tho' out of
   the devils mouth, fascinated our first Parents, and hurried them to the
   higher disobedience, and certainest ruin. And therefore now God by the
   Holy Scriptures makes us an offer as much more safe, as it is more
   sincere; when he sends his Word thus to be a lamp to our feet, and a
   light to our paths, Ps. 119. 105. to teach us all that is good for us
   to know; our affectation of ignorance will be more culpable than theirs
   of knowledge, if we do not admire the kindness, and embrace the bounty
   of such a tender.

   79. NOW the making us wise must be understood according to the
   Scripture notion of wisdom, which is not the wisdom of this world, nor
   the Princes of this world, which come to nought, as the Apostle speaks,
   1 Cor. 2. 6. but that wisdom which descends from above, Ja. 3. 17.
   which he there describes to be first pure, then peaceable, gentle and
   easie to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
   partiality and without hypocrisie. Indeed the Scripture usually
   comprehends these and all other graces under Wisdom; for it makes it
   synonymous to that which includes them all, viz. the fear of the Lord.
   Thus we find throughout the whole Book of Proverbs these us'd as terms
   convertible. In short, Wisdom is that practical knowledge of God and
   our selves which engages us to obedience and duty; and this is
   agreeable to that definition the Wise man gives of it; The wisdom of
   the prudent is to understand his way, Prov. 14. 8. Without this, all
   the most refin'd and aerial speculations are but like Thales's
   star-gazing; which secur'd him not from falling into the water; nay,
   betray'd him to it. In this is all solid wisdom compris'd.

   80. THE utmost all the wise men in the world have pretended to, is but
   to know what true happiness is, and what is the means of attaining it:
   and what they sought with so much study, and so little success, the
   Scripture presents us with in the greatest certainty, and plainest
   characters, such as he that runs may read, Hab. 2. 2. It acquaints us
   with that supreme felicity, that chief good whereof Philosophy could
   only give us a name, and it shews us the means, marks out a path which
   will infallibly lead us to it. Accordingly we find that Solomon after
   all the accurate search he had made to find what was that good for the
   sons of men; he shuts up his inquest in this plain conclusion: Fear God
   and keep his commandments; for God shall bring every work unto
   judgement, Eccl. 12. 13, 14. The regulating our lives so by the rules
   of Piety as may acquit us at our final account, is the most elegible
   thing that falls within human cognizance; and that not only in relation
   to the superlative happiness of the next world, but even to the quiet
   and tranquillity of this. For alas, we are impotent giddy creatures,
   sway'd sometimes by one passion, sometimes by another; nay often the
   interfering of our appetites makes us irresolute which we are to
   gratifie, whilst in the interim their strugling agitates and turmoils
   the mind. And what can be more desirable in such a case, than to put
   our selves under a wiser conduct than our own; and as oppres'd States
   use to defeat all lesser pretenders by becoming homagers to some more
   potent: so for us to deliver our selves from the tyranny of our lusts,
   by giving up our obedience to him whose service is perfect freedom.

   81. WERE there no other advantage of the exchange, but the bringing us
   under fix'd and determinate Laws, 'twere very considerable. Every man
   would gladly know the terms of his subjection, and have some standing
   rule to guide himself by; and Gods Laws are such, we may certainly know
   what he requires of us: but the mandates of our passions are arbitrary
   and extemporary: what pleases them to day disgusts them to morrow; and
   we must always be in readiness to do we know not what, and of all the
   Arbitrary governments that men either feel or fear, this is doubtless
   the most miserable. I wish our apprehensions of it were but as
   sensible: and then we should think the Holy Scripture did us the office
   of a Patriot, in offering us a rescue from so vile a slavery.

   82. AND that it do's make us this offer, is manifest by the whole
   tenour of the Bible. For first it rowzes and awakes us to a sense of
   our condition, shews us that what we call liberty is indeed the saddest
   servitude that he that committeth sin is the servant of sin, Jo. 8. 34.
   that those vices which pretend to serve and gratifie us, do really
   subdue and enslave us, and fetter when they seem to embrace: and
   whereas the will in all other oppressions retains its liberty, this
   tyranny brings that also into vassallage: renders our spirits so mean
   and servile, that we chuse bondage, and are apt to say with the
   Israelites, Let us alone that we may serve the Egyptians, Exod. 14. 12.

   83. AND what greater kindness can be done for people in this forlorn
   abject condition, than to animate them to cast off this yoke, and
   recover their freedom. And to this are most of the Scripture
   exhortations address'd; as may be seen in a multitude of places,
   particularly in the sixth chapter to the Romans, the whole scope
   whereof is directly to this purpose.

   84. NOR do's it only sound the alarm, put us upon the contest with our
   enemies, but it assists us in it, furnishes us with that whole armour
   of God which we find describ'd, Eph 6. 13. Nay further, it excites our
   courage, by assuring us that if we will not basely surrender our
   selves, we can never be overpower'd; if we do but stand our ground,
   resist our enemy, he will fly from us; Ja. 4. 7. And to that purpose it
   directs us under what banner we are to lift our selves; even his who
   hath spoil'd principalities and powers, Col. 2. 15. to whose conduct
   and discipline if we constantly adhere, we cannot miss of victory.

   85. AND then lastly it sets before us the prize of this conquest; that
   we shall not only recover our liberty, manumit our selves from the
   vilest bondage to the vilest and cruellest oppressors; but we shall be
   crown'd for it too, be rewarded for being kind to our selves, and be
   made happy eternally hereafter for being willing to be happy here.

   86. AND sure there are terms so apparently advantageous, that he must
   be infinitly stupid (foolish, to destruction) that will not be thus
   made wise unto salvation, that despises or cavils at this divine Book,
   which means him so much good, which designs to make him live here
   generously and according to the dignity of his nature, and in the next
   world to have that nature sublimated and exalted, made more capacious
   of those refin'd and immense felicities, which there await all who will
   qualifie themselves for them; who (as the Apostle speaks) by patient
   continuance in well doing seek for glory, and honour, and immortality,
   eternal life, Rom. 2. 7.

   87. BUT besides the greatest and principal advantages which concern our
   spiritual interest, it takes in also the care of our secular, directs
   us to such a managery of our selves, as is naturally apt to promote a
   quiet and happy life. Its injunction to live peaceably with all men
   keeps us out of the way of many misadventures, which turbulent unruly
   spirits meet with, and so secures our peace. So also as to wealth, it
   puts us into the fairest road to riches by prescribing diligence in our
   callings: what is thus got being like sound flesh, which will stick by
   us; whereas the hasty growth of ill-gotten wealth is but a tumour and
   impostume, which the bigger it swells, the sooner it bursts and leaves
   us lanker than before. In like manner it shews us also how to guard our
   reputation, by providing honest things not only in the sight of God,
   but also in the sight of men, 2 Cor. 8. 21. by abstaining even from all
   appearance of evil, 1 Thes. 5. 22. and making our light shine before
   men, Mat. 5. 16. It provides too for our ease and tranquillity,
   supersedes our anxious cares and sollicitudes, by directing us to cast
   our burden upon the Lord, Ps. 55. 22. and by a reliance on his
   providence how to secure to our selves all we really want. Finally it
   fixes us in all the changes, supports us under all the pressures,
   comforts us amidst all the calamities of this life, by assuring us they
   shall all work together for good to those that love God. Ro. 8. 28.

   88. NOR do's the Scripture design to promote our interests consider'd
   only singly and personally, but also in relation to Societies and
   Communities; it gives us the best rules of distributive and commutative
   justice; teaches us to render to all their dues, Rom. 13. 7. to keep
   our words, to observe inviolably all our pacts and contracts; nay tho'
   they prove to our damage, Psa. 15. 4. and to preserve exact fidelity
   and truth; which are the sinews of human commerce. It infuses into us
   noble and generous principles, to prefer a common good before our
   private: and that highest flight of Ethnick vertue, that of dying for
   ones Country, is no more than the Scripture prescribes even for our
   common brethren, 1 Jo. 3. 16.

   89. BUT besides these generals, it descends to more minute directions
   accommodated to our several circumstances; it gives us appropriate
   rules in reference to our distinct relations, whether natural, civil,
   ecclesiastical, or oeconomical. And if men would but universally
   conform to them, to what a blessed harmony would it tune the world?
   what order and peace would it introduce? There would then be no
   oppressive Governours, nor mutinous Subjects; no unnatural Parents, nor
   contumacious Children: no idle Sheepherds, or straying Flocks: none of
   those Domestick jars which oft disquiet, and sometimes subvert
   families: all would be calm and serene, and give us in reality that
   golden Age, whereof the Poets did but dream.

   90. THIS tendency of the Scripture is remarkably acknowledg'd in all
   our publick judicatories, where before any testimony is admitted, we
   cause the person that is to give his testimony, first to lay hold of
   with his hands, then with his mouth to kiss the Holy Scriptures: as if
   it were impossible for those hands, which held the mysteries of Truth,
   to be immediately employ'd in working false-hood; or that those lips
   which had ador'd those Holy Oracles, should be polluted with perjuries
   and lies. And I fear, the civil Government is exceedingly shaken at
   this day in its firmest foundation, by the little regard that is
   generally had of the Holy Scriptures, and what is consequent thereto,
   the Oaths that are taken upon them.

   91. 'TIS true, we are far remov'd from that state which Esaiah
   Prophecied of under the Gospel, tho' we have the Bible among us; that
   when the Law should go forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord, from
   Jerusalem, they should beat their swords into plow-shares, and their
   spears into pruning hooks, Es. 2. 4. but that is not from any defect in
   it, but from our own perverseness: we have it, but (as the Apostle
   speaks in another sense) as if we had it not, 1 Cor. 7. 29. We have it
   (that is, use it) to purposes widely different from what it means. Some
   have it as a Supersedeas to all the duty it enjoins; and so they can
   but cap texts, talk glibly of Scripture, are not at all concern'd to
   practise it: some have it as their Arsenal, to furnish them with
   Weapons, not against their spiritual enemies, but their secular:
   applying all the damnatory sentences they there find, to all those to
   whose persons or opinions they have prejudice. And some have it as a
   Scene of their mirth, a topick of raillery, dress their profane and
   scurrilous jests in its language; and study it for no other end but to
   abuse it. And whilst we treat it at this vile rate, no wonder we are
   never the better for it. For alas, what will it avail us to have the
   most soveraign Balsom in our possession, if in instead of applying it
   to our wounds, we trample it under our feet?

   92. BUT tho' we may frustrate the use, we cannot alter the nature of
   things. Gods design in giving us the Scripture was to make us as happy
   as our nature is capable of being and the Scripture is excellently
   adapted to this end: for as to our eternal felicity, all that believe
   there is any such state, must acknowledge the Scripture chalks us out
   the ready way to it: not only because 'tis dictated by God who
   infallibly knows it, but also by its prescribing those things which are
   in themselves best, and which a sober Heathen would adjudge fittest to
   be rewarded. And as to our temporal happiness, 1 dare appeal to any
   unprejudic'd man, whether any thing can contribute more to the peace
   and real happiness of mankind, than the universal practice of the
   Scripture rules would do. Would God we would all conspire to make the
   experiment and then doubtless, not only our reason, but our sense too
   would be convinc'd of it.

   93. AND as the design is thus beneficial, so in the second place is it
   as extensive also. Time was when the Jews had the inclosure of divine
   Revelation when the Oracles of God were their peculiar depositum and
   the Heathen then had not the knowledge of his Laws, Psal. 147. ult. but
   since that by the goodness of God the Gentiles are become fellow-heirs,
   Eph. 3. 6. he hath also deliver'd into their hands the deeds and
   evidences of their future state, given them the Holy Scriptures as the
   exact and authentick registers of the covenant between God and man, and
   these not to be like the Heathen Oracles appropriated to some one or
   two particular places, so that they cannot be consulted but at the
   expence of a pilgrimage; but laid open to the view of all that will
   believe themselves concern'd.

   94. IT was a large commission our Saviour gave his Disciples: go preach
   the Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16. 15. (which in the narrowest
   acception must be the Gentile world) and yet their oral Gospel did not
   reach farther than the written for wherever the Christian Faith was
   planted, the Holy Scriptures were left as the records of it; nay, as
   the conservers of it too, the standing rule by which all corruptions
   were to be detected. 'Tis true, the entire Canon of the New Testament,
   as we now have it, was not all at once deliver'd to the Church; the
   Gospels and Epistles being successively writ, as the needs of
   Christians, and the encroachment of Hereticks gave occasion: but at
   last they became all together the common magazine of the Church, to
   furnish arms both defensive and offensive. For as the Gospel puts in
   our hands the shield of Faith, so the Epistles help us to hold it, that
   it may not be wrested out of our hands again, either by the force of
   persecution, or the sly insinuations of vice or Heresie.

   95. THUS the Apostles like prudent leaders have beat up the Ambushes,
   discover'd the snares that were laid for us; and by discomfiting Satans
   forlorn hope, that earliest Set of false Teachers and corrupt practices
   which then invaded the Church, have laid a foundation of victory to the
   succeeding Ages, if they will but keep close to their conduct, adhere
   to those Sacred Writings they have left behind them in every Church for
   that purpose.

   96. NOW what was there deposited was design'd for the benefit of every
   particular member of that Church. The Bible was not committed (like the
   Regalia, or rarities of a Nation) to be kept under lock and key (and
   consequently to constitute a profitable office for the keepers) but
   expos'd like the Brazen Serpent for universal view and benefit: that
   sacred Book (like the common air) being every mans propriety, yet no
   mans inclosure: yet there are a generation of men whose eyes have been
   evil, because Gods have been good: who have seal'd up this spring,
   monopoliz'd the word of Life, and will allow none to partake of it but
   such persons, and in such proportions as they please to retail it: an
   attempt very insolent in respect of God, whole purpose they contradict;
   and very injurious in respect of man, whose advantage they obstruct.
   The iniquity of it will be very apparent, if we consider what is
   offer'd in the following Section.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   SECT. TV.

   The Custody of the Holy Scripture is a privilege and right of the
   Christian Church, and every member of it; which cannot without impiety
   to God, and injustice unto it and them, be taken away or impeach'd.

   BESIDES the keeping of the divine Law, which is obsequious, and imports
   a due regard to all its Precepts, commonly express'd in Scripture by
   keeping the commandments, hearkning to, and obeying the voice of the
   Lord, walking in his ways, and observing and doing his statutes and his
   judgements; there is a possessory keeping it, in reference to our
   selves and others; in respect whereof, Almighty God, Deut. 6. and
   elsewhere frequently, having enjoin'd the people of Israel, to love the
   Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their soul, and with
   all their might, and that the words which be commanded them should be
   in their heart, he adds, that they shall teach them diligently to their
   children, and shall talk of them when they sit down in their houses,
   and when they walk by the way, and when they lie down, and when they
   rise up: and that they bind them for a sign upon their hand, and that
   they shall be as frontlets between their eyes, and that they shall
   write them upon the posts of their house, and on their gates. So justly
   was the Law call'd the Scripture, being written by them, and worn upon
   the several parts of the body, inscrib'd upon the walls of their
   houses, the entrance of their doors, and gates of their Cities; and in
   a word placed before their eyes wherever they convers'd.

   2. AND this was granted to the Jews, as matter of privilege and favour.
   To them, says Saint Paul, Rom. 9. 4. pertaineth the adoption, and the
   glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law. And the same Saint
   Paul, at the 3. chap. 2, ver. of that Epistle, unto the question what
   advantage hath the Jew, or what profit is there of circumcision,
   answers, that it is much every way, chiefly because unto them were
   committed the Oracles of God. This depositumor trust was granted to the
   Fathers, that it should be continued down unto their children. He made
   a covenant, says David, Ps. 78. v. 5. with Jacob, and gave Israel a
   Law, which he commanded our Fore-fathers to teach their children, that
   their posterity might know it, and the children which are yet unborn;
   to the intent that when they came up, they might shew their children
   the same. Which Scripture by a perpetual succession was to be handed
   down unto the Christian Church; the Apostles on all occasions appealing
   unto them, as being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Act. 13.
   27. and also privately, in their hands; so that they might at pleasure
   search into them, Jo. 5. 39. Act. 17. 11. Hereupon the Jews are by
   Saint Austin call'd the Capsarii, or servants that carried the
   Christian Books. And Athanasius in his Tract of the Incarnation, says,
   The Law was not for the Jews only, nor were the Prophets sent for them
   alone; but that Nation was the Divinity-School of the whole world; from
   whence they were to fetch the knowledge of God and the way of spiritual
   living: which amounts to what the Apostle says, Galat. 3. 24. That the
   Law was a School-master to bring us unto Christ.

   3. AND 'tis observable that the very same word, Rom. 3. 2. in the Text
   even now recited, which expresses the committing of the Oracles of God
   to the Jews, is made use of constantly by Saint Paul, when he declares
   the trust and duty incumbent on him in the preaching of the Gospel: of
   which, see 1 Cor. 9. 17. Gal. 2. 7. 1 Thes. 2. 4. 1 Tim. 1. 11. Tit. 1.
   3. And therefore, as he says, 1. Cor. 9. Tho' I preach the Gospel, I
   have nothing to glory of; for necessity is laid upon me, yea, wo is
   unto me if I preach not the Gospel, for if I do this thing willingly, I
   have a reward; but if against my will, a dispensation of the Gospel is
   commuted unto me: So may all Christians say; if we our selves keep and
   transmit to our posterities the Holy Scriptures, we have nothing to
   glory of, for a necessity is laid upon us, and wo be unto us if we do
   not our selves keep, and transmit to our posterity the Holy Scriptures.
   if we do this thing willingly, we have a reward; but if against our
   will, the custody of the Gospel, and at least that dispensation of it,
   is committed to us. But if we are Traditors, and give up our Bibles, or
   take them away from others, let us consider how black an apostacy and
   sacrilege we shall incur.

   4. THE Mosaick Law was a temporary constitution, and only a shadow of
   good things to come, Heb. 10. 1. but the Gospel being in its duration
   as well as its intendment, everlasting, Rev. 14. 6. and to remain when
   time shall be no more, Rev. 10. 6. it is an infinitely more precious
   depositum and so with greater care and solemner attestation to be
   preserv'd. Not on1y the Clergy, or the people of one particular Church,
   nor the Clergy of the universal are intrusted with this care; but 'tis
   the charge, the privilege and duty of every Christian man, that either
   is, or was, or shall be in the world; even that collective Church which
   above all competition, is the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Tim. 3. 15.
   against which the assaults of men and devils, and even the gates of
   hell shall not prevail, Mat. 16. 18.

   5. THE Gospels were not written by their Holy Pen-men to instruct the
   Apostles, but to the Christian Church, that they might believe Jesus
   was the Christ, the son of God, and that believing they might have life
   thro' his name, Jo. 20. 31. The Epistles were not address'd peculiarly
   to the Bishops and Deacons, but all the Holy brethren, to the Churches
   of that are sanctified in Jesus Christ, and to all those that call upon
   the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Rom. 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1.
   Gal. 1. 2. Eph. 1. 1. Col. 4. 16. 1 Thes. 5. 27. Phil. 1. 1. Jam. 1. 1.
   1 Pet. 1. 1. 2 Pet. 1. Rev. 1. 4. Or if by chance some one or two of
   the Epistles were address'd to an Ecclesiastick person, as those to
   Timothy and Titus, their purport plainly refers to the community of
   Christians, and the depositum committed to their trust; 1 Tim. 6. 20.
   And St. John on the other side directs his Epistles to those who were
   plainly secular; to fathers, young men and little children; and a Lady
   and her children, Epist. I. chap. 2. 12, 13, 14. and Epist. 2. 1. 1.

   6. BUT besides the interest which every Christian has in the custody of
   the Scripture upon the account of its being a depositum intrusted to
   him, he has also another no less forcible; that 'tis the Testament of
   his Saviour, by which he becomes a Son of God, no more a Servant but a
   Son; and if he be a Son, it is the Apostles inference, that he is then
   an heir, an heir of God thro' Christ, Gal. 4. 7. Now as he who is heir
   to an estate, is also to the deeds and conveiances thereof; which
   without injury cannot be detain'd, or if they be, there is a remedy at
   Law for the recovery of them: so it fares in our Christian inheritance:
   every believer by the privilege of faith, is made a Son of Abraham, and
   an heir of the promises made unto the fathers, whereby he has an
   hereditary interest in the Old Testament; and also by the privilege of
   the same Faith he has a firm right to the purchas'd possession, Eph. 1.
   14. and the charter thereof, the New. Therefore the detention of the
   Scriptures, which are made up of there two parts, is a manifest
   injustice, and sacrilegious invasion of a right, which the person
   wrong'd is impower'd, nay, is strictly oblig'd by all lawful means to
   vindicate.

   7. WHICH invasion of right will appear more flagrant when the nature
   and importance of it is consider'd; which relating to mens spiritual
   interest, renders the violation infinitely more injurious than it could
   be in any secular. I might mention several detriments consequent to
   this detention of Scripture, even as many as there are benefits
   appendant to the free use of it; but there is one of so fundamental and
   comprehensive a nature, that I need name no more; and that is, that it
   delivers men up to any delusion their teachers shall impose upon them,
   by depriving them of means of detecting them. Where there is no
   standard or measures, 'tis easie for men to falsifie both; and no less
   easie is it to adulterate doctrines, where no recourse can be had to
   the primary rule. Now that there is a possibility that false teachers
   may arise, we have all assurance; nay we have the word of Christ, and
   his Apostles that it should be so and all Ecclesiastick Story to attest
   it has been so. And if in the first and purest times (those Ages of
   more immediate illumination) the God of this world found instruments
   whereby to blind mens minds, 2 Cor. 4. 4. it cannot be suppos'd
   impossible or improbable he should do so now.

   8. BUT to leave generals, and to speak to the case of that Church which
   magisterially prohibits Scripture to the vulgar: she manifestly stands
   liable to that charge of our Saviour, Luk. 11. 52. Ye have taken away
   the key of knowledge; and by allowing the common people no more
   Scripture than what she affords them in their Sermons and private
   Manuals, keeps it in her power to impose on them what she pleases. For
   'tis sure those portions she selects for them, shall be none of those
   which clash with the doctrines she recommends: and when ever she will
   use this power to the corrupting their faith, or worship (yea, or their
   manners either) they must brutishly submit to it, because they cannot
   bring her dictates to the rest.

   9. BUT 'twill be said, this danger she wards by her doctrine of
   infallibility: that is, she enervates a probable supposition attested
   by event, by an impossible one confuted by event. For 'tis certain that
   all particular Churches may err; and tho' the consciousness of that
   forces the Roman Church upon the absurd pretence of universality, to
   assert her infallibility; yet alas Tyber may as well call it self the
   Ocean, or Italy the world, as the Roman Church may name it self the
   universal; whilst 'tis so apparent that far the less part of Christians
   are under her communion. And if she be but a particular Church, she has
   no immunity from errours, nor those under her from having those errours
   (how pernicious soever) impos'd upon them. As to her having actually
   err'd, and in diverse particulars, the proof of that has been the work
   of so many Volumes, that 'twould be impertinent here to undertake it: I
   shall only instance in that of Image-worship, a practice perfectly
   irreconcilable with the second commandment; and doubtless clearly
   discern'd by her to be so; upon which account it is, that tho' by
   Translations and Paraphrases she wrests and moulds other Texts to
   comply with her Doctrines, yet the dares not trust to those arts of
   this: but takes a more compendious course, and expunges the
   Commandment; as is evident in her Catechisms and other Manuals. Now a
   Church that can thus sacrilegiously purloin one Commandment (and such a
   one as God has own'd himself the most jealously concen'd in) and to
   delude her Children split another to make up the number, may as her
   needs require, substract and divide what others she please: and then
   whilst all resort to Scripture is obstructed, how fatal a hazard must
   those poor souls run, who are oblig'd to follow these blind, or rather
   these winking guides into the ditch?

   10. BUT all these criminations she retorts by objecting the dangers of
   allowing the Scriptures to the vulgar, which she accuses as the spring
   of all Sects, Schisms, and Heresies. To which 1 answer first, that
   supposing this were true, 'twas certainly foreseen by God, who
   notwithstanding laid no restraint; probably as fore-seeing, that the
   dangers of implicite faith (to which such a restraint must subject men)
   would be far greater: and if God saw fit to indulge the liberty, those
   that shall oppose it must certainly think they do not only partake, but
   have transplanted infallibility from God to themselves.

   11. BUT secondly, 'tis not generally true, that Sects, Schisms, and
   Heresies are owing to this liberty: All Ecclesiastical Story shews us
   that they were not the illiterate Lay-men, but the learned Clerks who
   were usually the broachers of Heresies. And indeed many of them were so
   subtile and aerial, as could never have been forg'd in grosser brains;
   but were founded not on Scripture merely mistaken, but rack'd and
   distorted with nice criticisms, and quirks of Logick, as several of the
   Ancients complain: some again sprang from that ambition of attaining,
   or impatience of missing Ecclesiastical dignities; which appropriates
   them to the Clergy. So that if the abuse infer a forfeiture of the use,
   the Learned have of others the least title to the Scriptures; and
   perhaps those who now ingross them, the least title of all the Learned.

   12. ON the other side, Church story deed mentions some Lay-propugners
   of Heresies but those for the most part were either so gross and
   bestial; as disparag'd and confuted themselves and Authors, and rose
   rather from the brutish inclination of the men, than from their
   mistakes of Scripture: or else they were by the immediate infusion of
   the devil, who back'd his Heretical suggestions with sorcerie and lying
   wonders, as in Simon Magus, Menander, &c. And for latter times, tho'
   sometimes there happens among the vulgar a few pragmatick spirits, that
   love to tamper with the obscurest Texts, and will undertake to expound
   before they understand; yet that is not their common temper: the
   generality are rather in the other extreme, stupid and unobservant even
   of the plainest doctrines. And if to this be objected the multitude of
   Quakers and Fanaticks, who generally are of the ignorant sort; 1
   answer, that 'tis manifest the first propugners of those tenets in
   Germany were not seduc'd into them by mistakes of Scripture, but
   industriously form'd them, at once to disguise and promote their
   villainous designs of sedition and Rapine: and as for those amongst us,
   it is not at all certain that their first errours were their own
   productions: there are vehement presumptions that the seeds were sown
   by greater Artificers; whose first business was to unhinge them from
   the Church, and then to fill their Heads with strange Chimera's of
   their priviledges and perfections; and by that intoxication of
   Spiritual Pride, dispose them for all delusions: and thereby render
   them like Samsons Foxes, fit instruments to set all in combustion.

   13. BUT admit this were but a conjecture, and that they were the sole
   Authors of their own frenzy; how appears it that the liberty of reading
   the Scriptures was the cause of it? Had these men been of the Romish
   Communion, and so been interdicted private reading, yet some broken
   parts of Scripture would have been in Sermons and Books of Devotion
   communicated to them; had it not been as possible for them to have
   wrested what they heard as what they read? In one respect it seems
   rather more likely: for in those loose and incidental quotations the
   connexion is sometimes not so discernable: and many Texts there are
   whose sense is so interwoven with the context, that without consulting
   that, there may be very pernicious mistakes: on which account it is
   probably more safe that the Auditor should have Bibles to consult. So
   that this restraint of Scripture is a very fallible expedient of the
   infallible Church. And indeed themselves have in event found it so; for
   if it were so soveraign a prophylactick against errour, how comes it to
   pass that so many of their members who were under that discipline have
   revolted from them into that which they call Heresie? If they say, the
   defection was made by some of the Learned to whom the Scripture was
   allow'd, why do they not (according to their way of arguing) take it
   from them also upon that experiment of its mischief, and confine it
   only to the Infallible Chair? but if they own them to have been
   unlearned (as probably the Albigenses and Waldenses, &c. were) they may
   see how insignificant a guard this restraint is against errour: and
   learn how little is got by that policy which controuls the Divine
   Wisdom.

   14. NOR can they take shelter in the example of the primitive
   Christians: for they in the constant use of the Holy Scriptures yielded
   not unto the Jews. Whereas the Jews had the Scriptures read publickly
   to them every Sabbath-day; which Jorephus against Appion thus
   expresses: Moses expounded to the Jews the most excellent and necessary
   learning of the Law; not by hearing it once or twice, but every seventh
   day laying aside their works, he commanded them to assemble for the
   hearing of the Law, and throughly and exactly to learn it. Parallel to
   this was the practice of the primitive Church, perform'd by the Lector,
   or Reader, of which Justin Martyr in his 2 Apol. gives this account. On
   the day call'd Sunday, all that abide in Towns or the countries about,
   meet in one place, and the writings of the Apostles and Prophets are
   read, so far as there is place. So Tertullian in his Apol. describing
   the offices in the publick Assemblies: We feed our faith with the
   sacred Words, we raise our hopes, and establish our reliance.

   15. AND as the Jews thought it indecent for persons professing piety,
   to let three days pass without the offices thereof in the congregation;
   and therefore met in their Synagogues upon every Tuesday and Thursday
   in the week, and there perform'd the duties of fasting, prayer, and
   hearing the Holy Scriptures; concerning which is the boast of the
   Pharisee, Luk. 18. 12. in conformity hereto the Christians also, their
   Sabbath being brought forward from the Saturday to the day following,
   that the like number of days might not pass them without performing the
   aforesaid duties in the congregation, met together on the Wednesdays
   and Fridays which were the days of Station, so frequently mention'd in
   Tertullian, and others, the first writers of the Church. Tertullian
   expressly says, that the Christians dedicated to the offices of Piety,
   the fourth and sixth day of the week: and Clemens Alex. says of the
   Christians, that they understood the secret reasons of their weekly
   fasts, to wit, those of the fourth day of the week, and that of
   preparation before the Sabbath, commonly call'd Wednesday and Friday.
   Where, by the way, we may take notice what ground there is for the
   observation of the Wednesday and Friday in our Church, and the Litanies
   then appointed, so much neglected in this profligate Age.

   16. BUT secondly, as the Jews were diligent in the private reading of
   the Scripture; being taught it from their infancy: which custome Saint
   Paul refers to 1 Tim. 3. 15. whereof Josephus against Appion says, That
   if a man ask any Jew concerning the Laws, he will tell every thing
   readier than his name: for learning them from the first time they have
   sense of any thing, they retain them imprinted in their minds. So were
   the first Christians equally industrious in improving their knowledge
   of divine Truth. The whole life of a Christian says Clem. Alex. Strom.
   l. 7. is a Holy solemnity, there his sacrifices are prayers and
   praises; before every meal he has the readings of the Holy Scriptures;
   and Psalms, and hymns at the time of his meals. Which Tertullian also
   describes in his Apol. and St. Cyprian in the end of the Epist. to
   Donatus.

   17. AND this is farther evidenc'd by the early and numerous Versions of
   the Scriptures into all vulgar Languages; concerning which Theodoret
   speaks in his Book of the Cure of the Affections of the Greeks, Serm.
   5. We Christians (says he) are enabled to shew the power of Apostolick
   and Prophetick Doctrines, which have fill'd all Countries under Heaven.
   For that which was formerly utter'd in Hebrew, is not only translated
   into the Language of the Grecians, but also the Romans, Egyptians,
   Persians, Indians, Armenians, Scythians, Samaritans; and in a word into
   all the Languages that are us'd by any Nation. The same is said by
   Saint Chrysostom in his first Homily upon Saint John.

   18. NOR was this done by the blind zeal of inconsiderable men, but the
   most eminent Doctors of the Church were concern'd herein: such as
   Origen, who with infinite labour contriv'd the Hexapla. Saint
   Chrysostom, who translated the New Testament, Psalms, and some part of
   the Old Testament into the Armenian Tongue, as witnesses Geor. Alex. in
   the life of Chrysost. So Ulphilas the first Bishop of the Goths
   translated the Holy Scripture into the Gothick; as Socrat. Eccl. Hist.
   l. 4. cap. 33. and others testifie. Saint Jerome, who translated them
   not only into Latin from the Hebrew, the Old Italick version having
   been from the Greek; but also into his native vulgar Dalmatick: which
   he says himself in his Epistle to Sophronins.

   19. BUT the peoples having them for their private and constant use
   appears farther by the Heathens making the extorting of them a part of
   their persecution: and when divers did faint in that trial, and basely
   surrender'd them, we find the Church levell'd her severity only against
   the offending persons, did not (according to the Romish equity) punish
   the Innocent, by depriving them of that Sacred Book, because the others
   had so unworthily prostituted it (though the prevention of such a
   profanation for the future had been as fair a plea for it as the
   Romanists do now make:) but on the contrary the primitive Fathers are
   frequent, nay indeed importunate in their exhortations to the private
   study of Holy Scripture, which they recommend to Christians of all
   Ranks, Ages, and Sexes.

   20. AS an instance hereof let us hear Clemens of Alex. in his
   Exhortation. The word, says he, is not hid from any, it it a common
   light that shineth to all men; there is no obscurity in it; hear it you
   that be far off, and hear it you that are nigh.

   21. TO this purpose St. Jerome speaks in his Epistle to Leta, whom he
   directs in the education of her young daughter, and advises, that
   instead of gems and silk, she be enamour'd with the Holy Scripture;
   wherein not gold, or skins, or Babylonian embroideries, but a correct
   and beautiful variety producing faith, will recommend its self. Let her
   first learn the Psalter, and be entertain'd with those songs; then be
   instructed unto life by the Proverbs of Solomon: let her learn from
   Ecclesiastes to despise worldly things; transcribe from Job the
   practice of patience and vertue: let her pass then to the Gospels, and
   never let them be out of her hands: and then imbibe with all the
   faculties of the mind, the Acts of the Apostles, and Epistles. When she
   has enrich'd the storehouse of her breast with these treasures, let her
   learn the Prophets, the Heptateuch, or books of Moses, Joshua and
   Judges, the books of Kings and Chronicles, the volumes of Ezra and
   Esther; and lastly the Canticles. And indeed, this Father is so
   concern'd to have the unletter'd Female Sex skilful in the Scriptures,
   that tho' he sharply rebukes their pride and over-weening; he not only
   frequently resolves their doubts concerning difficult places in the
   said Scriptures, but dedicates several of his Commentaries to them.

   22. THE same is to be said of Saint Austin, who in his Epistles to
   unletter'd encourages their enquiries concerning the Scripture,
   assuring Volusianus Ep. 3* that it speaks those things that are plain
   to the heart of the learned and unlearned, as a familiar friend; in the
   mysterious, mounts not up into high phrases which might deter a slow
   and unlearned mind, (as the poor are in their addresses to the rich;)
   but invites all with lowly speech, feeding with manifest truth, and
   exercising with secret. And Ep. 1. 21. tells the devout Proba, that in
   this world, where we are absent from the Lord, and walk by faith and
   not by sight, the soul is to think it self desolate, and never cease
   from prayer, and the words of Divine and Holy Scripture, &c.

   23. SAINT Chrysostom in his third Homily of Lazarus thus addresses
   himself to married persons, house-holders, and people engag'd in trades
   and secular professions; telling them, that the reading of the
   Scripture is a great defensative against sin; and on the other side,
   the ignorance whereof is a deep and head-long precipice; that not to
   know the Law of God, is the utter loss of salvation; that this has
   caused Heresies, and corruption of Life, and has confounded the order
   of things: for it cannot be by any means, that his labour should be
   fruitless, who employs himself in a daily and attentive reading of the
   Scripture.

   24. I am not, says the same Saint Chrysostom, Homil. 9. on Colos 3. a
   Monk, I have Wife and Children, and the cares of a Family. But 'tis a
   destructive opinion, that the reading of the Scripture pertains only to
   those who have addicted themselves to a Monastick life; when the
   reading of Scripture is much more necessary for secular persons: for
   they who converse abroad, and receive frequent wounds, are in greatest
   needs of remedies and preservatives. So Hom. 2. on Matt. Hearken all
   you that are secular, how you ought to order your Wives and Children;
   and how you are particularly enjoyn'd to read the Scriptures, and that
   not perfunctorily, or by chance, but very diligently.

   25. LIKEWISE Hom. 3. on Lazarus. What sayest thou, O man? it is not thy
   business to turn over the Scripture, being distracted by innumerable
   cares; no, thou hast therefore the greater obligation: others do not so
   much stand in need of the aids of the Scripture, as they who are
   conversant in much business. Farther, Homil. 8. on Hebr. 5. I beseech
   you neglect not the reading of the Scriptures; but whether we
   comprehend the meaning of what if spoken or not, let us always be
   conversant in them: for daily meditation strengthens the memory; and it
   frequently happens, that what you now cannot find out, if you attempt
   it again, you will the next day discover: for God of his goodness will
   enlighten the mind. It were endless to transcribe all the Exhortations
   of the ancient Doctors and Fathers of the Church; they not only
   permitted, but earnestly prest upon all Christians, whatever their
   state or condition were, the constant reading of the holy Scripture.
   Nor indeed was their restraint ever heard of till the Church of Rome
   had espous'd such doctrines as would not bear the test of Scripture and
   then as those who deal in false wares are us'd to do, they found it
   necessary to proportion their lights accordingly.

   26. THIS Peter Sutor in his second Book Cap. 22. of the Translation of
   the Scripture honeisly confesses, that whereas many things are enjoyn'd
   which are not expresly Scripture, the unlearned observing this will be
   apt to murmur and complain that so heavy burthens are laid upon them,
   and their Christian liberty infringed. They will easily be with-drawn
   from observing the Constitutions of the Church, when they find that
   they are not contain'd in the Law of Christ. And that this was not a
   frivolous suggestion, the desperate attempt of the Romanists above
   mention'd, in leaving out the second Commandment in their Primers and
   Catechisms, which they communicate to the people, may pass for an
   irrefragable evidence; For what Lay-man would not be shockt to find
   Almighty God Command, not to make any graven image, nor the likeness of
   any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the
   Water under the Earth; that no one should bow down to them, nor worship
   them: when he sees the contrary is practiced and commanded by the
   Church.

   27. BUT would God none but the Romanist were impeachable of this
   detention of Scripture: there are too many among us that are thus false
   and envious to themselves: and what the former do upon policy and
   pretence of reverence, those do upon mere oscitancy and avow'd
   profaneness; which are much worse inducements. And for such as these to
   declaim against detention of the Scripture, is like the Law-suits of
   those who contend only about such little punctilio's as themselves
   design no advantage from, but only the worsting their Adversaries and
   it would be much safer for them to lie under the interdict of others,
   than thus to refrain themselves: even as much as the errours of
   obedience are more excusable, than those of contempt and profaneness.

   28. AND here I would have it seriously consider'd that the Edict of
   Diocletian for the demolishing the Christian Churches, and the burning
   their Bibles, became the character and particular aggravation of his
   most bloody persecution. Now should Almighty God call us to the like
   trial, should Antichristian violence, whether heathen or other, take
   from us our Churches and our Bibles, what comfort could we have in that
   calamity, if our contempt of those blessings drove them from us nay,
   prevented persecution, and bereft us of them even whilst we had them in
   our power? He who neglects to make his constant resort unto the Church,
   which by Gods mercy now stands open; or to read diligently the holy
   Scriptures, which by the same divine Goodness are free for him to use,
   is his own Diocletian; and without the terrours of death, or torments,
   has renounc'd, if not the Faith, the great instruments of its
   conveiance, and pledge of God Almighties presence among the sons of
   men.

   29. BUT what if men either upon the one motive or the other, will not
   read; yet the Scriptures continue still most worthy to be read: they
   retain still their propriety for all those excellent ends to which God
   design'd them: and as the Prophet tells the Jews, Ez. 2. 5. whether
   they will hear, or whether they will forbear, they shall know that
   there has been a Prophet among them: so whether we will take the
   benefit or no, we shall one day find that the holy Scripture would have
   made us wise unto salvation. If thro' our fault alone they fail to do
   so, they will one day assume a less grateful office; and from guides
   and assistants, become accusers and witnesses against us.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    SECT. V.

   The Scripture has great propriety and fitness towards the attainment of
   its excellent end.

   WE are now in the next place to consider how exactly the holy
   Scriptures are adapted to those great ends to which they are directed:
   how sufficient they are for that important negotiation on which they
   are sent: and that we than certainly find them, if we look on them
   either intrinsecally, or circumstantially. For the first of these 11
   notions we need only to reflect on the third Part of this discourse,
   where the Scripture in respect of the subject Matter is evinc'd to be a
   systeme of the most excellent Laws, back'd with the most transcendent
   rewards and punishments; and the certainty of those confirm'd by such
   pregnant inflames of Gods mercies and vengeance in this world, as are
   the surest gages and earnests of what we are bid to expect in another.

   2. NOW what method imaginable can there be used to rational creatures
   of more force and energy? Nay it seems to descend even to our passions
   and accommodates it self to our several inclinations. And seeing how
   few Proselytes there are to bare and naked vertue, and how many to
   interest and advantage; God closes with them upon their own terms, and
   does not so much injoin as buy those little services he asks from us.

   3. BUT because some mens natures are so disingenuous as to hate to be
   oblig'd no less than to be reform'd, the Scripture has goads and
   scourges to drive such beasts as will not be led; terrours and
   threatnings, and those of most formidable sorts, to affright those who
   will not be allur'd. Nay lest incredulous men should question the
   reality of future rewards or punishments, the Scripture gives as
   sensible evidence of them as we are capable of receiving in this world;
   by registring such signal protections and judgements proportioned to
   vertue and vice, as sufficiently attests the Psalmists Axiom: Doubtless
   there is a God that judgeth the earth, Psal. 58. 11. and leaves nothing
   to the impenitent firmer, but a fearful expectation of that fiery
   indignation threatned hereafter; Heb, 10. 27.

   4. AND now methinks the Scripture seems to be that net our Saviour
   speaks of, that caught of every sort, Matt. 13. 47. it is of so vast a
   compass, that it must, one would think, fetch in all kind of tempers:
   and sure had we not mixt natures with fiends contracted some of their
   malice and obstinacy, mere human gravity could not hold out.

   5. AND as the Holy Scripture is thus fitly proportion'd to its end in
   respect of the subject matter, so is it also in reference to its
   circumstances, which all conspire to render it, the power of God unto
   salvation, Rom. 1. 16. In the first rank of those we must place its
   Divine Original, which stamps it with an uncontroulable authority; and
   is an infallible security that the matter of it is perfectly true:
   since it proceeds from that Essential Verity which cannot abuse us with
   fraudulent promises or threatnings: and from that Infinite Power that
   cannot be impeded in the execution of what he purposes.

   6. YET to render this circumstance efficacious there needs another; to
   wit, that its being the Word of God be sufficiently testify'd to us:
   and we have in the foregoing discourse evinced it to be so; and that in
   the utmost degree that a matter of that kind is capable of, beyond
   which no sober man will require evidence in any thing. And certainly
   these two circumstances thus united, have a mighty force to impress the
   dictates of Scripture on us. And we must rebel against God and our own
   convictions too, to hold out against it.

   7. A third circumstance relates to the frame and composure of this
   Divine Book, both as to method, and stile: concerning which I have
   already made some reflexions. But now that I may speak more distinctly,
   I observe it takes its rise from the first point of time wherein 'twas
   possible for mankind to be concern'd; and so gradually proceeds to its
   fall and renovation: shews us first our need of a Redeemer, and then
   points us out who it is by Types and Promises in the Old Testament, and
   by way of History and Completion in the New. In the former it acquaints
   us with that Pedagogy of the Law which God design'd as our School
   master to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3. 25. And in the Gospel shews us
   yet a more excellent way; presents us with those more sublime, elevated
   doctrines, which Christ came down from Heaven to reveal.

   8. As for the stile, that is full of grateful variety, sometimes high
   and majestick, as becomes that High and only One that inhabiteth
   Eternity, Esaiah 57. 15. and sometimes so humble and after the manner
   of men, as agrees to the other part of his Character, his dwelling is
   with him that is of an humble spirit, Esai. 17. 15. I know profane wits
   are apt to brand this as an unevenness of stile: but they may as well
   accuse the various notes of Musick as destructive to harmony, or blame
   an Orator for being able to tune his tongue to the most different
   strains.

   9. ANOTHER excellency of the stile, is its propriety to the several
   subjects it treats of. When it speaks of such things as God would not
   have Men pry into, it wraps them up in clouds and thick darkness; by
   that means to deter inquisitive man (as he did at Sinai) from breaking
   into the Mount, Exod. 20. And that he gives any intimation at all of
   such, seems design'd only to give us a just estimate how shallow our
   Comprehensions are; and excite us to adore and admire that Abyss of
   Divine Wisdom which we can never fathom.

   10. THINGS of a middle nature, which may be useful to some, but are not
   indispensibly necessary to all, the Scripture leaves more accessible;
   yet not so obvious as to be within every mans reach: but makes them
   only the prize of industry, prayer, and humble endeavours. And it is no
   small benefit, that those who covet the knowledge of divine Truth, are
   by it engag'd to take these vertues in the way. Besides, there is so
   much time requir'd to that study, as renders it inconsistent with those
   secular businesses wherein the generality of men are immerst: and
   consquently 'tis necessary that those who addict themselves to the one,
   have competent vacancy from the other: And in this it hath a visible
   life by being very contributive to the maintaining that Spiritual
   subordination of the people to the Pastors; which God has establish'd.
   Miriam and Corahs Partisans are a pregnant instance how much the
   opinion of equal knowledge unfits for subjection and we see by sad
   experience how much the bare pretence of it has disturb'd the Church,
   and made those turn Preachers who never were understanding Hearers.

   11. BUT besides these more abstruse, there are easier truths in which
   every man is concern'd; the explicit knowledge whereof is necessary to
   all: I mean the Divine Rules for saving Faith and Manners. And in those
   the Scripture stile is as plain as possible; condescends to the
   apprehensions of the rudest Capacities: so that none that can read the
   Scripture but will there find the way to bliss evidently chalked out to
   him. That 1 may use the words of Saint Gregory, The Lamb may wade in
   those waters of Life, as well as the Elephant may swim. The Holy Ghost,
   as Saint Austin tells as, lib. 2. of Christian doctrine, cap. 6. has
   made in the plainer places of Scripture magnificent and healthful
   provision for our hunger; and in the obscure, against satiety. For
   there are scarce any things drawn from obscure places, which in others
   are not spoken most plainly. And he farther adds, that if any thing
   happen to be no where explain'd, every man may there abound in his own
   sense.

   12. SO again in the same Book, cap. 9. he saies, that all those things
   which concern Faith and Manners, are plainly to be met with in the
   Scripture: and Saint Jerome in his Comment on Es. 19. tells us, that
   'tis the custom of the Scripture to close obscure sayings with those
   that are easy; and what was first express'd darkly, to propose in
   evident words: which very thing is said likewise by Saint Chrysostom,
   Hom. 9. 2 Cor. 4. 11. who in his first Homily on St. Mat. farther
   declares, that the Scriptures are easy to be understood, and expos'd to
   vulgar capacities.

   13. HE saies again, Hom. upon Esay, that the Scriptures are not mettals
   that require the help of Miners, but afford a treasure easily to be had
   to them that seek the riches contain'd in them. It is enough only to
   stoop down, and look upon them, and depart replenish'd with wealth; it
   is enough only to open them, and behold the splendour of those Gems.
   Again Hom. 3. on Gen. 14. It cannot be that he who studious in the holy
   Scripture should be rejected: for though the instruction of men be
   wanting, the Lord from above will inlighten our minds, shine in upon
   our reason, reveal what is secret, and teach what we do not know. So
   Hom. 1. on Jo. 11. Almighty God involves his doctrine with no mists,
   and darkness, as did the Philosophers: his doctrine is brighter than
   the Sun-beams and more illustrious; and therefore every where diffus'd:
   and Hom. 6. on Jo. 11. His doctrine is so facile, that not only the
   wise, but even women, and youths must comprehend it. Hom. 13. on Gen.
   2. Let us go to the Scripture as our Mark, which is its own
   interpreter. And soon after saies, that the Scripture interprets
   itself, and suffers not its Auditor to err. To the same purpose saies
   Cyril in his third book against Julian. In the Scripture nothing is
   difficult to them, who are conversant in them as they ought to be.

   14. IT is therefore a groundless cavil which men make at the obscurity
   of the Scripture; since it is not obscure in those things wherein 'tis
   our common interest it should be plain: which sufficiently justifies
   its propriety to that great end of making us wise unto Salvation. And
   for those things which seem less intelligible to us, many of them
   become so, not by the innate obscurity of the Text, but by extrinsick
   circumstances (of which perhaps the over-busy tampering of Paraphrasts,
   pleased with new notions of their own, may be reckon'd for one.) But
   this subject the Reader may find so well pursued in Mr. Boyls Tract
   concerning the stile of Scripture, that I shall be kindest both to him
   and it to refer him thither; as also for answer to those other
   querulous objections, which men galled with the sense of the Scripture
   have made to its stile.

   15. A third circumstance in which the Scripture is fitted to attain its
   end, is its being committed to writing, as that is distinguish'd from
   oral delivery. It is most true, the word of God is of equal authority
   and efficacy which way soever it be deliver'd: The Sermons of the
   Apostles were every jot as divine and powerful out of their mouths, as
   they are now in their story. All the advantage therefore that the
   written Word can pretend to is in order to its perpetuity, as it is a
   securer way of derivation to posterity, than that of oral Tradition. To
   evince that it is so, I shall first weigh the rational probabilities on
   either side. Secondly, I shall consider to which God himself appears in
   Scripture to give the deference.

   16. FOR the first of these, I shall propose this consideration, which I
   had occasion to intimate before, that the Bible being writ for the
   universal use of the faithful, 'twas as universally disperst amongst
   them: The Jews had the Law not only in their Synagogues, but in their
   private houses, and as soon as the Evangelical Books were writ, they
   were scatter'd into all places where the Christian Faith had obtain'd.
   Now when there was such a vast multitude of Copies, and those so
   revered by the possessors, that they thought it the highest pitch of
   Sacrilege to expose them, it must surely be next to impossible entirely
   to suppress that Book. Besides, it could never be attempted but by some
   eminent violence, as it was by the heathen Persecutors; which
   (according to the common effect of opposition) serv'd to enhance the
   Christians value of the Bible: and consequently when the storm was
   past, to excite their diligence for recruiting the number. So that,
   unless in after Ages, all the Christians in the world should at once
   make a voluntary defection, and conspire to eradicate their Religion,
   the Scriptures could not be utterly extinguish'd.

   17. AND that which secures it from total suppression, do's in a great
   degree do so from corruption and falsification. For whilst so many
   genuine copies are extant in all parts or the world, to be appeal'd to,
   it would be a very difficult matter to impose a spurious one;
   especially if the chang'd were so material as to awaken mens
   jealousies. And it must be only in a place and age of gross ignorance,
   that any can be daring enough to attempt it. And if it should happen to
   succeed in such a particular Church, yet what is that to the universal?
   And to think to have the forgery admitted there, is (as a learned man
   saies) like attempting to poison the Sea.

   18. ON the other side, oral Tradition seems much more liable to
   hazards; errour may there insinuate it self much more insensibly. And
   tho' there be no universal conspiracy to admit it at first; yet like a
   small eruption of waters, it widens its own passage, till it causes an
   inundation. There is no impression so deep, but time and intervening
   accidents may wear it out of mens minds; especially where the notions
   are many and are founded not in nature, but positive institution, as a
   great part of Christian Religion is. And when we consider the various
   tempers of men, 'twill not be strange that succeeding Ages will not
   always be determin'd by the Traditions of the former. Some are
   pragmatick, and think themselves fitter to prescribe to the belief of
   their Posterity, than to follow that of their Ancestors: some have
   interests and designs which will be better serv'd by new Tenets: and
   some are ignorant and mistaking, and may unawares corrupt the doctrine
   they should barely deliver: and of this last sort we may guess there
   may be many, since it falls commonly to the Mothers lot to imbue
   Children with the first rudiments.

   19. NOW in all there cases how possible is it that primitive Tradition
   may be either lost or adulterated? and consequently, and in proportion
   to that possibility, our confidence of it must be stagger'd. I am sure
   according to the common estimate in seculars it must be so. For 1
   appeal to any man whether he be not apter to credit a relation which
   comes from an eye-witness than at the third or fourth, much more at the
   hundredth rebound: (as in this case.) And daily experience tells us,
   that a true and probable story by passing thro' many hands, often grows
   to an improbable lye. This man thinks he could add one becoming
   circumstance; that man another and whilst most men take the liberty to
   do so, the relation grows as monstrous as such a heap of incoherent
   fancies can make it.

   20. IF to this be said, that this happens only in trivial secular
   matters, but that in the weighty concern of Religion, mankind is
   certainly more serious and sincere: I answer that 'tis very improbable
   that they are; since 'tis obvious in the common practice of the world,
   that the interests of Religion are postpon'd to every little worldly
   concern. And therefore when a Temporal advantage requires the bending
   and warping of Religion, there never be wanting force that will attempt
   it.

   21. BESIDES; there is still left in human nature so much of the venom
   of the Serpents first temptation, that tho' Men cannot be as God, yet
   they love to be prescribing to him, and to be their own Assessors as to
   that Worship and Homage they are to pay him.

   22. BUT above all 'tis considerable that in this case Satan has a more
   peculiar concern, and can serve himself more by a falsification here
   than in Temporal affairs. For if he can but corrupt Religion, it ceases
   to be his Enemy, and becomes one of his most useful Engins, as
   sufficiently appear'd in the Rites of the Heathen Worship. We have
   therefore no cause to think this an exempt case; but to presume it may
   be influenc'd by the same pravity of human nature, which prevails in
   others; and consequently are oblig'd to bless God that he has not left
   our Spiritual concerns to such hazards, but has lodg'd them in a more
   secure Repository, the written word.

   23. BUT I fore-see 'twill be objected, that whilst I thus disparage
   Tradition, I do vertually invalidate the Scripture it self, which comes
   to us upon its credit. To this I answer first, that since God has
   with-drawn immediate Revelation from the word, Tradition is the only
   means to convey to us the first notice that this Book is the word of
   God: and it being the only means he affords, we have all reason to
   depend on his goodness, that he will not suffer that to be evacuated to
   us: and that how lyable soever Tradition may be to err, yet that it
   shall not actually err in this particular.

   24. BUT in the second place; This Tradition seems not so lyable to
   falsification as others: It is so very short and simple a proposition,
   such and such writings are the Word of God, that there is no great room
   for Sophistry or mistake to pervert the sense; the only possible
   deception must be to change the subject, and obtrude supposititious
   writings in room of the true, under the title of the Word of God. But
   this has already appear'd to be unpracticable, because of the multitude
   of copies which were disperst in the world; by which such an attempt
   would soon have been detected. There appears therefore more reason as
   well as more necessity, to rely upon Tradition in this, than in most
   other particulars.

   25. NEITHER yet do I so far decry oral Tradition in any, as to conclude
   it impossible it should derive any Truth to Posterity: I only look on
   it as more casual; and consequently a less fit conveyance of the most
   important and necessary verities than the written Word: In which I
   conceive my self justify'd by the common sense of mankind; who use to
   commit those things to writing, which they are most sollicitous to
   derive to Posterity. Do's any Nation trust their Fundamental Laws only
   to the memory of the present Age, and take no other course to transmit
   them to the Future? Do's any man purchase an Estate, and leave no way
   for his Children to lay claim to. it, but the Tradition the present
   witnesses shall leave of it? Nay, do's any considering man ordinarily
   make any important pact or bargain (tho' without relation to posterity)
   without putting the Articles in writing? And whence is all this caution
   but from a universal consent that writing is the surest way of
   transmitting?

   26. BUT we have yet a higher appeal in this matter than to the suffrage
   of men: God himself seems to have determin'd it; And what his decision
   is, 'tis our next business to inquire.

   27. AND first he has given the most real and comprehensive attestation
   to this way of writing, by having himself chose it. For he is too wise
   to be mistaken in his estimate of better and worse, and too kind to
   chuse the worst for us: and yet he has chosen to communicate himself to
   the latter Ages of the world by writing; and has summ'd up all the
   Eternal concerns of mankind in the sacred Scriptures, and left those
   sacred Records by which we are to be both inform'd and govern'd; which
   if oral Tradition would infallibly have done, had been utterly
   needless: and God sure is not so prodigal of his spirit, as to inspire
   the Authors of Scripture to write that, whose use was superseded by a
   former more certain expedient.

   28. NAY, under the Mosaick oeconomy, when he made use of other ways of
   revealing himself, yet to perpetuate the memory even of those
   Revelations, he chose to have them written. At the delivery of the Law,
   God spake then viva voce, and with that pomp of dreadful solemnity, as
   certainly was apt to make the deepest impressions; yet God fore-saw
   that thro' every succeeding Age that stamp would grow more dim, and in
   a long revolution might at last be extinct. And therefore how warm
   soever the Israelites apprehensions then were, he would not trust to
   them for the perpetuating his Law, but committed it to writing; Exod.
   31. 18. nay wrote it twice himself.

   29. YET farther even the ceremonial Law, tho' not intended to be of
   perpetual obligation, was not yet referr'd to the traditionary way, but
   was wrote by Moses, and deposited with the Priests, Deut. 31. 19. And
   after-event shew'd this was no needless caution. For when under
   Manasses, Idolatry had prevail'd in Jerusalem, it was not by any
   dormant Tradition, but by the Book of the Law found in the Temple, that
   Josiah was both excited to reform Religion, and instructed how to do
   it; 2 Kings 22. 10. And had not that or some other copy been produc'd,
   they had been much in the dark as to the particulars of their
   reformation; which that they had not been convey'd by Tradition,
   appears by the sudden startling of the King upon the reading of the
   Law; which could not have been, had he been before possest with the
   contents of it. In like manner we find in Nehemiah, that the
   observation of the Feast of Tabernacles was recover'd by consulting the
   Law; the Tradition whereof was wholly worn out; or else it had sure
   been impossible that it could for so long a time had been intermitted,
   Neh. 1. 18. And yet mens memories are commonly more retentive of an
   external visible rite, than they are of speculative Propositions, or
   moral Precepts.

   30. THESE instances shew how fallible an expedient mere oral Tradition
   is for transmission to posterity. But admit no such instance could be
   given, 'tis argument enough that God has by his own choice of writing
   given the preference to it. Nor has he barely chosen it, but has made
   it the standard by which to measure all succeeding pretences. 'Tis the
   means he prescribes for distinguishing divine from diabolical
   inspirations To the Law and to the testimony: if they speak not
   according to this Word, there is no light in them. Isai. 8. 20. And
   when the Lawyer interrogated our Saviour what he should do to inherit
   eternal life, he sends him not to ransack Tradition, or the
   cabalistical divinity of the Rabbins, but refers him to the Law: What
   is written in the Law? how readest thou? Luk. 10. 26. And indeed,
   throughout the Gospel, we still find him in his discourse appealing to
   Scripture, and asserting its authority: as on the other side inveighing
   against those Traditions of the Elders which had evacuated the written
   Word: Ye make the Word of God of none effect by your Tradition, Matt.
   15. 6. Which as it abundantly shews Christs adherence to the written
   word, so 'tis a pregnant instance how possible it is for Tradition to
   be corrupted, and made the instrument of imposing mens fancies even in
   contradiction to Gods commands.

   31. AND since our blessed Lord has made Scripture the test whereby to
   try Traditions, we may surely acquiesce in his decision, and either
   embrace or reject Traditions, according as they correspond to the
   supreme rule, the written Word. It must therefore be a very
   unwarrantable attempt to set up Tradition in competition with (much
   more in contradiction to) that to which Christ himself hath subjected
   it.

   32. SAINT Paul reckons it as the principal privilege of the Jewish
   Church, that it had the Oracles of God committed to it, i. e. that the
   Holy Scriptures were deposited, and put in its custody and in this the
   Christian Church succeeds it, and is the guardian and conservator of
   holy Writ. I ask then, had the Jewish Church by vertue of its being
   keeper, a power to supersede any part of those Oracles intrusted to
   them? if so, Saint Paul was much out in his estimate, and ought to have
   reckon'd that as their highest priviledge. But indeed, the very nature
   of the trust implies the contrary; and besides, 'tis evident, that is
   the very Crime Christ Charges upon the Jews in the place above cited.
   And if the Jewish Church had no such right, upon what account can the
   Christian claim any? Has Christ enlarg'd its Charter? Has he left the
   Sacred Scriptures with her, not to preserve and practise, but to
   regulate and reform? to fill up its vacancies, and supply its defects
   by her own Traditions? If so, let the Commission be produc'd; but if
   her office be only that of Guardianship and Trust, she must neither
   substract from, nor by any superadditions of her own evacuate its
   meaning and efficacy: and to do so, would be the same guilt that it
   would be in a person intrusted with the Fundamental Records of a
   Nation, to foist in such clauses as himself pleases.

   33. IN short, God has in the Scriptures laid down exact rules for our
   belief and practice, and has entrusted the Church to convey them to us:
   if she varies, or any way enervates them, she is false to that trust,
   but cannot by it oblige us to recede from that rule she should deliver,
   to comply with that she obtrudes upon us. The Case may be illustrated
   by an easy resemblance. Suppose a King has a Forreign Principality for
   which he composes a body of Laws; annexes to them rewards and
   penalties, and requires an exact and indispensable conformity to them.
   These being put in writing, he sends by a select messenger: now suppose
   this messenger delivers them, yet says withal, that himself has
   authority from the King to supersede these Laws at his pleasure; so
   that their resort must be to his dictates, yet produces no other
   testimony but his own bare affirmation. Is it possible that any men in
   their wits should be so stupidly credulous, as to incur the penalty of
   those Laws upon so improbable an indemnity? And sure it would be no
   whit less madness in Christians, to violate any precept of God, on an
   ungrounded supposal of the Churches power to dispense with them.

   34. AND if the Church Universal has not this power, nor indeed ever
   claim'd it, it must be a strange insolence for any particular Church to
   pretend to it, as the Church of Rome do's; as if we should owe to her
   Tradition all our Scripture, and all our Faith insomuch that without
   the supplies which she affords from the Oracle of her Chair, our
   Religion were imperfect, and our Salvation insecure. Upon which wild
   dictates I shall take liberty in a distinct Section farther to
   animadvert.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   SECT. VI.

   The suffrage of the primitive Christian Church, concerning the
   propriety and fitness which the Scripture has towards the attainment of
   its excellent end.

   AGAINST what has been hitherto said to the advantage of the Holy
   Scripture, there opposes it self (as we have already intimated) the
   authority of the Church of Rome; which allows it to be only an
   imperfect rule of Faith, saying in the fourth Session of the Council of
   Trent, That Christian Faith and Discipline are contain'd the Books
   written and unwritten Tradition. And in the fourth Rule of the Index,
   put forth by Command of the said Council, the Scripture is declar'd to
   be so far from useful, that its reading is pernicious, if permitted
   promiscuously in the vulgar Tongue, and therefore to be with-held:
   insomuch that the study of the Holy Bible is commonly by persons of the
   Roman Communion, imputed to Protestants as part of their Heresy; they
   being call'd by them in contempt, the Evangelical Men, and
   Scripturarians. And the Bible in the vulgar Tongue of any Nation is
   commonly reckon'd among prohibited Books, and as such, publickly burnt
   when met with by the Inquisitors: and the person who is found with it,
   or to read therein, is subjected to severe penalties.

   2. FOR the vindication of the Truth of God, and to put to shame those
   unhappy Innovators, who, amidst great pretences to Antiquity, and
   veneration to the Scriptures, prevaricate from both: I think it may not
   be amiss to shew plainly the mind of the primitive Church herein; and
   that in as few words as the matter will admit.

   3. FIRST, I premise that Ireneus and Tertullian having to do with
   Hereticks, who boasted themselves to be Emendators of the Apostles, and
   Wiser than they, despising their authority, rejecting several parts of
   the Scripture, and obtruding other writings in their stead, have had
   recourse unto Tradition, with a seeming preference of it unto
   Scripture. Their Adversaries having no common principle besides the
   owning the name of Christians; it was impossible to convince them, but
   by a recourse to such a medium which they would allow. But these
   Fathers being to set down and establish their Faith, are most express
   in resolving it into Scripture: and when they recommend Tradition ever
   mean such as is also Apostolical.

   4. IRENEUS in the second Book, 37. cap. tells us, That the Scriptures
   are perfect, as dictated by the word of God and his Spirit. And the
   same Father begins his third Book in this manner, The disposition of
   our salvation is no otherwise known by us, than by those by whom the
   Gospel was brought to us; which indeed they first preach'd, but
   afterward deliver'd it to us in the Scripture, to be the foundation and
   pillar of our Faith. Nor may we imagine, that they began to preach to
   others, before they themselves had perfect knowledge, as some are bold
   to say; boasting themselves to be emendators of the Apostles. For after
   our Lords Resurrection, they were indued with the power of the Holy
   Spirit from on high; and having perfect knowledge, went forth to the
   ends of the earth, preaching the glad tidings of salvation, and
   celestial praise unto men. Each and all of whom had the Gospel of God.
   So Saint Matthew wrote the Gospel to the Hebrews in their tongue. Saint
   Peter and Saint Paul preach'd at Rome, and there founded a Church: Mark
   the Disciple and Interpreter of Peter, deliver'd in writing what he had
   preach'd, and Luke the follower of Paul set down in his Book the Gospel
   he had deliver'd. Afterward Saint John at Ephesus in Asia publish'd his
   Gospel &c. in his fourth Book, ch. 66. he directs all the Hereticks
   with whom he deals, to read diligently the Gospel deliver'd by the
   Apostles, and also read diligently the Prophets, assuring them they
   shall there find every action, every doctrine, and every suffering of
   our Lord declared by them.

   5. THUS Tertullian in his Book of Prescriptions ch. 6. It is not lawful
   for us to introduce any thing of our own will, nor make any choice upon
   our arbitrement. We have the Apostles of our Lord for our Authors, who
   themselves took up nothing on their own will or choice; but faithfully
   imparted to the Nations the discipline which they had receiv'd from
   Christ. So that if an Angel from heaven should teach another doctrine,
   he were to be accurst. And ch. 25. 'Tis madness, says he of the
   Hereticks, when they confess that the Apostles were ignorant of
   nothing, nor taught things different, to think that they did not reveal
   all things to all: which he enforces in the following Chapter. In his
   Book against Hermogenes, ch. 23, he discourses thus; I adore the
   plenitude of the Scripture, which discovers to me the Creator, and what
   was created. Also in the Gospel I find the Word was the Arbiter and
   Agent in the Creation. That all things were made of preexistent matter
   I never read. Let Hermogenes, and his journey-men shew that it is
   written. If it be not written, let him fear the woe, which belongs to
   them that add or detract. And in the 39 ch. of his Prescript, We feed
   our faith, raise our hope, and establish our reliance with the sacred
   Word.

   6. IN like manner Hippolytus in the Homily against .Noctus declares,
   that we acknowledge only from Scripture that there is one God. And
   whereas secular Philosophy is not to be had but from the reading of the
   doctrine of the Philosophers; so whosoever of us will preserve piety
   towards God, he cannot otherwise learn it than from the holy Scripture.
   Accordingly Origen in the fifth Homily on Leviticus, says, that in the
   Scripture every word appertaining to God, is to be sought and discust;
   and the knowledge of all things is to be receiv'd.

   7. WHAT Saint Cyprian's opinion was in this point, we learn at large
   from his Epistle to Pompey. For when Tradition was objected to him, he
   answers; Whence is this Tradition? is it from the authority of our Lord
   and his Gospel; or comes it from the commands of the Apostles in their
   Epistles? Almighty God declares that what is written should be obey'd
   and practised. The Book of the Law, says he in Joshua, shall not depart
   from thy mouth, but thou shalt meditate on it day and night, that you
   may observe and keep all that is written therein. So our Lord sending
   his Apostles, commands them to baptise all Nations, and teach them to
   observe all things that he had commanded. Again what obstinacy and
   presumption it is to prefer human Tradition to divine command: not
   considering that Gods wrath is kindled as often as his Precepts are
   dissolv'd and neglected by reason of human Traditions. Thus God warns
   and speaks by Isaiah: This people honour me with their lips but their
   heart is far from me; but in vain do they worship me, teaching for
   docrines the commandments of men. Also the Lord in the Gospel checks
   and reproves, saying; you reject the Law of God, that you may establish
   your Tradition. Of which Precept the Apostle Saint Paul being mindful,
   admonishes and instructs, saying; If any man teaches otherwise and
   hearkens not to sound doctrine, and the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
   he is proud, knowing nothing: From such we must depart. And again he
   adds, There is a compendious way for religious and sincere minds, both
   to deposit their errours, and find out the truth. For if we return to
   the force and original of divine Tradition; humane errour will cease,
   and the ground of heavenly mysteries being seen, whatsoever was hid
   with clouds and darkness, will be manifest by the light of truth. If a
   pipe that brought plentiful supplies of water, fail on the suddain, do
   not men look to the fountain, and thence learn the cause of the defect,
   whether the spring it self be dry; or if running freely, the water is
   stopt in its passage; that if by interrupted or broken conveyances, it
   was hindred to pass, they being repair'd, it may again be brought to
   the City, with the same plenty as it flows from the spring? And this
   Gods Priests ought to do at this time, obeying the commands of God,
   that if truth has swerv'd or fail'd in any particular, we go backward
   to the source of the Evangelical and Apostolical Tradition, and there
   found our actings: from whence their order and origination began.

   8. IT is true Bellarmine reproaches this discourse as erroneous; but
   whatever it might be in the inference which Saint Cyprian drew from it,
   in it self it was not so. For Saint Austin, tho' sufficiently engag'd
   against Saint Cyprian's conclusion, allows the position as most
   Orthodox; saying, in the fourth Book of Baptism, cap. 35. Whereas he
   admonishes to go back to the fountain, that is, the Tradition of the
   Apostles, and thence bring the stream down to our times; 'tis most
   excellent, and without doubt to be done.

   9. THUS Eusebius expresses himself in his second Book against
   Sabellius. As it is a point of sloth, not to seek into those things,
   whereof one may enquire; so 'tis insolence to be inquisitive in others.
   But what are those things which we ought to enquire into? Even those
   which are to be found in the Scriptures: those things which are not
   there to be found, let us not seek after. Eor if they ought to be
   known, the Holy Ghost had not omitted them in the Scripture.

   10. ATHANASIUS in his Tract of the Incarnation, says, It is fit for us
   to adhere to the Word of God, and not relinquish it, thinking by
   syllogisms to evade what is there clearly deliver'd. Again, in his
   Tract to Serap. of the Holy Ghost: Ask not, says he, concerning the
   Trinity, but learn only from the Scriptures. For the instructions which
   you will find there, are sufficient. And in his Oration against the
   Gentiles, declares, That the Scriptures are sufficient to the
   manifestation of the Truth.

   11. AGREEABLE to there is Optatus in his fifth Book against Parmen, who
   reasons thus, You say 'tis lawful to Rebaptize, we say 'tis not lawful:
   betwixt your saying and our gain-saying the Peoples minds are amus'd.
   Let no man believe either you or us. All men are apt to be contentious.
   Therefore Judges are to be call'd in. Christians they cannot be, for
   they will be parties, and thereby partial. Therefore a Judge is to be
   look'd out from abroad. If a Pagan, he knows not the mysteries of our
   Religion. If a Jew, he is an enemy to our Baptism. There is therefore
   no Earthly Judge; but one is to be sought from Heaven. Yet there is no
   need of a resort to Heaven, when we have in the Gospel a Testament: and
   in this case, Celestial things may be compar'd to Earthly. So it is as
   with a Father who has many Children; while he is present he orders them
   all, and there is no need of a written Will: Accordingly Christ when he
   was present upon Earth, from time to time commanded the Apostles
   whatsoever was necessary. But as the Earthly Father finding himself to
   be at the point of death, and fearing that after his departure his
   Children should quarrel among themselves, he calls witnesses, and puts
   his mind in writing; and if any difference arise among the brethren,
   they go not to their Fathers Sepulchre, but repair to his Will and
   Testament; and he who rests in his grave, speaks still in his writing,
   as if he were alive. Our Lord who left his Will among us, is now in
   Heaven, therefore let its seek his Commands in the Gospel as in his
   Will.

   12. THUS Cyril of Jerusalem, Cat. 4. Nothing, no not the least
   concernment of the Divine and Holy Sacraments of our Faith, is to be
   deliver'd without the Holy Scripture: believe not me unless I give you
   a demonstration of what I say from the Scripture.

   13. SAINT Basil in his Book of the true Faith says, If God be faithful
   in all his sayings, his words, and works, they remaining for ever, and
   being done in truth and equity, it must be an evident sign of
   infidelity and pride, if any one shall reject what is written, and
   introduce what is not written. In which Books he generally declares
   that he will write nothing but what he receives from the Holy
   Scripture: and that he abhors from taking it elsewhere. In his 29.
   Homily against the Antitrinitarians. Believe, says he, those which are
   written; seek not those which are not written. And in his Eth. reg. 26.
   Every word and action ought to be confirm'd by the testimony of the
   divinely inspir'd Scriptures, to the establishment of the Faith of the
   good, and reproof of the wicked.

   14. SAINT Ambrose in the first Book of his Offic. says: How can we make
   use of any thing which is not to be found in Scripture? And in his
   Institut. of Virgins. I read he is the first, but read not he is the
   second; let them who say he is the second, shew it from the reading.

   15. GREG. Nyssen in his Dial. of the Soul and Resurrection, says, 'Tis
   undeniable, that truth it there only to be plac'd, where there is the
   Seal of Scripture Testimony.

   16. SAINT Jerom against Helvidius declares. As we deny not that which
   is written, so we refuse those which are not written. And in his
   Comment on the 98. Psal. Every thing that we assert, we must shew from
   the Holy Scripture. The word of him that speaks has not that authority
   as Gods Precept. And on the 87. Psal. Whatever is said after the
   Apostles, let it be cut off, nor have afterwards authority. Tho' one be
   holy after the Apostles, tho' one be eloquent, yet has he not
   authority.

   17. SAINT Austin in his Tract of the unity of the Church, cap. 12.
   Acknowledges that be could not be convinc'd but by the Scriptures of
   what he was to believe; and adds, they are read with such
   manifestation, that he who believes them must confess the doctrine to
   be most true. In the second Book of Christian doctrine, cap. 9. he
   says, That in the plain places of Scripture are found all those things
   that concern Faith and Manners. And in Epistle 42. All things which
   have been exhibited heretofore as done to mankind, and what we now set
   and deliver to our Posterity, the Scripture has not past in silence, so
   far forth as they concern the search or defence of our Religion. In his
   Tract of the good Widowhood, he says to Julian, the person to whom he
   addresses, What shall I teach you more than that we read in the
   Apostles? for the holy Scripture settles the rule of our doctrine; that
   we think not any thing more than we ought to think; but to think
   soberly, as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith. Therefore
   my teaching is only to expound the words of this Doctor, Ep. 157. Where
   any subject is obscure, and passes our comprehension, and the Scripture
   do's not plainly afford its help, there human conjecture is
   presumptuous in defining.

   18. THEOPHILLUS of Alex. in his second Paschal Homily, tells us that
   'tis the suggestion of a diabolical spirit to think that any thing
   besides the Scripture has divine authority. And in his third he adds,
   that the Doctors of the Church having the Testimony of the Scripture,
   lay firm foundation of their Doctrine.

   19. CHRYSOSTOM in his third Homily on the first of the Thessal.
   asserts, that from alone reading or hearing of the Scripture one may
   learn all things necessary. So Hom. 34. on Acts 15. he declares. A
   heathen comes and says, I would willingly be a Christian, but I know
   not whom to join my self to; for there are many contentions among you,
   many seditions and tumults; so that I am in doubt what opinion I should
   chuse. Each man says, what I say is true, and I know not whom to
   believe; each pretends to Scripture which I am ignorant of. 'Tis very
   well the issue is put here: for if the appeal were to reason, in this
   case there would be just occasion of being troubled: but when we appeal
   to the Scriptures, and they are simple and certain, you may easily your
   self judge. He that agrees with the Scriptures is a Christian, he that
   resists them, is far out of the way. And on Psal. 95. If any thing be
   said without the Scripture, the mind halts between different opinions;
   sometimes inclining as to what is probable, anon rejecting as what is
   frivolous: but when the testimony of holy Scripture is produc'd, the
   mind both of speaker and hearer is confirm'd. And Hom. 4. on Lazar.
   Though one should arise from the dead, or an Angel come down from
   heaven, we must believe the Scriptures; they being fram'd by the Lord
   of Angels, and of the quick and dead. And Hom. 13. 2 Cor. 7. Is it not
   an absurd thing that when we deal with men about mony, we will trust no
   body, but cast up the sum, and make use of our counters; but in
   religions affairs, suffer our selves to be led aside by other mens
   opinions, even then when we have by an exact scale and touchstone the
   dictate of the divine Law? Therefore I pray and exhort you, that giving
   no heed to what this or that man says, you would consult the holy
   Scripture, and thence learn the divine riches, and pursue what you have
   learn'd. And Hom. 58. on Jo. 10. 1. 'Tis the mark of a thief, that he
   comes not in by the door, but another way: now by the door the
   testimony of the Scripture is signified. And Hom. on Gal. 1. 8. The
   Apostle says not if any man teach a contrary doctrine let him be
   accurs'd, or if he subvert the whole Gospel; but if he teach any thing
   besides the Gospel which you have receiv'd, or vary any little thing,
   let him be accurs'd.

   20. CYRIL of Alex. against Jul. l. 7. says, The holy Scripture is
   sufficient to make them who are instructed in it wise unto salvation,
   and endued with most ample knowledge.

   21. THEODORET Dial, 1. I am persuaded only by the holy Scripture. And
   Dial. 2. I am not so bold to affirm any thing, not spoken of in the
   Scripture. And again, qu. 45. upon Genes. We ought not to enquire after
   what is past over in silence, but acquiesce in what is written.

   22. IT were easy to enlarge this discourse into a Volume; but having
   taken, as they offer'd themselves, the suffrages of the writers of the
   four first Centuries, I shall not proceed to those that follow. If the
   holy Scripture were a perfect rule of Faith and Manners to all
   Christians heretofore, we may reasonably assure our selves it is so
   still; and will now guide us into all necessary truth, and consequently
   make us wise unto salvation, without the aid of oral Tradition, or the
   new mintage of a living infallible Judge of controversy. And the
   impartial Reader will be enabled to judge whether our appeal to the
   holy Scripture, in all occasions of controversy, and recommendation of
   it to the study of every Christian, be that heresy and innovation which
   it is said to be.

   23. IT is, we know, severely imputed to the Scribes and Pharisees by
   our Saviour, that they took from the people the key of knowledge, Luke
   11. 52. and had made the word of God of none effect by their
   Traditions, Matt. 15. 6. but they never attempted what has been since
   practicised by their Successors in the Western Church, to take away the
   Ark of the Testament it self, and cut off not only the efficacy, but
   the very possession of the word of God by their Traditions. Surely this
   had been exceeding criminal from any hand: but that the Bishops and
   Governours of the Church, and the universal and infallible Pastor of
   it, who claim the office to interpret the Scriptures, exhort unto, and
   assist in the knowledge of them, should be the men who thus rob the
   people of them, carries with it the highest aggravations both of
   cruelty and breach of trust. If any man shall take away from the words
   of the Book of this prophecy says Saint John, Revel. 22. 19. God shall
   take away his part out of the Book of Life, and out of the holy City,
   and from the things which are written in this Book. What vengeance
   therefore awaits those, who have taken away not only from one Book, but
   at once the Books themselves, even all the Scripture, the whole Word of
   God?
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   SECT. VII.

   Historical reflexions upon the Events which have happen'd in the Church
   since the with-drawing of the Holy Scripture.

   'TWILL in this place be no useless contemplation to observe, after the
   Scriptures had been ravish'd from the people in the Church of Rome,
   what pitiful pretenders were admitted to succeed. And first, because
   Lay-men were presum'd to be illiterate, and easily seducible by those
   writings which were in themselves difficult, and would be wrested by
   the unlearned to their own destruction; Pictures were recommended in
   their stead, and complemented as the Books of the Laity, which soon
   improv'd into a necessity of their Worship, and that gross Superstition
   which renders Christianity abominated by Turks, and Jews, and Heathens
   unto this day.

   2. 1 would not be hasty in charging Idolatry upon the Church of Rome,
   or all in her Communion; but that their Image-worship is a most fatal
   snare, in which vast numbers of unhappy Souls are taken, no man can
   doubt who hath with any regard travail'd in Popish Countries. I my
   self, and thousands of others, whom the late Troubles, or other
   Occasions sent abroad, are and have been witnesses thereof. Charity,
   'tis true, believes all things, but it do's not oblige men to
   disbelieve their eyes. 'Twas the out-cry of Micah against the Danites,
   Jud. 18. 24. ye have taken away my Gods which I have made, and the
   Priest, and are gone away, and what have I more? But the Laity of the
   Roman Communion may enlarge the complaint and say; you have taken away
   the Oracles of our God, and set up every where among us graven and
   molten Images, and Teraphims, and what have we more? And 'twas lately
   the loud, and I doubt is still the unanswerable complaint of the poor
   Americans, that they were deny'd to worship their Pagod once in the
   year, when they who forbad them, worship'd theirs every day.

   3. THE Jews before the Captivity, notwithstanding the recent memory of
   the Miracles in Egypt and the Wilderness, and the first Conquest of the
   Land of Canaan, with those that succeeded under the Judges and Kings of
   Israel and Juda, as also the express Command of God, and the Menaces of
   Prophets, ever and anon fell to downright Idolatry: but after their
   return unto this day have kept themselves from falling into that Sin,
   tho' they had no Prophets to instruct them, no Miracles or Government
   to encourage or constrain them. The reason of which a very learned man
   in his discourse of Religious Assemblies takes to be, The reading and
   teaching of the Law in their Synagogues; which was perform'd with great
   exactness after the return from the Captivity, but was not so perform'd
   before. And may we not invert the observation, and impute the
   Image-worfhip now set up in the Christian Church to the forbidding the
   reading of the Scriptures in the Churches, and interdicting the private
   use, and institution of them?

   4. FOR a farther supplement in place of the Scriptures, whose History
   was thought not edifying enough, the Legends of the Saints were
   introduc'd; stories so stupid, that one would imagine them design'd as
   an experiment how far credulity could be impos'd upon; or else fram'd
   to a worse intent, that Christianity by them might be made ridiculous.
   Yet these are recommended to use and veneration, while in the mean time
   the word of God is utterly forbidden, whereby the parties to this
   unhappy practice (that I may speak in the words of the Prophet Jeremiah
   2. 13.) Have committed two evils, they have forsaken the fountain of
   living waters, hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold
   no water.

   5. FARTHER yet, the same unreasonable tyranny, which permitted not the
   Laity to understand Almighty God speaking to them in the Scripture,
   hinder'd them from being suffer'd to understand the Church or
   themselves speaking to him in their prayers; whilst the whole Roman
   office is so dispos'd, that in defiance of the Apostles discourse, 1
   Cor. 14. he that occupies the room of the unlearned must say amen to
   those prayers and praises which he has no comprehension of: and by his
   endless repetitions of Pater's, Ave's and Credo's, falls into that
   battology reprov'd by our Saviour, Mat. 6. 7. And as 'twas said of the
   woman of Samaria, Jo. 4. 22. knows not what he worships, Yet this
   unaccountable practice is so much the darling of that Church, that when
   in France about eighteen years since, the Roman Missal was translated
   into the vulgar Tongue, and publish'd by the direction of several of
   their Bishops, the Clergy of France rose up in great fury against the
   attempt, anathematizing in their circular Epistles, all that sold,
   read, or us'd the said Book: and upon complaint unto Pope 41ex. the 7.
   he resented the matter so deeply, as to issue out his Bull against it
   in the following words.

   6. WHEREAS sons of perdition, endeavouring the destruction of souls,
   have translated the Roman Missal into the French Tongue, and so
   attempted to throw down and trample upon the majesty of the holy Rites
   comprehended in Latin words: As we abominate and detest the novelty,
   which will deform the beauty of the Church, and produce disobedience,
   temerity, boldness, sedition and schism; so we condemn, reprobate and
   forbid, the said and all other such Transactions, and interdict the
   reading, and keeping, to all and singular the faithful, of whatever
   sex, degree, order, condition, dignity, honour, or preeminence, &c.
   under pain of excommunication. And we command the copies to be
   immediatly burnt, &c. So mortal a sin it seems 'twas thought for the
   Laity to understand the prayers in which they must communicate.

   7. NOR is this all; agreeable to the other attempts upon the holy
   Scripture was the bold insolence of making a new authentick Text in
   that unknown Tongue in which the offices of prayer had been, and were
   to be kept disguis'd; which was done by the decree of the Council of
   Trent in the fourth Session. But when the Council had given this
   Prerogative to the Version which it call'd vulgar, the succeeding Popes
   began to consider what that Version was; and this work Pius the fourth
   and fifth set upon, but prevented by death fail'd to compleat it; so
   that the honour of the performance fell to Sixtus the fifth, who in the
   plenitude of his Apostolick power, the Translation being reform'd to
   his mind, commanded it to be that genuine ancient Edition which the
   Trent Fathers had before made authentick, and under the pain of
   excommunication requir'd it to be so received: which he do's in this
   form.Of our certain knowledge, and the plenitude of Apostolick power,
   we order and declare that the vulgar Edition which has been receiv'd
   for authentick by the Council of Trent, is without doubt or controversy
   to be esteem'd this very one, which being amended as well as it is
   possible, and printed at the Vatican Press, we publish to be read in
   the whole Christian Republick, and in all Churches of the Christian
   world. Decreeing that it having been approv'd by the consent of the
   holy universal Church, and the holy Fathers, and then by the Decree of
   the general Council of Trent, and now by the Apostolick authority
   deliver'd to us by the Lord; is the true, legitimate authentick, and
   undoubted, which is to be received and held in all publick and private
   Disputations, Lectures, Preachings, and Expositions, &c. But
   notwithstanding this certain knowledge, and plenitude of Apostolick
   power, soon after came Clement the eighth, and again resumes the work
   of his Predecessor Sixtus, discovers great and many errours in it, and
   puts out one more reform'd, yet confess'd by himself to be imperfect;
   which now stands for the authentick Text, and carries the title of the
   Bible put forth by Sixtus, notwithstanding all its alterations. So well
   do's the Roman Church deserve the honour which she pretends to, of
   being the mistress of all Churches; and so infallible is the holy Chair
   in its determinations; and lastly, so authentick a Transcript of the
   word of God (concerning which 'tis said; Matt. 5. 18. one jot or one
   title shall not fail) is that which the establish'd, and that has
   receiv'd so many, and yet according to the confession of the infallible
   Corrector, wants still more alterations.

   8. DEPENDENT upon this, and as great a mischief as any of the former,
   consequent to the withdrawing of the Scripture, I take to be the step
   it made to the overthrow of the Ancient and most useful discipline of
   the Church in point of Penance, whose rigours always heretofore
   proceeded the possibility of having absolution. Now of this we know a
   solemn part was the state of Audience, when the laps'd person was
   receiv'd, after long attendance without doors, prostrations, and
   lamentations there, within the entrance of the Church; and was
   permitted with the Catechumens or Candidates of Baptism, to hear the
   readings of the Scripture, and stay till Prayer began, but then depart.
   He was oblig'd to hear the terrours of the Lord, the threats of the
   divine Law against sin and sinners, to stand among the unbaptiz'd and
   heathen multitude, and learn again the elements of that holy Faith from
   which he had prevaricated; and so in time be render'd capable of the
   devotions of the faithful, and afterwards of the reception of the
   Eucharist. But when the Scriptures were thought useless or dangerous to
   be understood and heard, it was consequent that the state of Audience
   should be cut off from Penance, and that the next to it, upon the
   self-same principle should be dismiss'd: and so the long probation
   formerly requir'd should be supplanted: and the compendious way of
   Pardoning first, and Repenting afterwards, the endless circle of
   Sinning and being Absolv'd, and then Sinning and being Absolv'd again,
   should prevail upon the Church. Which still obtains, notwithstanding
   the complaints, and irrefragable demonstrations of learned men even of
   the Romish Communion, who plainly shew this now receiv'd method to be
   an Innovation groundless and unreasonable, and most pernicious in its
   consequents.

   9 AND, by the way, we may take notice that there cannot be a plainer
   evidence of the judgement of the Church, concerning the necessity of
   the Scriptures being known, not only by the learned but mean
   Christians, and the interest they have therein, than is the ancient
   course of Penance, establish'd by the practice of all the first Ages,
   and almost as many Councils, whether general or local, as have decreed
   any thing concerning Discipline, with the Penitentiary Books and
   Canons, which are written for the first eleven hundred years in the
   whole Christian world. For if even the unbaptiz'd Catechumen, and the
   laps'd Sinner, notwithstanding their slender knowledge in the mysteries
   of Faith, or frail pretence to the priviledge thereof, had a right to
   the state of Audience, and was oblig'd to hear the Scripture read;
   surely the meanest unobnoxious Laick was in as advantageous
   circumstances, and might not only be trusted with the reading of those
   sacred Books, but might claim them as his birthright.

   10. I may justly, over and above what has been hitherto alledg'd,
   impute to the Governours of the same Church, and their withholding from
   the Laity the Holy Scripture, the many dangerous errours, gross
   ignorances, and scandalous immoralities which have prevail'd among them
   both. It is no new method of Divine vengeance, that there should be
   like People, like Priest, Hos. 4. 9. And that the idle Shepherd who led
   his flock into the ditch, should fall therein himself, Mat. 15. 14. And
   as the Prophet Zachary describes it, ch. 11. 17. The sword shall be
   upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up,
   and his right eye shall be utterly darkned.

   11. BUT no consequence can be more obviously deducible from that
   practice, than that men should justify the with-holding of the
   Scripture by lessening its Credit, and depreciating its Worth: which
   has occasion'd those reproaches which by the Writers of the Church of
   Rome, of best note, have been cast upon it. As that it was a Nose of
   wax, a leaden rule, a deaf and useless Deputy to God in the office of a
   Judge; of less authority than the Roman Church, and of no more credit
   than sops Fables, but for the testimony of the said Church; that they
   contain things apt to raise laughter or indignation, that the Latin
   Translation in the Complutensian Bible is placed between the Hebrew
   Text and the Septuagint Version, as our Saviour was at his Crucifixion
   between two thieves; and that the Vulgar Edition is of such authority
   that the Originals ought to be mended by it, rather than it should be
   mended from them: which are the complements of Cardinal Bellarmin,
   Hofius, Eckius, Perron, Ximines, Coqueus, and others of that Communion:
   words to be answer'd by a Thunderbolt, and fitter for the mouth of a
   Celsus or a Porphyry, than of the pious Sons, and zealous Champions of
   the Church of Christ.

   12. 'TIS to be expected that the Romanists should now wipe their
   mouths, and plead not guilty; telling us that they permit the Scripture
   to the Laity in their Mother Tongue: And to that purpose the Fathers of
   Rhemes and Doway have publish'd an English Bible for those of their
   Communion. I shall therefore give a short and plain account of the
   whole affair, as really it stands, and then on Gods Name let the
   Romanists make the best of their Apology.

   13. THE fourth rule of the Index of prohibited Books compos'd upon the
   command and auspice of the Council of Trent, and publish'd by the
   Authority of Pius the fourth, Sixtus the fifth, and Clement the eighth,
   runs thus: Since 'tis manifest by experience, that if the Holy Bible be
   suffer'd promiscuously in the Vulgar Tongue, such is the temerity of
   men, that greater detriment than advantage will thence arise; in this
   matter let the judgement of the Bishop or Inquisitor be stood to: that
   with the advice of the Curate or Confessor, they may give leave for the
   reading of the Bible in the vulgar Tongue, Translated by Catholicks, to
   such as they know will not receive damage, but increase of Faith and
   Piety thereby. Which faculty they shall have an writing; and whosoever
   without such faculty shall presume to have or to read the Bible, he
   shall not 'till he has deliver'd it up, receive Absolution of his Sins.
   Now (to pass over the iniquity of obliging men to ask leave to do that
   which God Almighty commands) when 'tis consider'd how few of the Laity
   can make means to the Bishop or, Inquisitor, or convince them, or the
   Curate or Confessor, that they are such who will not receive damage,
   but increase of Faith and Piety by the reading of the Scripture; and
   also have interest to prevail with them for their favour herein: and
   after all, can and will be at the charge of taking out the faculty,
   which is so penally requir'd: 'tis easy to guess what thin numbers of
   the Laity are likely, or indeed capable of reaping benefit by this
   Indulgence pretended to be allowed them.

   14. BUT, besides all this, what shall we say, if the power it self of
   giving Licences be a mere shew, and really signifies just nothing? In
   the observation subjoyn'd to this fourth rule it is declar'd, that the
   Impression and Edition thereof gives no new faculty to Bishops, or
   Inquisitors, or Superiors of regulars, to grant Licenses of buying,
   reading, or retaining Bibles publish'd in a vulgar Tongue; since
   hitherto by the command and practice of the holy Roman and universal
   Inquisition, the power of giving such faculties, to read or retain
   vulgar Bibles, or any parts of Scripture of the Old or New Testament,
   in any vulgar Tongue; or also summaries or historical compendiums of
   the said Bibles or Books of Scripture, in whatsoever Tongue they are
   written, has been taken away. And sure if a Lay-man cannot read the
   Bible without a faculty, and it is not in any ones power to grant it,
   'twill evidently follow that he cannot read it: And so the pretence of
   giving liberty, owns the shame of openly refusing it, but has no other
   effect or consequence. And if any Romanist among us, or in any other
   Protestant Country enjoys any liberty herein, 'tis merely by
   connivance, and owed to a fear lest the Votary would be lost, and take
   the Bible where it was without difficulty to be had, if strictness
   should be us'd. And should Popery, which God forbid, become paramount;
   the Translations of the Scripture into our Mother Tongues would be no
   more endur'd here, than they are in Spain and they who have formerly
   been wary in comunicating the Scriptures, remembring how thereby their
   errours have been detected, would upon a revolution effectually provide
   for the future, and be sure to keep their people in an Egyptian
   darkness that might it self be felt, but that allow'd the notices of no
   other object. They would not be content with that composition of the
   Ammonites, to thrust out all the right eyes of those that submitted to
   them, 1 Sam. 11. 2. but would put out both, as the Philistines did to
   Samson, that they might make their miserable captives for ever grind in
   their Mill, Jud. 16. 21.

   15. BUT this heaviest of judgements will never fall upon the reform'd
   Churches, till by their vicious practice and contempt of the divine
   Law, they have deferred their profession, and made themselves utterly
   unworthy of the blessings they enjoy, and the light of that Gospel
   which with noon-day brightness has shin'd among them. Upon which
   account, I suppose it may not be impertinent in the next place to
   subjoyn some plain directions, and cautionary advices, concerning the
   use of these sacred Books.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  SECT. VIII.

   Necessary cautions to be us'd in the reading of the holy Scriptures.

   IT is a common observation, that the most generous and sprightly
   Medicines are the most unsafe, if not apply'd with due care and
   regimen: and the remark holds as well in spiritual as corporal
   remedies. The Apostle asserts it upon his own experience, that the
   doctrine of the Gospel, which was to some the savour of life unto life,
   was to others the savour of death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. And the same effect
   that the oral Word had then, the written Word may have now; not that
   either the one or the other has any thing in it that is of it self
   mortiferous, but becomes so by the ill disposition of the persons who
   so pervert it. It is therefore well worth our inquiry, what
   qualifications on our part are necessary to make the Word be to us what
   it is in it self, the power of God unto salvation, Rom. 1. 16. Of these
   some are previous before our reading, some are concomitant with it, and
   some are subsequent and follow after it.

   2. OF those that go before, sincerity is a most essential requisite: by
   sincerity, I mean an upright intention, by which we direct our reading
   to that proper end for which the holy Scriptures were design'd: viz.
   the knowing God's will in order to the practising it. This honest
   simplicity of heart is that which Christ represents by the good ground,
   where alone it was that the seed could fructify, Matt. 13. 8. And he
   that brings not this with him, brings only the shadow of a Disciple.
   The word of God, is indeed, sharper than a two-edged sword, Heb. 4. 12.
   but what impression can a sword make on a body of air, which still
   slips from, and eludes its thrusts? And as little can all the practical
   discourses of Holy Writ make on him, who brings only his speculative
   faculties with him, and leaves his will and affections behind him;
   which are the only proper subjects for it to work on.

   3. TO this we may probably impute that strange, inefficaciousness we
   see of the Word. Alas! men rarely apply it to the right place: our most
   inveterate diseases lie in our morals, and we suffer the Medicine to
   reach no farther than our intellects. As if he that had an ulcer in his
   bowels should apply all his balsoms and sanatives only to his head.
   'Tis true, the holy Scriptures are the treasuries of divine Wisdom; the
   Oracles to which we should resort for saving knowledge: but they are
   also the rule and guide of holy Life: and he that covets to know God's
   will for any purpose but to practise it, is only studious to entitle
   himself to the greater number of stripes, Luke 12. 47.

   4. NAY farther, he that affects only the bare knowledge is oft
   disappointed even of that. The Scripture, like the Pillar of Fire and
   Cloud, enlightens the Israelites, those who sincerely resign themselves
   to its guidance; but it darkens and confounds the Egyptians, Exod. 14.
   20. And 'tis frequently seen, that those who read only to become
   knowing, are toll'd on by their curiosity into the more abstruse and
   mysterious parts of Scripture, where they entangle themselves in
   inextricable mazes and confusions; and instead of acquiring a more
   superlative knowledge, lose those easy and common notions which lye
   obvious to every plain well meaning Reader. I fear this Age affords too
   many, and too frequent instances of this, in men who have lost God in
   the midst of his Word, and study'd Scripture till they have renounc'd
   its Author.

   5. AND sure this infatuation is very just, and no more than God himself
   has warn'd us of, who takes the wise in their own craftiness, Job 5.
   13. but appropriates his fecrets only to them that fear him, and has
   promis'd to teach the meek his way, Psal. 25. 9, 14. And this was the
   method Christ observ'd in his Preaching, unveiling those truths to his
   Disciples, which to the Scribes and Pharisees, his inquisitive, yet
   refractory hearers, he wrapt up in parables; not that he dislik'd their
   desire of knowledge, but their want of sincerity: which is so fatal a
   defect as blasts our pursuit, tho' of things in themselves never so
   excellent. This we find exemplify'd in Simon Magus, Acts 8. who, tho'
   be coveted a thing in it self very desireable, the power of conferring
   the Holy Ghost, yet desiring it not only upon undue conditions, but for
   sinister ends, not only miss'd of that, but was (after all his
   convincement by the Apostles Miracle, and the engagement of his
   Baptism) immers'd in the gall of bitterness; and at last advanc'd to
   that height of Blasphemy, as to set up himself for a God, so becoming a
   lasting memento, how unsafe it is to prevaricate in holy things.

   6. BUT as there is a sincerity of the Will in order to practice, so
   there is also a sincerity of the Understanding in order to belief; and
   this is also no less requisite to the profitable reading of Scripture.
   I mean by this, that we come with a preparation of mind, to embrace
   indifferently whatever God there reveals as the object of our Faith;
   that we bring our own opinions, not as the clue by which to unfold
   Scripture, but to be try'd and regulated by it. The want of this has
   been of very pernicious consequence in matters both of Faith and
   Speculation. Men are commonly prepossess'd strongly with their own
   notions, and their errand to Scripture is not to lend them light to
   judge of them, but aids to back and defend them.

   7. OF this there is no Book of controversy that do's not give notorious
   proof. The Socinian can easily over-look the beginning of Saint John,
   that says, The Word was God, Joh. 1. 1. and all those other places
   which plainly assert the Deity dour Saviour, if he can divert to that
   other more agreeable Text, that the Father is greater than I. Among the
   Romanists, Peters being said to be first among the Apostles, Matt. 10.
   2. and that on that Rock Christ would build his Church, Matt. 16. 18.
   carrys away all attention from those other places, where Saint Paul
   says he was not behind the very chiefest of the Apostles, 2. Cor. 11.
   5. that upon him lay the care of all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 28. and
   that the Church was not built upon the foundation of some one, but all
   the twelve Apostles, Revelat. 21. 14. So it fares in the business of
   the Eucharist: This is my body, Matt. 26. 26. carrys it away clear for
   Transubstantiation, when our Saviours calling that which he drunk the
   fruit of the vine, Matt. 26. 29, and then Saint Paul's naming the
   Elements in the Lords Supper several times over, Bread and Wine; The
   Bread that we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? The
   Cup that we bless, is it not the Communion? &c. 1. Cor. 10. 16. And
   again, He that eats this Bread, and drinks this Cup unworthily, &c. 1.
   Cor. 11. 29. can make no appearance of an Argument.

   8. THUS men once engag'd ransack for Texts that carry some
   correspondency to the opinions they have imbib'd, and those how do they
   rack and scrue to bring to .a perfect conformity, and improve every
   little probability into a demonstration? On the other side, the
   contrary Texts the look on as enemies, and consider them no farther
   than to provide fences and guards against them: So they bring Texts not
   into the scales to weigh, but into the field to skirmish, as Partizans
   and Auxiliaries of such or such Opinions.

   9. By this force of prepossession it is, that that Sacred Rule, which
   is the measure and standard of all rectitude, is it self bow'd and
   distorted to countenance and abet the most contrary Tenets: and like a
   variable picture, represents differing shapes, according to the light
   in which you view it. And sure we cannot do it a worse office than to
   represent it thus dissonant to it self. Yet thus it must still be till
   men come unbyast to the reading of it. And certainly there is all the
   reason in the world they should do so: the ultimate end of our faith is
   but the salvation of our souls, 1. Pet. 1. 9. and we may be sure the
   Scripture can best direct us what Faith it is which will lead us to
   that end.

   10. WHY should we not then have the same indifference which a traveller
   hath, whether his way lie on this hand or that: so as it be the direct
   road to his journeys end? For although it be infinitely material that I
   embrace right principles, yet 'tis not so that this should be right
   rather than the other: and our wishes that it should be so proceed only
   from our prepossessions and fondness of our own conceptions, than which
   nothing is more apt to intercept the clear view of truth. It therefore
   nearly concerns us to deposit them, and to give up our selves without
   reserve to the guidance of Gods Word, and give it equal credit when it
   thwarts, as when it complies with our own notions.

   11. WITHOUT this, though we may call Scripture the rule of Faith, and
   judge of controversies; yet 'tis manifest we make it not so, but
   reserve still the last appeal to our own prejudicate fancies: and then
   no wonder, though we fall under the same occecation which our Saviour
   upbraids to the Jews, that seeing, we see not, neither do we
   understand, Matt. 13.14. For he that will not be sav'd Gods way, will
   hardly be so by his own. He that resolves not impartially to embrace
   all the Scriptures dictates comes to them as unsincerely, as the
   remnant of the Jews did to Jeremiah to inquire of the Lord for them,
   which be no sooner had done, but they protest against his message, Jer.
   41. 20. and may expect as fatal an event.

   12. BUT there are a set of men who deal yet more unsincerely with the
   Word; that read it insidiously, on purpose to collect matter of
   objection and cavil; that with a malicious diligence compare Texts in
   hope to find contradictions: and read attentively, but to no other end
   than to remark incoherences and defects in the stile: which when they
   think they have started, they have their design; and never will use a
   quarter of the same diligence in considering how they may be solv'd, or
   consulting with those who may assist them in it. For I think I may
   appeal to the generality of those who have rais'd the loudest clamours
   against the Scripture, whether they have endeavour'd to render
   themselves competent judges of it by inquiring into the Originals, or
   informing themselves of those local Customs, peculiar Idioms, and many
   other circumstances, by which obscure Texts are to be clear'd. And
   though I do not affirm it necessary to salvation that every man should
   do this; yet I may affirm it necessary to him that will pretend to
   judge of the Bible: and he that without this condemns it, do's it as
   manifest injury, as a judge that should pass sentence only upon the
   Indictment, without hearing the defence.

   13. AND certainly there cannot be any thing more unmanly and
   disingenuous, than for men to inveigh and condemn before they inquire
   and examine. Yet this is the thing upon which so many value themselves,
   assuming to be men of reason, for that for which the Scripture
   pronounces them brute Beasts, viz, the speaking evil of those things
   they understand not, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Would men use due diligence, no
   doubt many of those seeming contradictions would be reconcil'd, and the
   obscurities clear'd: and if any should after all remain, they might
   find twenty things fitter to charge it on, than want of verity or
   discourse in the inspir'd writers.

   14. ALAS what human writing is there of near that Antiquity, wherein
   there are not many passages unintelligible? And indeed, unless modern
   times knew all those national customs, obsolete Laws, particular Rites
   and Ceremonies, Phrases and proverbial Sayings, to which such ancient
   Books refer, 'tis impossible but some passages must still remain
   obscure. Yet in these we ordinarily have so much candour, as to impute
   their unintelligibleness to our own ignorance of those things which
   should clear them, the improprieties of stile to the variation that
   times make in dialects, or to the errors of Scribes, and do not
   presently exclaim against the Authors as false or impertinent, or
   discard the whole Book for some such passages.

   15. AND sure what allowances we make to other Books may with more
   reason be made to the Bible; which having been writ so many Ages since,
   past thro' infinite variety of hands, and (which is above all) having
   been the object of the Devils, and wicked mens malice, lies under
   greater disadvantages than any human composure: And doubtless men would
   be as equitable to that as they are to others, were it not that they
   more wish to have that false or irrational than any other Book. The
   plain parts of it, the precepts and threatnings speak clearer than they
   desire, gall and fret them; and therefore they will revenge themselves
   upon the obscurer: and seem angry that there are some things they
   understand not, when indeed their real displeasure is at those they do.

   16. A second qualification preparatory to reading the Scripture is
   reverence. When we take the Bible in our hands, we should do it with
   other sentiments and apprehensions than when we take a common Book;
   considering that it is the word of God, the instrument of our
   salvation, or upon our abuse of it, a promoter of our ruin.

   17. AND sure this, if duly apprehended, cannot but strike us with a
   reverential awe, make us to say with Jacob, Gen. 28. 16. surely God is
   in this place; controul all trifling fancies, and make us read, not for
   custome or divertisement, but with those solemn and holy intentions;
   which become the dignity of its Author. Accordingly we find holy men
   have in all Ages been affected with it; and some to the inward
   reverence of the mind have joyn'd the outward of the body also, and
   never read it but upon their knees: an example that may both instruct
   and reproach our profaneness; who commonly read by chance, and at a
   venture: If a Bible happen in our way, we take it up as we would do a
   Romance, or a Play-book; only herein we differ, that we dismiss it much
   sooner, and retain less of its impressions.

   18. IT was a Law of Numa, that no wan should meddle with divine things,
   or worship the Gods in passing or by accident, but make it a set and
   solemn business. And every one knows with how great ceremony and
   solemnity the Heathen Oracles were consulted. How great a shame is it
   then for Christians to defalk that reverence from the true God, which
   Heathens allow'd their false ones?

   19. NOW this proceeds sometimes from the want of that habitual
   reverence we should always have to it as Gods word, and sometimes from
   want of actually exciting it, when we go to read: for if the habit lye
   only dormant in us, and be not awak'd by actual consideration, it
   avails us as little in our reading, as the habitual strength of a man
   do's towards labour, when he will not exert it for that end.

   20. WE ought therefore, as to make it our deliberate choice to read
   Gods word; so when we do it, to stir up our selves to those solemn
   apprehensions of its dignity and authority, as may render us malleable,
   and apt to receive its impressions; for where there is no reverence,
   'tis not to be exspected there should be any genuine or lasting
   obedience.

   21. SAINT Austin in his Tract to Honoratus, of the advantage of
   believing, makes the first requisite to the knowledge of the Scriptures
   to be the love of them. Believe me, says he, every thing in the
   Scripture is Sublime and Divine, its truth and doctrine are most
   accommodate to the refreshment, and building up of our minds: and in
   all respects so order'd, that every one may draw thence what is
   sufficient for him; provided he approach it with Devotion, is Piety,
   and Religion. The proof of this may require much reasoning and
   discourse. But this I am first to perswade, that you do not hate the
   Authors, and then that you love them. Had we an ill opinion of Virgil,
   nay, if upon the account of the reputation he has gain'd with our
   Predecessors, we did not greatly love, before we understood him, we
   should never patiently go through all the difficult questions
   Grammarians raise about him. Many employ themselves in Commenting upon
   him; we esteem him most, whose Exposition most commends the Book, and
   shews that the Author, not only was free from errour, but did
   excellently well where he is not understood. And if such an account
   happen not to be given, we impute it rather to the Interpreter than the
   Poet.

   22. THUS the good Father; whose words I have transcrib'd at large, as
   being remarkable to the present purpose; he also shews that the mind of
   no Author is to be learnt from one averse to his doctrine: as that 'tis
   vain to enquire of Aristotles Books from one of a different Sect: Or of
   Archimedes from Epicurus: the discourse will be as displeasing as the
   speaker; and that shall be esteem'd absurd, which comes from one that
   is envy'd or despis'd.

   23. A third preparative to our reading should be prayer. The Scripture
   as it was dictated at first by the Holy Spirit, so must still owe its
   effects and influence to its co-operation. The things of God, the
   Apostle tells us, are spiritually discern'd, 1. Cor. 2. 14. And tho'
   the natural man may well enough apprehend the letter, and grammatical
   sense of the Word; yet its power and energy, that insinuative
   perswasive force whereby it works on hearts, is peculiar to the Spirit;
   and therefore without his aids, the Scripture whilst it lyes open
   before our eyes, may still be as a Book that seal'd Esai. 29. 11. be as
   ineffective as if the characters were illegible.

   24. BESIDES, our Saviour tells us, the devil is still busy to steal
   away the seed as soon as it is sown, Matt. 13. 19. And unless we have
   some better guard than our own vigilance, he is sure enough to prosper
   in his attempt. Let it therefore be our care to invoke the Divine Aid;
   and when ever we take the Bible into our hands, to dart up at least a
   hearty ejaculation, that we may find its effects in our hearts. Let us
   say with holy David, open thou mine eyes, O Lord, that I may see the
   wondrous things of thy Law. Blessed art thou O Lord, O teach me thy
   statutes, Psal. 119. Nay, indeed 'twill be fit matter of a daily solemn
   devotion, as our Church has made it an annual in the Collect on the
   second Sunday in Advent: a prayer so apt and fully expressive of what
   we should desire in this particular, that if we transcribe not only the
   example, but the very words, I know not how we can form that part of
   our devotion more advantageously.

   25. IN the second place we are to consider what is requir'd of us at
   the time of reading the Scripture; which consist principally in two
   things. The first of these is attention, which is so indispensably
   requisite, that without it all Books are alike, and all equally
   insignificant: for he that adverts not to the sense of what he reads,
   the wisest discourses signify no more to him, than the most exquisite
   Musick do's to a man perfectly deaf. The letters and syllables of the
   Bible are no more sacred than those of another Book; 'tis the sense and
   meaning only that is divinely inspir'd: and he that considers only the
   former may as well entertain himself with a spelling-book.

   26. WE must therefore keep our minds fix'd and attent to what we read:
   'tis a folly and Iightness not to do so in human Authors, but 'tis a
   sin and danger not to do so in this divine Book. We know there can
   scarce be a greater instance of contempt and disvalue, than to hear a
   man speak, and not at all mind what he says: yet this vilest affront do
   all those put upon God, who hear or read his Word, and give it no
   attention. Yet I fear the practice is not more impious than it is
   frequent: for there are many that read the Bible, who, if at the end of
   each Chapter they shall be call'd to account, I doubt could produce but
   very slender collections: and truly 'tis a sad consideration, that that
   sacred Book is read most attentively by those, who read it as some
   preach the Gospel, Phil. 1. 15. out of envy and strife. How curiously
   do men inspect, nay ransack and embowel a Text to find a pretence for
   cavil and objection; whilst men who profess to look there for life and
   salvation read with such a rechless heedlesness, as if it could tell
   them nothing they were concern'd in: and to such 'tis no wonder if
   their reading bring no advantage. God is not in this sense found of
   those that seek him not, Esai. 65. 1. 'tis Satans part to serve himself
   of the bare words and characters of holy Writ, for charms and amulets:
   the vertue God has put there consists in the sense and meaning, and can
   never be drawn out by drousy inadverting Readers.

   27. THIS unattentiveness fore-stalls all possibility of good. How shall
   that convince the understanding, or persuade the affections, which do's
   not so much as enter the imagination. So that in this case the seed
   seems more cast away than in any of those instances the parable gives,
   Matt. 13. In those it still fell upon the soil, but in this it never
   reaches that; but is scatter'd and dissipated, as with a mighty wind,
   by those thoughts which have prepossess'd the mind. Let no man
   therefore take this sacred Book into his hand, till he has turn'd out
   all distracting fancies and has his faculties free and vacant for those
   better objects which will there present themselves. And when he has so
   dispos'd himself for attention, then let him contrive to improve that
   attention to the best advantage.

   28. TO which purpose it may be very conducive to put it into some order
   and method. As for instance, when he reads the doctrinal part of
   Scripture, let him first and principally advert to those plain Texts
   which contain the necessary points of Faith: that he may not owe his
   Creed only to his education, the institution of his Parents or Tutors;
   but may know the true foundation on which it is bottom'd, viz. the word
   of God, and may thence be able to justify his Faith: and as Saint Peter
   exhorts, be ready to give an answer to every man that asks him a reason
   of the hope that is in him, 1 Pet. 3. 15. For want of this it is, that
   Religion fits so loose upon men, that every wind of doctrine blows them
   into distinct and various forms; till at last their Christianity it
   self vaporus away and disappears.

   29. BUT let men be careful thus to secure the foundation, and then
   'twill be commendable in them (who are capable of it) to aspire to
   higher degrees of speculation: yet even in these it will be their
   safest course chiefly to pursue such as have the most immediate
   influence on practice, and be more industrious to make observations of
   that sort, than curious and critical remarks or bold conjectures upon
   those mysteries on which God has spread a veil.

   30. BUT besides a mans own particular collections, it will be prudence
   in him to advantage himself of those of others, and to consult the
   learnedest and best Expositors; and that not only upon a present
   emergency, when he is to dispute a point; (as most do) but in the
   constant course of his reading, wherein he will most sedately, and
   dispassionately judge of the notions they offer.

   31. AS to the choice of the portions of Scripture to be read in course,
   though I shall not condemn that of reading the whole Bible in order,
   yet 'tis apparent that some parts of it (as that of the Levitical Law)
   are not so aptly accommodated to our present state, as others are; and
   consequently not so edificatory to us: and therefore I cannot see why
   any man should oblige himself to an equal frequency in reading them.
   And to this our Church seems to give her suffrage, by excluding such
   out of her publick Lessons. And if we govern our private reading by her
   measure it will well express our deference to her judgement; who has
   selected some parts of Scripture, nor that she would keep her children
   in ignorance of any, but because they tend most immediately to
   practice.

   32. NEITHER will the daily reading the Scripture in the Rubricks order
   hinder any man from acquainting himself with the rest. For he may take
   in the other parts as supernumeraries to his constant task, and read
   them as his leisure and inclination shall prompt. So that all the hurt
   that can accrue to him by this method, is the being invited to read
   sometimes extraordinary proportions.

   33. IF it be objected, that to those who daily hear the Church Service
   'twill be a kind of tautology, first to read those Lessons in private,
   which soon after they shall hear read publickly; I answer, that
   whatever men may please to call it, 'twill really be an advantage: For
   he that shall read a Chapter by himself with due consideration, and
   consulting of good Paraphrasts, will have div'd so far into the sense
   of it, that he will much better comprehend it when he hears it read: as
   on the other side, the hearing it read so immediately after, will serve
   to confirm and rivet the sense in his mind. The one is as the conning,
   the other the repeating the Lesson; which every School-boy can tell us
   is best done at the nearest distance to each other. But I shall not
   contend for this, or any particular method: let the Scriptures be read
   in proportion to every mans leisure and capacity, and read with
   attention; and we need not be scrupulous about circumstances when the
   main duty is secur'd.

   34. BUT as in the Doctrinal, so in the Preceptive part, there is a
   caution to be us'd in our attention. For we are to distinguish between
   those temporary precepts that were adapted to particular times and
   occasions, and such as are of perpetual obligation. He that do's not
   this may bring himself under the Jewish Law, or believe a necessity of
   selling all and giving it to the poor, because 'twas Christs command to
   the rich man; Matt. 19. or incur other considerable mischiefs.

   35. THUS frequently commands are put in comprehensive indefinite words,
   but concern only the generality to whom the Law is written and not
   those who are intrusted with the vindication of their contempt.
   Accordingly 'tis said, thou shalt not kill, Mark 10. 19. which concerns
   the private person but extends not to the Magistrate in the execution
   of his office, who is a revenger appointed by God, and bears not the
   sword in vain, Rom. 13. 4. So the injunction not to swear at all, Matt.
   5. 34. refers to the common transactions of life, but not those solemn
   occasions where an oath is to give glory to God, and is the end of all
   strife, Hebr. 6. 16. Yet these mistakes at this day prevail with
   Anabaptists and Quakers, and bottom their denyal of the Magistrates
   power to protect his Subjects by War, and to determine differences in
   Peace by the Oath of witnesses in judicial proceedings.

   36. THERE is another distinction we are to attend to; and that is
   between absolute and primary commands, and secundary ones: the former
   we are to set a special remark upon, as those upon whose observance or
   violation our Eternal Life or Death inseparably depends. And therefore
   our first and most solicitous care must be concerning them. I mention
   this not to divert any from aspiring to the highest degrees of
   perfection, but to reprove that preposterous course many take, who lay
   the greatest weight upon those things on which God lays the least; and
   have more zeal for oblique intimations, than for express downright
   commands; nay, think by the one to commute for the contempt of the
   other. For example, Fasting is recommended to us in Scripture, but in a
   far lower key than moral duties: rather as an expedient and help to
   vertue, than as properly a vertue it self. And yet we may see men
   scrupulous in that, who startle not at injustice and oppression (that
   clamorous sin that crys to Heaven) who pretend to mortify their
   appetites by denying it its proper food, or being luxurious in one sort
   of it; and yet glut their avarice, eat up the poor, and devour widows
   houses, Matt. 23.

   37. TO such as these 'twould be good advice to fix their attention on
   the absolute commands, to study moral Honesty and the essentials of
   Christianity; to make a good progress there, and do what God
   indispensably requires: and then it may be seasonable to think of
   voluntary oblations: but till then they are so far from Homage, that
   they are the most reproachful Flattery: an attempt to bribe God against
   himself; and a Sacrilege, like that of Dionysius, who took away
   Apollo's golden robe and gave him a stuff one.

   38. THE second thing requisite in our reading, is application: this is
   the proper end of our attention; and without this we may be very busy
   to very little purpose. The most laborious attention without it puts us
   but in the condition of those poor slaves that labour in the Mines, who
   with infinite toil dig that Ore of which they shall never partake. If
   therefore we will appropriate that rich treasure, we must apply, and so
   make it our own.

   39. LET us then at every period of Holy Writ reflect and look on our
   selves as the persons spoke to. When we find Philip giving Baptism to
   the Eunuch upon this condition, that he believe with all his heart,
   Acts 8. let us consider that unless we do so, our Baptism (like a thing
   surreptitiously obtain'd) conveys no title to us, will avail us
   nothing.

   40. WHEN we read our Saviours denunciation to the Jew, except ye
   repent, ye shall all likewise perish; Luke 13. 5. we are to look on it
   as if address'd immediately to our selves; and conclude as great a
   necessity of our repentance. In those black catalogues of crimes which
   the Apostle mentions, 1. Cor. 6. 10. and Gal. 5. 19, 20, 22. as
   excluding from the Kingdom of' Heaven, we are to behold our own guilts
   arraign'd and to resolve that the same crimes will as certainly shut
   Heaven gates against us, as those to whom those Epistles were
   immediately directed. In all the precepts of good life, and Christian
   Vertue, we are to think our selves as nearly and particularly
   concern'd, as if we had been Christs Auditors on the mount. So
   proportionably in all the threats and promises we are either to tremble
   or hope, according as we find our selves adhere to those sins or
   vertues to which they are affix'd.

   41. THIS close application would render what we read operative and
   effective, which without it will be useless and insignificant. We may
   see an instance of it in David; who was not at all convinc'd of his own
   guilt by Nathans parable (though the most apposite that was imaginable)
   till he roundly apply'd it, saying, thou art the man, 2 Sam. 12. And
   unless we treat our selves at the same rate, the Scripture may fill our
   heads with high notions, nay with many speculative truths which yet
   amounts to no more than the Devils Theology, Ja. 2. 19. and will as
   little advantage us.

   42. IT now remains that we speak of what we are to do after our
   reading; which may be summ'd up in two words: Recollect and practise.
   Our memories are very frail as to things of this nature. And therefore
   we ought to impress them as deep as we can, by reflecting on what we
   have read. It is an observation out of the Levitical Law, that those
   beasts only were clean, and fit for sacrifice, that chew'd the cud,
   Lev. 11. 4. And tho' the ceremony were Jewish, the moral is Christian,
   and admonishes us how we should revolve and ruminate on spiritual
   instructions. Without this what we hear or read slips insensibly from
   us, and like letters writ in chalk, is wiped out by the next succeeding
   thought but recollection engraves and indents the characters in the
   mind. And he that would duly use it would find other manner of
   impressions more affective and more lasting than bare reading will
   leave.

   43. WE find it thus in all Sciences: he that only reads over the rules,
   and lays aside the thoughts of them together with his Book will make
   but a slow advance; whilst he that plods and studies upon them, repeats
   and reinforces them upon his mind, soon arrives to an eminency. By this
   it was that David attain'd to that perfection in Gods Law as to
   out-strip his teachers, and understand more than the Ancients, Psal.
   119. 99, 100. because it was his meditation as himself tells us, ver.
   97. 99.

   44. LET us therefore pursue the same method; and when we have read a
   portion of Scripture, let us recollect what observable things we have
   there met with: what exhortions to vertue, or determents from vice;
   what promises to obedience, or menaces for the contrary; what examples
   of Gods vengeance against such or such sins, or what instances of his
   blessing upon duties. If we do this daily, we cannot but amass together
   a great stock of Scripture documents, which will be ready for us to
   produce upon every occasion. Satan can assault us no where, but we
   shall be provided of a guard, a Scriptum est; which we see was the sole
   armour the captain of our Salvation us'd in his encounter with him,
   Matt. 4. ver. 4. 7. and 10. and will be as successful to us, if we will
   duly manage it.

   45. THE last thing requir'd as consequent to our reading, is practice.
   This is the ultimate end, to which all the fore-going qualifications
   are directed. And if we fail here, the most assiduous diligence in all
   the former will be but lost labour. Let us mean never so well, attend
   never so close, recollect never so exactly, if after all we do not
   practise, all the rest will serve but to enhance our guilt.
   Christianity is an active Science, and the Bible was given us not
   merely for a theme of speculation, but for a rule of life.

   46. AND alas, what will it avail us that our opinions are right, if our
   manners be crooked? When the Scripture has shew'd us what God requires
   of us, nay, has evinc'd to us the reasonableness of the injunctions,
   the great agreeableness which they have to the excellency of our
   nature; and has back'd this with the assurance that in keeping of them
   there shall be a great reward, Psal. 19, 11. if in the midst of full
   importunate invitations to life we will choose death; we are indeed
   worthy, as the wise man speaks, to take part with it, Wisd. 1. 16. our
   crimes are hereby increas'd to a monstrous bulk, and also depriv'd of
   that veil and shelter which darkness and ignorance would have given
   them. And a vicious Christian may have cause at the last day to wish
   that he had studied the Alcoran rather than the Bible. His sensualities
   might then have pleaded, that they were but the anticipating his
   Paradise, taking up that before hand, which his Religion propos'd to
   him as his summum bonum, his final and highest aim. But with what
   confusion must a Christian then appear, whose institution obliges him
   to mortify the flesh, and yet has made it the business of' his life,
   not only to satisfy, but even to enrage, and enflame its appetites?
   that has set up a counter-discipline to that of the Gospel he
   professes; and when that requires austerities and self-denials, to
   reduce corrupt nature to a tameness and subjection, has not only pull'd
   off the bridle, but us'd the spur; contriv'd Arts to debauch even
   corruption it self; and has forc'd his relucting nature upon studied
   and artificial leudness? Such men may be thought to have read the
   Scripture with no other design but to be sure to run counter to it;
   that by informing themselves of Gods will they may know the more
   exactly how to affront and contradict it.

   47. NAY, so it is, too many unto malice add contempt; are not content
   only sullenly to resist its Precepts, but despise and revile them also,
   arraign the Wisdom of God, and pronounce the Divine Laws to be weak
   arid impertinent; lay their Scenes of ridiculous mirth in the Bible;
   rally in the Sacred Dialect, and play the Buffoons with the most
   serious thing in the world. An impious licentiousness which is now
   grown to that height, that it is one of the wonders of Gods
   long-suffering that there are not as many eminent instances of the
   vengeance, as there are of the guilt. I have formerly complain'd of it,
   and must still crave leave to do so. It is indeed so spreading an
   infection, that we can never be sufficiently arm'd against it. Some
   degrees of it have tainted many who have not utterly renouned their
   reverence for the Bible: there being those who in their solemn moods
   own it as Gods Word, and profess they must finally stand or fall by its
   verdict; who, yet in their jocular humours make light and irreverent
   applications of its phrases and sentences, furnish out their little
   jests in its attire, and use it as if they thought it good for nothing
   else.

   48. AND certainly this abuse in men that own the Bible, is infinitely
   more monstrous than in those who defy it: the latter look on it as a
   common thing, and use it as such: but for those who confess it Sacred
   thus to prostitute it, is a flat contradiction as much against the
   rules of Discourse as Religion: 'tis to offer the same abuse to Christ
   in his Word, which the rude Souldiers did to his Person; to bow the
   knee before it, and yet expose it as an object of scorn and laughter.
   But sure there cannot be two things more inconsistent, than the avowing
   it to be dictated by God in order to the most important concern of man,
   and yet debate it to the vilest purposes; make it the drudge and
   hackney to our sportful humours, and bring it out as the Philistines
   did Samson, only to make us merry, Jud. 16. 25.

   49. INDEED one would wonder how that should become a proper instrument
   for that purpose, that those doctrines of righteousness, temperance,
   and judgement to come (every where scatter'd thro' that Book) which set
   Heathen Felix a trembling, should set Christians a laughing: and yet
   should men cite the same things and phrases out of another Author,
   there would be no jest in it. It seems therefore that the spirit and
   essence in this sort of wit lyes in the profaness. How absurd is it
   then for men that do not utterly abjure Religion to affect this impious
   sort of raillery, which has nothing but daring wickedness to recommend
   it? for certainly of all the ways of discourse that ever pretended to
   wit, this has the least claim to it.

   50. WHAT strength of reason, or height of fancy is there in repeating
   of phrases and fragments of Books, when what they would say, they might
   much more properly express in their own words? In any other instance
   but this of the Bible, it would pass rather for a defect than an excess
   of wit. But that which 1 suppose renders it so taking, is, that it is
   the cheapest expedient for men to arrive to that reputation. Men, that
   cannot go to the cost of any thing that is truly ingenious, can by this
   means immediately commence wits; if they can but charge their memories
   with half a dozen Texts, they need no other furniture for the Trade:
   these mangled and transposed will be ready at all turns, and render
   them applauded by those who have no other treasure of wit, but its
   opposition to Piety. But would God, men would look a little before
   them, and consider what the final reckoning will be for such
   divertisements; and if the whole world be an unequal change for a Soul,
   what a miserable merchant is he that barters his for a bald insipid
   jest? Such as a sober man would avoid were there no sin in it.

   51. I know men are apt to Batter themselves, that these lighter
   frolicks will pass for nothing, so long as they do not seriously and
   maliciously oppose Gods Word: but I fear they will find God in earnest,
   tho' they be in jest. He that has magnified his Word above all things,
   Psal. 138. 2. cannot brook that we should make it vile and cheap, play
   and daily with it. And if it were a capital crime to convert any of the
   perfume of the Sanctuary to common use, Exod. 30. 32. can we think God
   can be pleas'd to see his more Sacred Word the Theme of our giddy
   mirth, and have his own words ecchoed to him in profane drollery?

   52. BUT besides 'tis to be consider'd, that this wanton liberty is a
   step to the more solemn and deliberate contempt of Gods word: custom
   do's strangely prescribe to us, and he that a while has us'd any thing
   irreverently will at last bring his practice into argument, and
   conclude that there is no reverence due to it. God knows we are
   naturally too apt to have slight and easy apprehensions of Sacred
   things, and had need to use all Arts and Instruments to impress an awe
   upon our minds.

   53. IT will sure then be very unsafe for us to trifle with them, and by
   so undue a familiarity draw on that contempt which we should make it
   our care to avoid. The Wise Man says, he that contemns small things,
   shall fall by little and little, Eccl. 19. 1. And tho' no degree of
   irreverence towards God or his Word, can be call'd a small thing
   absolutely consider'd, yet comparatively with the more exorbitant
   degrees it may: and yet that smaller is the seed and parent of the
   greatest. It is so in all sins: the kingdom of Satan, like that of God,
   may be compar'd to a grain of mustard seed, Mat. 31. 31. which tho'
   little in it self is mighty in its increase.

   54. NO man ever yet began at the top of villany, but the advance is
   still gradual from one degree to another; each commission smoothing and
   glibbing the way to the next. He that accustoms in his ordinary
   discourse to use the sacred Name of God with as little sentiment and
   reverence as he do's that of his neighbour or servant; that makes it
   his common by-word, and cries Lord and God upon every the lightest
   occasion of exclamation or wonder, this man has a very short step to
   the using it in oaths, and upon all frivolous occasions; and he that
   swears vainly is at no great distance from swearing falsely. It is the
   same in this instance of the Scriptures: He that indulges his wit to
   rally with them will soon come to think them such tame things that he
   may down-right scorn them: And when he is arriv'd to that, then he must
   pick quarrels to justify it, till at last he arrive even to the height
   of enmity.

   55. LET every man therefore take heed of setting so much as one step in
   this fatal circle; guard himself against the first insinuation of this
   guilt: and when a jest offers it self as a temptation, let him balance
   that with a sober thought, and consider whether the jest can quit the
   cost of the profanation. Let him possess his mind with an habitual awe,
   take up the Bible with solemner thoughts, and other kind of
   apprehensions than any human Author: and if he habituate himself to
   this reverence, every clause and phrase of it that occurs to his mind
   will be apter to excite him to devout ejaculations than vain laughter.

   56. IT is reported of our excellent Prince, King Edward the sixth; that
   when in his Council Chamber, a Paper that was call'd for happen'd to
   lie out of reach, and the Person concern'd to produce it took a Bible
   that lay by, and standing upon it reach'd down the Paper: the King
   observing what was done ran himself to the place, and taking the Bible
   in his hands kissed it, and laid it up again. Of this it were a very
   desirable moral that Princes, and all persons in authority, would take
   care not to permit any to raise themselves by either a hypocritical or
   profane trampling upon holy things. But besides that, a more general
   application offers its self; that all men of what condition soever
   should both themselves abstain from every action that has the
   appearance of a contempt of the holy Scripture; and also when they
   observe it in others; discountenance the insolence: and by their words
   and actions give Testimony of the veneration which they have for that
   holy Book, they see others so wretchedly despise.

   57. BUT above all, let him who reads the Scripture, seriously set
   himself to the practice of it, and daily examine how he proceeds in it:
   he that diligently do's this will not be much at leisure to sport with
   it: he will scarce meet with a Text which will not give him cause of
   reflection, and provide him work within his own breast: every duty
   injoin'd will prompt him to examine how he has perform'd: every sin
   forbidden will call him to recollect how guilty he has been; every
   pathetick strain of devotion will kindle his zeal, or at least upbraid
   his coldness; every heroick example will excite his emulation. In a
   word, every part of Scripture will, if duly apply'd, contribute to some
   good and excellent end. And when a thing is proper for such noble
   purposes, can it be the part of a wise man to apply it only to mean and
   trivial? Would any but an Idiot wast that Sovereign Liquor in the
   washing of his feet, which was given him to expell poison from his
   heart? And are not we guilty of the like folly when we apply Gods word
   to serve only a ludicrous humour; and make ourselves merry with that
   which was design'd for the most serious and most important purpose, the
   salvation of our Souls. And indeed who ever takes any lower aim than
   that, and the vertues preparatory to it in his study of Scripture,
   extremely debases it.

   58. LET us therefore keep a steady eye upon that mark, and press
   towards it as the Apostle did, Phil. 3. 14. walk by that rule the holy
   Scripture proposes; faithfully and diligently observe its precepts,
   that we may finally partake it promises. To this end continually pray
   we, in the words of our holy mother the Church, unto Almighty God, who
   has caus'd all holy Scripture to be written for our learning; that we
   may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest
   them, that by patience and comfort of his holy Word, we may embrace and
   ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting Life, which he has given
   us in our Saviour Jesus Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 THE CONTENTS.

SECTION.

   Sect. 1. The several methods of Gods communicating the knowledge of
   himself.

   Pag. 1.

   Sect. 2. The divine Original, Endearments; and Authority of the Holy
   Scripture.

   p. 9.

   Sect. 3. The Subject Matter treated of in the holy Scripture is
   excellent, as is also its end and deign.

   p. 63.

   Sect. 4. The Custody of the holy Scripture is a privilege and right of
   the Christian Church, and every member of it, which cannot without
   impiety to God, and injustice unto it and them, be taken away or
   impeach'd.

   p. 123.

   Sect 5. The Scripture has great propriety and fitness towards the
   attainment of its excellent end.

   p. 145.

   Sect. 6. the suffrage of the primitive Christian Church, concerning the
   propriety and fitness which the Scripture has, towards the attainment
   of its excellent end.

   p. 165.

   Sect. 7. Historical reflections upon the events which have happen'd in
   the Church, since the withdrawing of the holy Scripture.

   p. 180.

   Sect. 8. Necessary Cautions to be us'd in the reading of the Scripture.

   p. 193.

FINIS.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:31   [2]2:1-25   [3]2:7   [4]3:15   [5]4:4   [6]5:15   [7]9:13
   [8]14:1-24   [9]15:18-21   [10]18:12   [11]18:18   [12]18:25
   [13]22:11   [14]28:16   [15]37:19

   Exodus

   [16]4:14   [17]8:19   [18]14:12   [19]14:20   [20]15:11   [21]18:11
   [22]20:1-26   [23]30:32   [24]31:18   [25]32:4   [26]34:29   [27]45:19

   Leviticus

   [28]11:4

   Numbers

   [29]12:1   [30]20:24   [31]23:19   [32]23:19

   Deuteronomy

   [33]6:1-25   [34]11:9   [35]11:21   [36]13:1   [37]21:20   [38]28:1
   [39]28:1-13   [40]28:1-68   [41]28:1-68   [42]28:65-67   [43]30:14
   [44]30:19   [45]31:19

   Judges

   [46]16:21   [47]16:25   [48]18:24

   1 Samuel

   [49]11:2   [50]15:17

   2 Samuel

   [51]12:7

   1 Kings

   [52]21:19   [53]21:23

   2 Kings

   [54]15:10   [55]22:10

   Nehemiah

   [56]1:18

   Job

   [57]4:19   [58]5:13   [59]19:25   [60]20:22

   Psalms

   [61]1:2   [62]1:6   [63]12:6   [64]15:4   [65]19:7   [66]19:7
   [67]19:10   [68]19:11   [69]22:1   [70]22:8   [71]22:16-17
   [72]22:18   [73]25:9   [74]25:14   [75]27:10   [76]34:8   [77]34:9
   [78]37:19   [79]48:2   [80]50:10   [81]51:4   [82]55:22   [83]55:23
   [84]58:11   [85]62:9   [86]69:11   [87]73:1-28   [88]78:5
   [89]95:1-11   [90]106:15   [91]109:1-31   [92]119:1-176   [93]119:24
   [94]119:50   [95]119:72   [96]119:97   [97]119:99   [98]119:99
   [99]119:99-100   [100]119:105   [101]126:3   [102]138:2   [103]140:11
   [104]147:20

   Proverbs

   [105]3:16   [106]3:35   [107]4:1   [108]9:11   [109]10:3   [110]10:3
   [111]10:7   [112]10:7   [113]10:22   [114]13:25   [115]14:8
   [116]14:13   [117]31:31

   Ecclesiastes

   [118]7:29   [119]12:13-14   [120]19:1

   Isaiah

   [121]1:3   [122]1:11   [123]1:13   [124]2:4   [125]5:3   [126]7:14
   [127]8:20   [128]14:20-21   [129]17:15   [130]18:20   [131]19:1-25
   [132]29:11   [133]44:1-28   [134]44:25   [135]44:28   [136]48:22
   [137]49:15   [138]49:15   [139]53:5   [140]53:9   [141]53:10
   [142]53:11   [143]57:15   [144]57:15   [145]59:5   [146]61:1-11
   [147]65:1

   Jeremiah

   [148]2:11   [149]2:13   [150]5:22   [151]7:4   [152]7:9-11   [153]8:7
   [154]10:1-25   [155]31:31   [156]41:20

   Ezekiel

   [157]2:5   [158]18:29   [159]18:31-32

   Daniel

   [160]7:13   [161]9:26

   Hosea

   [162]2:19   [163]4:9   [164]11:4   [165]11:8

   Habakkuk

   [166]1:13   [167]2:2   [168]2:6

   Zechariah

   [169]11:17   [170]12:10

   Malachi

   [171]1:14

   Matthew

   [172]2:5   [173]4:4   [174]4:7   [175]4:10   [176]5:1   [177]5:11-12
   [178]5:16   [179]5:18   [180]5:34   [181]5:48   [182]6:7   [183]6:32
   [184]6:33   [185]7:7   [186]7:11   [187]7:21-27   [188]10:2
   [189]12:34   [190]12:42   [191]13:1-58   [192]13:8   [193]13:11
   [194]13:14   [195]13:19   [196]13:47   [197]15:6   [198]15:6
   [199]15:14   [200]16:18   [201]16:18   [202]17:1   [203]19:8
   [204]19:16-24   [205]21:25   [206]21:36   [207]23:1-39   [208]23:23
   [209]24:11   [210]24:24   [211]25:14   [212]25:21   [213]25:29
   [214]26:8   [215]26:26   [216]26:29   [217]26:65   [218]27:43
   [219]31:31

   Mark

   [220]9:48   [221]10:19   [222]16:15

   Luke

   [223]4:18   [224]10:16   [225]10:26   [226]11:52   [227]11:52
   [228]12:47   [229]13:5   [230]13:28   [231]16:31   [232]16:31
   [233]18:12   [234]24:13   [235]24:49

   John

   [236]1:1   [237]3:2   [238]3:16   [239]4:22   [240]5:39   [241]5:39
   [242]5:43   [243]7:1-52   [244]7:17   [245]8:9   [246]8:34
   [247]10:1   [248]11:1-57   [249]11:1-57   [250]12:48   [251]12:48
   [252]13:13   [253]15:13   [254]20:10   [255]20:31

   Acts

   [256]2:1-12   [257]2:13   [258]4:20   [259]4:22   [260]4:24
   [261]5:18   [262]5:28   [263]5:40   [264]7:1-60   [265]7:38
   [266]8:1-40   [267]8:26-39   [268]10:43   [269]10:45-46   [270]12:22
   [271]13:27   [272]15   [273]17:11   [274]19:19

   Romans

   [275]1:7   [276]1:16   [277]1:16   [278]2:7   [279]3:2   [280]3:2
   [281]3:4   [282]6:1-23   [283]8:17   [284]8:17   [285]8:18
   [286]8:18   [287]8:28   [288]9:4   [289]10:18   [290]11:8   [291]13:4
   [292]13:7

   1 Corinthians

   [293]1:1   [294]1:2   [295]2:6   [296]2:6   [297]2:14   [298]6:10
   [299]7:29   [300]9:16-17   [301]9:17   [302]10:13   [303]10:16
   [304]11:29   [305]13:12   [306]14:16   [307]15:28

   2 Corinthians

   [308]1:20   [309]2:16   [310]4:4   [311]4:5   [312]4:6   [313]4:11
   [314]7:1-16   [315]8:21   [316]8:21   [317]10:5   [318]11:5
   [319]11:28   [320]12:16

   Galatians

   [321]1:2   [322]1:8   [323]1:12   [324]2:7   [325]3:24   [326]3:25
   [327]4:7   [328]5:19-20   [329]5:22

   Ephesians

   [330]1:1   [331]1:14   [332]3:6   [333]4:23   [334]6:13

   Philippians

   [335]1:1   [336]1:15   [337]3:14

   Colossians

   [338]2:3   [339]2:15   [340]4:16

   1 Thessalonians

   [341]2:4   [342]4:17   [343]5:21   [344]5:22   [345]5:22   [346]5:27

   2 Thessalonians

   [347]2:11

   1 Timothy

   [348]1:11   [349]3:15   [350]3:15   [351]3:16   [352]4:8   [353]4:9
   [354]6:20

   2 Timothy

   [355]3:15   [356]3:15

   Titus

   [357]1:3

   Hebrews

   [358]1:1-2   [359]4:12   [360]4:12   [361]4:14   [362]6:6   [363]6:16
   [364]9:14   [365]10:1   [366]10:16   [367]10:27   [368]10:27
   [369]10:29   [370]12:9   [371]12:10   [372]12:29

   James

   [373]1:1   [374]2:19   [375]3:6   [376]3:17   [377]4:7

   1 Peter

   [378]1:1   [379]1:9   [380]1:12   [381]1:15   [382]1:25   [383]3:15

   2 Peter

   [384]1:1-21   [385]1:3   [386]1:4   [387]2:12   [388]3:16

   1 John

   [389]2:12-14   [390]3:2   [391]3:8

   2 John

   [392]1:1

   Revelation

   [393]1:4   [394]2:10   [395]6:14   [396]10:6   [397]10:9   [398]14:6
   [399]20:21   [400]21:14   [401]22:11   [402]22:19

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [403]1:16   [404]2:24   [405]11:26   [406]12:26
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Agenda: [407]1
     * Credenda: [408]1
     * Postulata: [409]1
     * Scriptum est: [410]1
     * depositum: [411]1 [412]2 [413]3 [414]4
     * summum bonum: [415]1
     * supersedens: [416]1
     * viva voce: [417]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [418]i  [419]ii  [420]iii  [421]iv  [422]v  [423]vi  [424]vii
   [425]viii  [426]ix  [427]x  [428]xi  [429]1  [430]2  [431]3  [432]4
   [433]5  [434]6  [435]7  [436]8  [437]9  [438]10  [439]11  [440]12
   [441]13  [442]14  [443]15  [444]16  [445]17  [446]12  [447]19  [448]20
   [449]21  [450]22  [451]23  [452]24  [453]25  [454]26  [455]27  [456]28
   [457]29  [458]30  [459]31  [460]32  [461]33  [462]34  [463]35  [464]36
   [465]37  [466]38  [467]39  [468]40  [469]41  [470]42  [471]43  [472]44
   [473]45  [474]46  [475]47  [476]48  [477]49  [478]50  [479]51  [480]52
   [481]53  [482]54  [483]55  [484]56  [485]57  [486]58  [487]59  [488]60
   [489]61  [490]62  [491]63  [492]64  [493]65  [494]66  [495]67  [496]68
   [497]69  [498]70  [499]71  [500]72  [501]73  [502]74  [503]75  [504]76
   [505]77  [506]78  [507]79  [508]80  [509]81  [510]82  [511]83  [512]84
   [513]85  [514]86  [515]87  [516]88  [517]89  [518]90  [519]91  [520]92
   [521]93  [522]94  [523]95  [524]96  [525]97  [526]98  [527]99
   [528]100  [529]101  [530]102  [531]103  [532]104  [533]105  [534]106
   [535]107  [536]108  [537]109  [538]110  [539]111  [540]112  [541]113
   [542]114  [543]115  [544]116  [545]117  [546]118  [547]119  [548]120
   [549]121  [550]122  [551]124  [552]125  [553]126  [554]127  [555]128
   [556]129  [557]130  [558]131  [559]132  [560]133  [561]134  [562]135
   [563]136  [564]137  [565]138  [566]139  [567]140  [568]141  [569]142
   [570]143  [571]144  [572]146  [573]147  [574]148  [575]149  [576]150
   [577]151  [578]152  [579]153  [580]154  [581]155  [582]156  [583]157
   [584]158  [585]159  [586]160  [587]161  [588]162  [589]163  [590]164
   [591]165  [592]166  [593]167  [594]168  [595]169  [596]170  [597]171
   [598]172  [599]173  [600]174  [601]175  [602]176  [603]177  [604]178
   [605]179  [606]180  [607]181  [608]182  [609]183  [610]184  [611]185
   [612]186  [613]187  [614]188  [615]189  [616]190  [617]191  [618]192
   [619]193  [620]194  [621]195  [622]196  [623]197  [624]198  [625]200
   [626]201  [627]203  [628]204  [629]205  [630]206  [631]207  [632]208
   [633]209  [634]210  [635]211  [636]212  [637]213  [638]214  [639]215
   [640]216  [641]217  [642]218  [643]219  [644]220  [645]221  [646]222
   [647]223  [648]224  [649]225  [650]226
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v-p42.1
   2. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vii-p14.4
   3. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v-p3.1
   4. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v-p10.5
   5. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v-p69.2
   6. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iv-p20.2
   7. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v-p59.4
   8. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vii-p14.1
   9. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=18#v-p10.2
  10. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=12#v-p10.1
  11. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=18#v-p3.3
  12. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=25#iv-p7.3
  13. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=11#v-p10.4
  14. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=16#x-p18.1
  15. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=19#iv-p58.1
  16. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v-p4.1
  17. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=8&scrV=19#iv-p31.1
  18. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=12#v-p83.2
  19. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=20#x-p5.1
  20. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=11#v-p15.6
  21. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=11#iv-p31.5
  22. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=1#vii-p10.1
  23. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=32#x-p52.2
  24. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=18#vii-p29.2
  25. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=4#v-p5.2
  26. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=29#ii-p7.1
  27. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=45&scrV=19#iv-p19.3
  28. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=11&scrV=4#x-p43.1
  29. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v-p5.1
  30. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=24#v-p4.2
  31. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=19#iv-p19.2
  32. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=19#iv-p57.1
  33. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi-p2.1
  34. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=9#v-p52.1
  35. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=21#v-p52.2
  36. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv-p31.2
  37. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=21&scrV=20#iv-p5.2
  38. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=1#v-p49.2
  39. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=1#v-p49.1
  40. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=1#v-p9.1
  41. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=1#v-p64.1
  42. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=65#v-p69.3
  43. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=14#iv-p9.1
  44. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=19#v-p74.1
  45. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=31&scrV=19#vii-p30.1
  46. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=16&scrV=21#ix-p15.2
  47. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=16&scrV=25#x-p49.1
  48. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=18&scrV=24#ix-p3.1
  49. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=2#ix-p15.1
  50. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=17#v-p8.1
  51. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=7#x-p42.1
  52. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v-p9.2
  53. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=23#v-p9.2
  54. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v-p9.3
  55. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=10#vii-p30.2
  56. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii-p30.3
  57. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v-p3.2
  58. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=13#x-p6.1
  59. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=25#v-p13.6
  60. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=20&scrV=22#v-p65.3
  61. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v-p54.2
  62. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v-p54.2
  63. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iv-p2.2
  64. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=4#v-p89.2
  65. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=7#ii-p6.3
  66. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=7#iii-p12.1
  67. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=10#v-p2.2
  68. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=11#x-p47.1
  69. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=1#v-p14.2
  70. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=8#v-p14.3
  71. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=16#v-p14.1
  72. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=18#v-p14.8
  73. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=9#x-p6.2
  74. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=14#x-p6.2
  75. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=10#iv-p11.2
  76. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=8#ii-p6.1
  77. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=9#v-p49.3
  78. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=19#v-p49.4
  79. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=2#iv-p7.1
  80. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=10#v-p49.8
  81. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=4#iv-p2.1
  82. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=22#v-p88.4
  83. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=23#v-p66.1
  84. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=58&scrV=11#vii-p4.1
  85. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=9#iv-p19.1
  86. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=11#v-p14.5
  87. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=1#v-p65.1
  88. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=5#vi-p3.4
  89. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=1#viii-p20.2
  90. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=15#v-p65.2
  91. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=1#v-p9.4
  92. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=1#x-p25.2
  93. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=24#iv-p9.2
  94. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=50#iv-p9.3
  95. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=72#iv-p9.4
  96. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=97#x-p44.2
  97. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=99#iv-p9.5
  98. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=99#x-p44.2
  99. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=99#x-p44.1
 100. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=105#v-p79.1
 101. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=3#iv-p12.1
 102. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=138&scrV=2#x-p52.1
 103. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=140&scrV=11#v-p64.2
 104. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=20#v-p94.1
 105. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v-p52.4
 106. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=35#v-p53.1
 107. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv-p5.1
 108. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=11#v-p52.3
 109. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=3#v-p49.5
 110. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=3#v-p64.3
 111. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=7#v-p53.3
 112. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=7#v-p66.2
 113. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=22#v-p65.4
 114. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=25#v-p64.4
 115. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=8#v-p80.3
 116. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v-p57.2
 117. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=31&scrV=31#v-p53.2
 118. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=29#v-p43.1
 119. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v-p81.2
 120. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=19&scrV=1#x-p54.1
 121. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v-p15.1
 122. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v-p18.2
 123. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v-p18.2
 124. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v-p92.1
 125. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v-p17.2
 126. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v-p11.1
 127. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=20#vii-p31.1
 128. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=20#v-p66.3
 129. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=17&scrV=15#vii-p9.2
 130. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=18&scrV=20#iv-p27.1
 131. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=19&scrV=1#vii-p13.1
 132. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=11#x-p24.2
 133. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=1#v-p17.4
 134. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=25#iv-p15.2
 135. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=28#v-p10.3
 136. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=22#v-p57.1
 137. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=15#iv-p11.1
 138. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=15#v-p16.2
 139. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#v-p13.3
 140. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=9#v-p14.7
 141. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#v-p13.4
 142. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=11#v-p13.5
 143. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#v-p15.5
 144. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#vii-p9.1
 145. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=5#v-p76.1
 146. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=1#v-p11.3
 147. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=1#x-p27.2
 148. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v-p15.3
 149. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=13#ix-p5.1
 150. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v-p15.4
 151. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=4#v-p19.1
 152. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=9#v-p19.2
 153. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=7#v-p15.2
 154. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v-p17.5
 155. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=31#v-p55.1
 156. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=41&scrV=20#x-p12.2
 157. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=5#vi-p30.1
 158. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=29#v-p17.3
 159. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=31#v-p16.4
 160. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=13#iv-p7.4
 161. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=26#v-p13.2
 162. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v-p16.1
 163. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=4&scrV=9#ix-p11.1
 164. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=4#v-p16.3
 165. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=8#v-p16.5
 166. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v-p24.1
 167. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v-p81.1
 168. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v-p50.1
 169. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=17#ix-p11.3
 170. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v-p14.6
 171. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv-p7.2
 172. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v-p11.2
 173. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=4#x-p45.2
 174. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=7#x-p45.2
 175. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=10#x-p45.2
 176. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv-p20.1
 177. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v-p54.1
 178. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#v-p88.3
 179. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=18#ix-p8.1
 180. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=34#x-p36.3
 181. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#iii-p12.2
 182. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=7#ix-p6.2
 183. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=32#v-p49.7
 184. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#v-p49.6
 185. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v-p59.5
 186. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v-p59.2
 187. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=21#v-p32.3
 188. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=2#x-p8.2
 189. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=34#ii-p2.1
 190. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=42#iv-p15.1
 191. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=1#x-p28.1
 192. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=8#x-p3.1
 193. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iv-p42.4
 194. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=14#x-p12.1
 195. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=19#x-p25.1
 196. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=47#vii-p5.1
 197. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=6#vii-p31.3
 198. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=6#viii-p24.2
 199. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=14#ix-p11.2
 200. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#vi-p5.6
 201. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#x-p8.3
 202. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#ii-p7.2
 203. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=8#v-p34.1
 204. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=16#x-p35.1
 205. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=25#iv-p54.1
 206. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=36#iii-p10.1
 207. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=1#x-p37.1
 208. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=23#v-p18.3
 209. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=11#iv-p31.3
 210. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=24#iv-p31.3
 211. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=14#v-p60.2
 212. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=21#v-p60.3
 213. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=29#v-p59.1
 214. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=8#v-p62.1
 215. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=26#x-p8.7
 216. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=29#x-p8.8
 217. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=65#iv-p44.1
 218. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=43#v-p14.4
 219. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=31&scrV=31#x-p54.2
 220. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=48#v-p71.1
 221. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=19#x-p36.1
 222. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=15#v-p95.1
 223. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v-p11.4
 224. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=16#iii-p8.2
 225. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=26#vii-p31.2
 226. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=52#vi-p9.1
 227. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=52#viii-p24.1
 228. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=47#x-p4.1
 229. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=5#x-p41.1
 230. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=28#v-p71.2
 231. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=31#ii-p10.1
 232. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=31#iv-p63.1
 233. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=12#vi-p16.1
 234. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=13#v-p10.7
 235. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=49#iv-p34.1
 236. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#x-p8.1
 237. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii-p6.2
 238. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v-p89.3
 239. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=22#ix-p6.3
 240. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#i-p2.1
 241. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#vi-p3.6
 242. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=43#iv-p21.1
 243. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iv-p3.1
 244. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=17#iv-p68.1
 245. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iv-p66.1
 246. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=34#v-p83.1
 247. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=1#viii-p20.4
 248. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vii-p14.2
 249. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vii-p14.3
 250. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=48#ii-p1.2
 251. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=48#iv-p7.7
 252. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=13#iv-p7.5
 253. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iv-p12.2
 254. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iv-p34.2
 255. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=31#vi-p6.1
 256. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv-p38.1
 257. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv-p59.1
 258. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv-p34.3
 259. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=22#v-p13.1
 260. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v-p13.1
 261. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv-p34.4
 262. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iv-p37.1
 263. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=40#iv-p34.4
 264. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iv-p42.1
 265. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=38#iii-p7.1
 266. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=1#x-p6.3
 267. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=26#x-p40.1
 268. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=43#v-p10.6
 269. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=45#iv-p42.2
 270. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=22#iv-p7.6
 271. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=27#vi-p3.5
 272. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#viii-p20.1
 273. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#vi-p3.7
 274. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=19#ii-p9.1
 275. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vi-p6.2
 276. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii-p6.1
 277. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#x-p2.2
 278. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v-p87.1
 279. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi-p3.2
 280. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi-p4.1
 281. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv-p31.6
 282. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=1#v-p84.1
 283. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#v-p28.1
 284. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#v-p28.3
 285. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#v-p28.4
 286. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#v-p60.1
 287. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#v-p88.5
 288. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vi-p3.1
 289. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iv-p37.2
 290. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=8#iv-p67.2
 291. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=4#x-p36.2
 292. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v-p89.1
 293. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p6.4
 294. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi-p6.3
 295. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv-p18.1
 296. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v-p80.1
 297. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#x-p24.1
 298. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=10#x-p41.2
 299. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#v-p92.2
 300. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=16#vi-p4.7
 301. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=17#vi-p4.2
 302. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v-p59.3
 303. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=16#x-p8.9
 304. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#x-p8.10
 305. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#v-p60.5
 306. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=16#ix-p6.1
 307. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#v-p2.1
 308. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv-p19.4
 309. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#x-p2.1
 310. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi-p8.1
 311. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv-p67.1
 312. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii-p5.1
 313. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii-p13.2
 314. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#viii-p20.3
 315. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=21#v-p53.5
 316. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=21#v-p88.1
 317. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iv-p17.2
 318. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=5#x-p8.4
 319. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=28#x-p8.5
 320. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=16#v-p17.1
 321. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi-p6.5
 322. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#viii-p20.5
 323. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv-p42.3
 324. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi-p4.3
 325. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=24#vi-p3.8
 326. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=25#vii-p8.1
 327. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi-p7.2
 328. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=19#x-p41.3
 329. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#x-p41.3
 330. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p6.6
 331. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi-p7.3
 332. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v-p94.2
 333. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=23#v-p56.1
 334. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v-p85.1
 335. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p6.9
 336. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=15#x-p27.1
 337. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=14#x-p59.1
 338. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv-p14.1
 339. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v-p85.3
 340. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vi-p6.7
 341. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi-p4.4
 342. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v-p60.4
 343. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv-p3.2
 344. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v-p53.4
 345. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v-p88.2
 346. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=27#vi-p6.8
 347. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv-p31.4
 348. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi-p4.5
 349. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi-p5.5
 350. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi-p17.1
 351. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii-p6.1
 352. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v-p48.1
 353. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v-p29.1
 354. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=20#vi-p6.15
 355. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv-p17.1
 356. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v-p78.1
 357. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi-p4.6
 358. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p8.1
 359. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#ii-p8.1
 360. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#x-p3.2
 361. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv-p17.3
 362. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v-p67.2
 363. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=16#x-p36.4
 364. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#v-p56.2
 365. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vi-p5.1
 366. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=16#v-p55.2
 367. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=27#v-p69.1
 368. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=27#vii-p4.2
 369. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=29#v-p67.1
 370. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=9#iv-p6.1
 371. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iv-p6.2
 372. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=29#v-p73.1
 373. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p6.10
 374. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#x-p42.2
 375. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=6#ii-p1.1
 376. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v-p80.2
 377. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v-p85.2
 378. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p6.11
 379. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=9#x-p10.1
 380. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v-p27.1
 381. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v-p22.1
 382. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v-p27.2
 383. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=15#x-p29.1
 384. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p6.12
 385. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p7.2
 386. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v-p58.1
 387. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#x-p14.1
 388. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p67.3
 389. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi-p6.16
 390. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v-p60.6
 391. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v-p38.2
 392. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p6.17
 393. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi-p6.13
 394. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v-p28.2
 395. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=14#ii-p9.2
 396. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=10&scrV=6#vi-p5.3
 397. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=10&scrV=9#ii-p6.2
 398. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vi-p5.2
 399. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=21#ii-p9.3
 400. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=14#x-p8.6
 401. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=11#v-p68.1
 402. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=19#viii-p24.3
 403. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=16#x-p47.2
 404. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=2&scrV=24#v-p38.1
 405. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=11&scrV=26#iv-p11.3
 406. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=12&scrV=26#iv-p21.2
 407. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-p32.2
 408. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-p32.1
 409. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-p22.1
 410. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-p45.1
 411. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-p3.3
 412. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-p5.4
 413. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-p6.14
 414. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-p7.1
 415. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-p47.3
 416. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-p18.1
 417. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-p29.1
 418. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#i-Page_i
 419. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#i-Page_ii
 420. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#i-Page_iii
 421. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ii-Page_iv
 422. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ii-Page_v
 423. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ii-Page_vi
 424. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ii-Page_vii
 425. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ii-Page_viii
 426. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ii-Page_ix
 427. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ii-Page_x
 428. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ii-Page_xi
 429. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ii-Page_1
 430. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iii-Page_2
 431. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iii-Page_3
 432. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iii-Page_4
 433. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iii-Page_5
 434. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iii-Page_6
 435. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iii-Page_7
 436. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iii-Page_8
 437. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iii-Page_9
 438. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_10
 439. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_11
 440. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_12
 441. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_13
 442. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_14
 443. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_15
 444. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_16
 445. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_17
 446. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_12_1
 447. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_19
 448. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_20
 449. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_21
 450. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_22
 451. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_23
 452. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_24
 453. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_25
 454. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_26
 455. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_27
 456. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_28
 457. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_29
 458. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_30
 459. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_31
 460. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_32
 461. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_33
 462. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_34
 463. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_35
 464. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_36
 465. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_37
 466. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_38
 467. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_39
 468. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_40
 469. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_41
 470. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_42
 471. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_43
 472. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_44
 473. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_45
 474. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_46
 475. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_47
 476. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_48
 477. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_49
 478. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_50
 479. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_51
 480. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_52
 481. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_53
 482. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_54
 483. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_55
 484. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_56
 485. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_57
 486. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_58
 487. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_59
 488. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_60
 489. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_61
 490. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_62
 491. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#iv-Page_63
 492. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_64
 493. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_65
 494. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_66
 495. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_67
 496. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_68
 497. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_69
 498. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_70
 499. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_71
 500. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_72
 501. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_73
 502. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_74
 503. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_75
 504. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_76
 505. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_77
 506. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_78
 507. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_79
 508. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_80
 509. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_81
 510. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_82
 511. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_83
 512. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_84
 513. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_85
 514. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_86
 515. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_87
 516. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_88
 517. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_89
 518. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_90
 519. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_91
 520. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_92
 521. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_93
 522. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_94
 523. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_95
 524. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_96
 525. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_97
 526. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_98
 527. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_99
 528. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_100
 529. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_101
 530. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_102
 531. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_103
 532. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_104
 533. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_105
 534. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_106
 535. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_107
 536. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_108
 537. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_109
 538. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_110
 539. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_111
 540. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_112
 541. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_113
 542. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_114
 543. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_115
 544. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_116
 545. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_117
 546. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_118
 547. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_119
 548. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_120
 549. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_121
 550. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#v-Page_122
 551. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_124
 552. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_125
 553. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_126
 554. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_127
 555. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_128
 556. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_129
 557. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_130
 558. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_131
 559. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_132
 560. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_133
 561. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_134
 562. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_135
 563. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_136
 564. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_137
 565. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_138
 566. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_139
 567. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_140
 568. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_141
 569. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_142
 570. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_143
 571. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vi-Page_144
 572. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_146
 573. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_147
 574. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_148
 575. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_149
 576. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_150
 577. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_151
 578. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_152
 579. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_153
 580. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_154
 581. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_155
 582. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_156
 583. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_157
 584. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_158
 585. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_159
 586. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_160
 587. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_161
 588. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_162
 589. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_163
 590. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_164
 591. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#vii-Page_165
 592. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_166
 593. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_167
 594. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_168
 595. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_169
 596. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_170
 597. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_171
 598. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_172
 599. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_173
 600. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_174
 601. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_175
 602. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_176
 603. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_177
 604. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_178
 605. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_179
 606. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#viii-Page_180
 607. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_181
 608. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_182
 609. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_183
 610. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_184
 611. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_185
 612. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_186
 613. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_187
 614. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_188
 615. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_189
 616. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_190
 617. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_191
 618. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_192
 619. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#ix-Page_193
 620. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_194
 621. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_195
 622. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_196
 623. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_197
 624. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_198
 625. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_200
 626. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_201
 627. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_203
 628. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_204
 629. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_205
 630. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_206
 631. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_207
 632. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_208
 633. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_209
 634. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_210
 635. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_211
 636. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_212
 637. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_213
 638. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_214
 639. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_215
 640. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_216
 641. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_217
 642. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_218
 643. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_219
 644. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_220
 645. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_221
 646. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_222
 647. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_223
 648. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_224
 649. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_225
 650. file:///ccel/a/allestree/oracles/cache/oracles.html3#x-Page_226
