     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Philosophy of Revelation
      Creator(s): Bavinck, Herman (1854-1921)
     Print Basis: New York, Longmans, Green, 1909.
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
      LC Call no: BT127.B3
     LC Subjects:

                  Doctrinal theology

                  God

                  Revelation
     __________________________________________________________________

                               The Philosophy of

                                   Revelation


  The Stone Lectures for 1908-1909

  Princeton Theological Semiary


  BY

Herman Bavinck

   Doctor of Theology; Professor in the Free University

   of Amsterdam
     __________________________________________________________________

                            PHILOSOPHY OF REVELATION

Lecture 1 - The Idea of a Philosophy of Revelation


   The well-known Assyrian scholar, Hugo Winckler, some years ago boldly
   declared that "in the whole of the historical evolution of mankind
   there are only two general world-views to be distinguished, --the
   ancient Babylonian and the modern empirico-scientific" ; "the latter of
   which," he added, "is still only in process of development." [1] The
   implication was that the religion and civilization of all peoples have
   had their origin in the land of Sumer and Akkad, and more particularly
   that the Biblical religion, in its New Testament no less than in its
   Old Testament form, has derived its material from that source. This
   pan-Babylonian construction of history has, because of its syncretistic
   and levelling character, justly met with much serious opposition. But
   there is undoubtedly an element of truth in the declaration, if it may
   be, taken in this wider sense,--that the religious supra-naturalistic
   world-view has universally prevailed among all peoples and in all ages
   down to our own day, and only in the last hundred and fifty years has
   given way in some circles to the empirico-scientific.

   Humanity as a whole has been at all times supra-naturalistic to the
   core. Neither in thought nor in life have men been able to satisfy
   themselves with the things of this world; they have always assumed a
   heaven above the earth, and behind what is visible a persistently
   ignored in Romanist and liberal circles, and the Reformation movement
   systematically represented as the origin and source of the Revolution.
   Cousin and Guizot agree in this judgment with De Bonald and De Maistre.
   [2] French Protestantism finds it acceptable, and puts forward and
   praises the "Declaration of the Rights of Man" as a blessed fruit of
   the labors of Luther and Calvin. And in Germany, by men like Paulsen
   and Julius Kaftan, Kant is glorified as a second Luther, the true
   philosopher of Protestantism. [3]

   No doubt between these two mighty movements of modern history certain
   lines of resemblance may be traced. But formal resemblance is not the
   same as real likeness, analogy as identity. Between the freedom of the
   Christian man, on behalf of which Luther entered the lists, and the
   liberty, equality, fraternity, which the Revolution inscribed on its
   banner, the difference is fundamental. Luther and Voltaire are not men
   of the same spirit; Calvin and Rousseau should not be named in the same
   breath ; and Kant, with his epistemological and moral autonomy, was not
   the exponent of the Reformation, but the philosopher of Rationalism.
   This is implicitly acknowledged by all who accord the honor of
   emancipating the mind of man in the sixteenth century to Erasmus rather
   than to Luther, and who rank the Renascence in importance and value
   above the Reformation. [4] According to this view Erasmus and his
   like-minded fellow-workers attempted a regeneration of Christianity,
   but sought this not, like Luther, in a repristination of the teaching
   of Paul, but in a return to the Sermon on the Mount. He is to be
   thanked, then, that supranaturalism has slowly given way to
   materialism, transcendence to immanence, Paulinism to the religion of
   Jesus, dogmatics to the science of religion. Luther remains the father
   of the old Protestantism; to Erasmus belongs the glory of having been
   the first exponent of modern Protestantism.

   In this historical judgment there undoubtedly lies an element of truth.
   Erasmus and his kindred spirits, no less than the Reformers, aimed at a
   simpler and more interior type of religion to be attained through
   contact with the Person of Christ But the fact is lost sight of that
   all these men, in their conception of the essence of religion, remained
   entangled in mediaeval dualism, and were thus in no position to effect
   a fundamental reformation of the doctrine and worship of the Church of
   Rome. The whole mental attitude of humanism was such as to render it,
   above everything, afraid of tumult, and bent upon preserving the
   "amabilis ecclesiae concordia." "Summa nostrae religionis pax est et
   unanimitas," said Erasmus. But altogether apart from this, humanism was
   and remained one of the many "Aufklarungsbewegangen" which have
   periodically emerged in the Roman Church, and will not fail to reappear
   in the future. The experience of sin and grace which came to Luther in
   the monastery of Erfurt fixed itself in these two conceptions; the
   humanists felt no need of the liberty and joy which flow from the
   sinner's justification in the sight of God through faith alone and
   without the works of the law. Humanism, therefore, was nothing more nor
   less than the Reformed-Catholicism of the sixteenth century; in the end
   it not only broke with Luther, but came to the help of Rome and the
   Counter-Reformation. [5]

   Nevertheless, there is this much of truth in the view in
   question,--that Luther and Erasmus were two different men, and the old
   and the new Protestantism are in principle distinct. Confirmation of
   this has recently come from an unprejudiced quarter, namely, from
   Professor Troeltsch of Heidelberg, in an important study of
   Protestantism contributed by him to Die Kultur der Gegenwart. [6] He
   acknowledges, of course, that the ancient world-view was modified by
   the Reformation, and enriched with a new conception of religion; but he
   none the less maintains that its general structure was preserved
   intact. In their view of the world and life, sin and grace, heaven and
   earth, church and state, faith and knowledge, Luther, Zwingli, and
   Calvin were children of the Middle Ages, and revealed this fact at
   every point of their activity as Reformers. The supranaturalism which
   finds expression in the Gospel, and more particularly in the theology
   of Paul, received the fullest consent of their hearts. They, no doubt,
   moderated and softened the eschatological and mystic-ascetic elements
   which characterized primitive Christianity; but, in Troeltsch's view,
   they utterly failed to perceive the great differences which exist
   within the New Testament itself between the Synoptics and the Apostolic
   Epistles, between Jesus and Paul. The Christianity of the Bible, the
   Christianity of the first four centuries was, to their naive
   conception, an undifferentiated whole, a system of faith and practice
   which they believed themselves to have received unmodified, and which
   they meant to set as the pure expression of the Christian religion over
   against the caricature that the Roman Church had later made of it.

   On the other hand, Professor Troeltsch thinks that the modern,
   anti-supranaturalistic type of Protestantism gained no hearing until
   the eighteenth century. For this form of Protestantism is not to be
   understood as a logically or historically consistent development of the
   principles of the Reformation, but as the product of "a great and
   radical revolution." In the so-called "Enlightenment" it presented the
   world--with a new form of culture which differed in principle from the
   culture-ideal of the Reformation. Consequently not the sixteenth but
   the eighteenth century, not the Reformation but the "Enlightenment," is
   the source of that world-view which, turning its back on all
   supranaturalism, thinks to find in this world all that science and
   religion, thought and life, can ask. In point of fact, before the
   eighteenth century the existence of a supranatural world, and the
   necessity, possibility, and reality of a special revelation, had never
   been seriously called into question. But Deism, springing up in
   England, emancipated the world from God, reason from revelation, the
   will from grace. [7] In its first exponents, Herbert, Locke, Toland,
   Collins, and their fellows, as also later in Kant, Fichte, and Lessing,
   it is true, it did not yet deny in principle the possibility and
   reality of revelation. But in the first place, from a formal point of
   view, it subjected the authenticity of revelation, especially of
   "traditional revelation," in distinction from "original revelation," to
   the critical test of reason, as may be seen in such writers as Herbert,
   Hobbes, and Locke. And, secondly, with respect to the content of
   revelation, it laid down the canon, that since we have no power to
   assimilate anything else, it can comprise nothing beyond truths of
   reason, that is, such truths as would, no doubt, sooner or later have
   been discovered by reason, but have been made known earlier and more,
   readily by revelation. This concession, however, was deprived of all
   real value by adding that God had commonly given the earlier revealed
   truth in such a symbolical form that its essential rational content was
   not understood until the present age of enlightenment. [8] All deistic
   thought tended towards making revelation superfluous, and all action of
   God in the world unnecessary. [9] While the fact of creation was still
   commonly admitted, it served with the original Deists no other purpose
   than with Kant, and later with Darwin, namely, to give the world an
   independent existence. The world had in creation been so abundantly
   supplied with all manners of powers and gifts that it could dispense
   with God altogether, and could save itself without any outside aid and
   with completeness.

   This principle of autonomy, transplanted into France, first sought to
   gain supremacy for itself by way of revolution. The French Revolution
   of 1789 furnished the first typical example of this. This was not a
   revolt like that of the Netherlands against Spain, or of the Puritans
   against the Stuarts, or of the American Colonies against Britain, for
   all these upheavals left untouched the political system, the
   fundamental principle of government, the droit divin of the magistracy.
   The Revolution in France sprang from a definite deistical theory, and
   bore from the outset a doctrinaire, specifically dogmatic character.
   Attaching itself to the fiction of the contrat social, it endeavored to
   subvert the entire existing social order, and to replace it by a newly
   conceived and self-manufactured order of things. It was a violent
   effort to establish the principle of popular sovereignty, and was
   hailed everywhere, even by men like Kant and Schiller, as the dawn of
   popular enfranchisement. [10]

   But, although this Revolution was launched under the most favorable
   circumstances, enjoyed the advantage of international sympathies, and
   found imitation on a smaller or larger scale in all countries on the
   continent of Europe Europe and in South America, it nevertheless passed
   beyond the experimental stage in none of these movements, but in them
   all, sooner or later, issued in failure. So far from realizing the
   ideal, they overwhelmed their fanatical adherents with grievous
   disappointment and a deep feeling of shame. [11] In the leading thought
   of the world the idea of revolution gradually gave way to that of
   evolution. The eighteenth century principle of autonomy was not
   abandoned, but its application and development were sought by a
   different method.

   It is hardly necessary to say that the term evolution has not in
   itself, any more than revolution, an objectionable connotation. The
   idea of development is not a production of modern times; it was already
   familiar to Greek philosophy. More particularly Aristotle raised it to
   the rank of the leading principle of his entire system by his
   significant distinction between "potentia" and "actus." The true
   reality he did not place with Plato outside of and behind and above
   phenomenal things, but conceived of it rather as their immanent
   essence, not, however, as from the outset fully actualized in them, but
   as finding gradual realization in the form of a process. According to
   Aristotle, therefore, becoming and change are not to be explained by
   mechanical impact or pressure, nor by chemical combination or
   separation of atoms. On the contrary, he derived his theory of becoming
   from the facts of organic life, seeing in it a self-actualizing of the
   essential being in the phenomena, of the form in the matter. The
   essence, the idea of a thing, is not simply a quiescent archetype, but
   at the same time an immanent power propelling the thing and moving it
   on to its development in a definite direction. Evolution, as conceived
   by Aristotle, beam thus an organic and teleological character; the
   genesis exists for the sake of the ousia; becoming takes place because
   there is being. [12]

   This idea of development aroused no objection whatever in Christian
   theology and philosophy. On the contrary, it received extension and
   enrichment by being linked with the principle of theism. For the
   essence of it, it appears also in modem philosophy, in Lessing, Herder
   and Goethe, Schelling and Hegel, and in many historians of distinction.
   Some of these, it is true, have severed the idea of development from
   the theistic basis on which it rests in Christianity, and by so doing
   have reverted to the ancient pre-Christian naturalism. Nevertheless,
   even so, their naturalism retains a specific character, clearly enough
   distinguishable from the later materialism. Whatever terms Goethe and
   Herder, Schelling and Hegel might employ to designate the core and
   essence of things, they never regarded nature as a dead mechanism, but
   as an eternally formative power, a creative artist. The notion that all
   higher forms of being have sprung through the action of purely
   mechanical and chemical forces from lower ones is entirely foreign to
   them. The ascending forms in the world of nature and spirit appear to
   them rather evidence of the inexhaustible fulness of life and the
   infinite, creative power present in the universe. [13] With Hegel the
   entire world becomes one mighty process of thought, which in each of
   its moments and in each of its stages is rational, so far as it is
   real; but which at the same time, by the principle of immanent
   antithesis, to which it remains subject, is forced ever forward and
   upward. Whatever exists is therefore pure becoming, not being; it
   exists for no other purpose but to pass away; in pursuance of the law
   of the dialectic process the old continually gives way to the new.
   Hence we should draw back from all violent revolutions and futile
   experiments; the eternal spirit itself is unceasingly occupied in
   breaking down while building up, and in building up while breaking
   down. Process, evolution, endless and restless becoming, is the
   principle which governs the Hegelian system to a much higher degree,
   and much more one-sidedly, than those of Aristotle and Leibnitz. [14]

   This doctrine of evolution, however, was too rationalistic, too
   aprioristic, too romantic in construction to withstand the onset of the
   natural science which was now growing up. It soon gave way before the
   mechanical and anti-teleological principles of the theory of descent.
   Darwin was led to his agnostic naturalism as much by the misery which
   he observed in the world as by the facts which scientific investigation
   brought under his notice. There was too much strife and injustice in
   the world for him to believe in providence and a predetermined goal. A
   world so full of cruelty and pain he could not reconcile with the
   omniscience, the omnipotence, the goodness of God. An innocent and good
   man stands under a tree and is struck by lightning. "Do you believe,"
   asks Darwin of his friend Gray, "that God slew this man on purpose?
   Many or most people believe this; I cannot and will not believe it."
   The discovery of the so-called law of "natural selection" brought him
   accordingly a real feeling of relief, for by it he escaped the
   necessity of assuming a conscious plan and purpose in creation. Whether
   God existed or not, in either case he was blameless. The immutable laws
   of nature, imperfect in all their operations, bore the blame for
   everything, while at the same time guaranteeing that the world is not a
   product of chance and is progressing as a whole towards a better
   condition. [15]

   Just as Darwin discovered the misery in nature, so Karl Marx discovered
   the misery in society. In the same year in which Darwin's Origin of
   Species was published, Marx's Political Economy also appeared. At the
   grave of Marx, on the 17th of March, in the year 1883, Friedrich Engels
   declared that, as Darwin had found the law of the development of
   organic nature, so Marx had discovered that of the development of human
   society. Darwin believed that his natural selection, with its adjuncts,
   had once for all disposed of teleology, miracles, and all
   supranaturalism; Marx was convinced that he had freed Socialism from
   all utopianism and established it on a firm scientific foundation. Both
   Darwin and Marx were thorough believers in the inviolability of the
   laws of nature and the necessary sequence of events; both were deeply
   moved by the fact that this necessary process of development has both
   in the past an present brought into existence terrible conditions; and
   both cherished the fixed hope that development means progress, and
   carries with it the promise of a better world, a better race, and a
   better society.

   It goes without saying that this mechanical and anti-teleological
   conception of evolution left no room for miracles, for a world of the
   supranatural, for the existence and activity of God. Darwin, while at
   first adhering to the deistic belief in creation, afterwards declined
   more and more to agnosticism. It was his custom to dismiss religious
   problems by saying that he had not sufficiently reflected upon them and
   could not lay claim to a strong religious feeling. [16] And Marx was of
   the opinion that religion, "that opiate of the people," was destined to
   die a natural death in the perfect society of the future. [17] The
   belief that modern natural science, with its doctrine of evolution, had
   made an end of medieval dualism with its conception of two worlds, and
   the principle of naturalism had permanently triumphed, found an echo in
   the widest circles. Revelation could no longer be considered a
   possibility. Renan declared apodictically; "Il n'y a pas de
   surnaturel." According to Haeckel, all revelations to which religions
   appeal are pure figments of human phantasy ; the one true revelation is
   nature itself. And Strauss, not quite so sure that the victory had been
   gained and the enemy slain, called to battle with the summons: "The
   last enemy to be conquered is the conception of another world." The
   term evolution embodies in itself a harm-less conception, and the
   principle expressed by it is certainly operative within well-defined
   limits throughout the universe. But the trend of thought by which it
   has been monopolized, and the system built on it, in many cases at
   least, avail themselves of the word in order to explain the entire
   world, including man and religion and morality, without the aid of any
   supranatural factor, purely from immanent forces, and according to
   unvarying laws of nature.

   Nevertheless, the transition from the nineteenth to the twentieth
   century has witnessed an important change in this respect. The foremost
   investigators in the field of science have abandoned the attempt to
   explain all phenomena and events by mechanico-chemical causes.
   Everywhere there is manifesting itself an effort to take up and
   incorporate Darwin's scheme of a nature subject to law into an
   idealistic world-view. In fact Darwin himself, through his agnosticism,
   left room for different conceptions of the Absolute, nay repeatedly and
   emphatically gave voice to a conviction that the world is not the
   product of accident, brute force, or blind necessity but in its
   entirety has been intended for progressive improvement. [18] By way of
   Darwin, and enriched by a mass of valuable scientific material, the
   doctrine of evolution has returned to the fundamental idea of Hegel's
   philosophy. The mechanical conception of nature has been once more
   replaced by the dynamical; materialism has reverted to pantheism;
   evolution has become again the unfolding, the revealing of absolute
   spirit. And the concept of revelation has held anew its triumphant
   entry into the realm of philosophy and even of natural science. [19]

   Such generous concessions have not failed to meet with response from
   the side of theology. It is true the exponents of the, "new theology"
   which has made its appearance in recent years, differ greatly among
   themselves as to the significance which should be accorded in
   revelation to nature or history, to individualism or collectivism, to
   the intellect or the heart. Nevertheless, the movement as a whole is
   clearly inspired and controlled by the desire to identify revelation
   and evolution, and for this purpose to shift the centre of gravity from
   the transcendence of God to his immanence. To it God is "that which is
   implied in all being, the reality behind all phenomena, the sum of the
   forces of the universe." It is admitted that this idea of the immanence
   of God was not unknown in former ages; but never until the present has
   it been made the lever of a "moral and spiritual movement," such as may
   now be witnessed through the whole of Christendom, a movement which
   aims at the perfect reconciliation of religion and science and finds
   its highest expression in "the gospel of the humanity of God and the
   divinity of man."

   It needs no pointing out that on this principle, as with Hegel, the
   divine revelation must be coextensive with all that exists, with nature
   and history, with all nations and religions. Everything is a
   manifestation of God. The finite in all its parts is an essential
   element of the infinite. It is the infinite itself, as become finite in
   the creature. But there is a definite course and gradation in the
   self-realizing of God. From the inorganic it ascends to the organic,
   from the physical to the psychical, from nature to spirit, reaching its
   culminating point in man. "We are a part of the universe, and the
   universe is a part of God; there is no real difference between humanity
   and deity; every soul is a sparkle of the divine spirit." Humanity ever
   increasingly reveals God to us, in the same proportion that it develops
   and progresses. For everything is subject to the law of progress.
   Everything is continually in the making. Man has sprung from the
   animals, and has in the civilized portion of the race risen far
   superior to his ancestors; but still he has before him an endless vista
   of development. He is not "simply what he is, but all he yet may be."
   He is, and becomes ever more and more, an organ of the eternal
   consciousness. He was an animal, he became a man, and after humanizing
   comes deifying. By way of anticipation the Christian religion
   illustrates this principle in the person of its founder; in Christ
   humanity and divinity are one. According to Sir Oliver Lodge, Christ is
   the glorification of human effort, the upward development of manhood,
   the highest point of human striving, the supreme flower of our race.
   All men are potential Christs, all moving on by the development of the
   forces of our own nature into that Christhood. [20]

   Although the New Theology likes to represent this conception as a new
   movement, it is at bottom nothing but a repetition of the pantheistic
   world-view which has been embodied in the systems of Erigena, Spinoza,
   and especially Hegel. And in all probability no greater success than
   was attained by these philosophers will attend the present attempt to
   harmonize after this fashion faith and science, the revelation of the
   Scriptures, and a materialistically or pantheistically conceived
   doctrine of evolution. There is cause for rejoicing that the
   intellectualism of the last century has been succeeded by a feeling for
   religion and mysticism, for metaphysics and philosophy; and that in
   religion itself there is now recognized a reality and a revelation of
   God. But joy over this change in the attitude of the leading minds of
   the age should not blind us to the danger to which it exposes us. The
   religious craving at present asserting itself bears a pronouncedly
   egoistic character; it reveals a longing rather for self-satisfaction
   than for knowledge and service of the living God; it seeks God not
   above but in the world, and regards his essence as identical with that
   of the creature. All of which goes to show that the world-view, which
   formerly offered itself under the name of "the scientific," has not
   essentially changed, but has simply, owing to various influences,
   assumed now a religious form, and taken up its position as a new faith
   over against the old faith. [21] The difference consists merely in the
   doctrine of evolution no longer contenting itself with standing as
   "science" by the side of or over against Christianity, but pressing on
   determinedly to usurp the place of Christianity as dogma and religion.
   Monism lays claim through the mouth of Haeckel and the monistic
   alliance not only to the title of the true science, but likewise to
   that of the one true religion. [22]

   As a form of religion, however, monism hardly deserves serious
   consideration. A religion which has nothing to offer but an immanent
   God, identical with the world, may for a while aesthetically affect and
   warm man; it can never satisfy man's religious and ethical needs. It
   fails to raise us above the actual, and supplies no power stronger than
   the world; it brings no peace, and offers no rest on the Father-heart
   of God. This, after all, is what man seeks in religion,--strength,
   life, a personal power, that can pardon sin, receive us into favor, and
   cause us to triumph joyfully over a world of sin and death. The true
   religion which shall satisfy our mind and heart, our conscience and our
   will, must be one that does not shut us up in, but lifts us up high
   above, the world; in the midst of time It must impart to us eternity;
   in the midst of death give us life; in the midst of the stream of
   change place us on the immovable rock of salvation. This is the reason
   why transcendence, supranaturalism, revelation, are essential to all
   religion.

   Thus also is explained why humanity, no less than formerly, continues
   to think and live after a supranaturalistic fashion. As regards the
   heathen and Mohammedan nations, this needs no pointing out. As to
   Christendom, here also the Greek Church continues to occupy the
   orthodox position. The Roman Church, contrary to the expectation of
   many, has during the nineteenth century almost everywhere increased in
   power and influence, and yet in the encyclical letter of July 3, 1907,
   it repudiated without hesitation the notion that revelation involves
   nothing more than man's becoming conscious of his relation to God. And
   while Protestantism is divided within itself even more thoroughly than
   Romanism, yet to a large extent, among all classes in all lands, it too
   still holds to the fundamental elements of the Christian confession.
   Thus, notwithstanding all the criticism that has been brought to bear
   upon the Scriptures, the Bible retains its unique place in the
   church,--in the sermon, in the worship, in catechetical instruction.
   More than this, all our modern civilization, art, science, literature,
   ethics, jurisprudence, society, state, politics, are leavened by
   religious, Christian, supranaturalistic elements, and still rest on the
   foundation of the old world-view. "The stamp of this education," says
   Troeltsch, "Europe bears deep in its soul up to to-day." [23] Much,
   therefore, will have to be done before the modern, pantheistic or
   materialistic, world-view shall have conquered the old theistic one.
   Nay, in view of the past history of mankind, it may safely be added
   that this will never happen.

   Nor is there any warrant for ascribing this loyalty to the Christian
   supranatural world-view, to stubborn conservatism or incorrigible lack
   of understanding. It requires little discernment to perceive that the
   revelation which every religion, and more particularly Christianity,
   claims for itself is something essentially different from that which
   the new theology and philosophy would commend to us. This was frankly
   acknowledged not long ago by Friedrich Delitzsch. In his first address
   on Babel and Bible, he had affirmed that the Old Testament idea of
   revelation, like many other Old Testament ideas, was in perfect accord
   with that found in the Babylonian religion. This identification having
   been contradicted, he reverted to the point in his fourth lecture
   entitled Rückblick und Ausblick. Here he points out that the conception
   of revelation is no doubt modified by many to-day so as to make of it a
   humanly mediated, gradual process of historical evolution. But be
   immediately adds that such a conception, while quite acceptable to him
   personally, is, after all, only a weak dilution of the Biblical and
   theological conception of revelations. [24] And there can hardly be two
   opinions on this point. Not only does Scripture draw a sharp
   distinction between that revelation which God continues to give to the
   heathen through nature and the false religion to which the heathen have
   abandoned themselves (Rom. 1:19-23), as well as between that special
   revelation which he has granted to his people Israel and the idolatry
   and image-worship by which the people of God were constantly led away;
   but it also most emphatically proclaims as a fundamental truth, that
   Jehovah, who revealed himself to Moses and the prophets, is the true
   living God, and that all the gods of the heathen are idols and things
   of naught.

   If this be so, it must be contrary to the plain intent of Scripture to
   identify revelation and development, divine law and human conduct, or
   to consider these as two sides of one and the same process. When Hegel
   says of the infinite and the finite: "The truth is the inseparable
   union of both," [25] we recognize in this not the primum verum but the
   proton pseudos of his philosophy. As in science one must distinguish
   between the ideas which God has deposited in his works, and the errors
   which constantly are being drawn from them as truth, even so revelation
   and religion are not two manifestations of the same thing, but differ
   as God differs from man, the Creator from the creature. Although
   Gwatkin some times so widens the idea as to make revelation and
   discovery the same process viewed from different standpoints, he quite
   correctly explains that not every thought of man, but only true
   thought, echoes God's thought, and that religions can be viewed as
   divine revelations only so far as they are true. [26]

   This distinction between revelation and religion, and consequently the
   good right of supranaturalism, begins slowly to dawn once more on
   people. Titius declared some time ago that it is the common conviction
   of all theologians from Kahler to Troeltsch that supranaturalism and
   Christianity stand or fall together. Certainly Troeltsch insists over
   against Fr. R. Lipsius upon a certain supranaturalism. Loofs maintains,
   no doubt, that the supranaturalism of the sixteenth and seventeenth
   centuries was of too clumsy construction for the science of nature and
   history seriously to reckon with it. But he propounds at the same time
   the pertinent question, whether it is really an immutable axiom of all
   modern culture that natural science has made belief impossible in any
   kind of revelation except one that can be fully explained on the
   principle of evolution, and in any kind of redemption except one worked
   out by purely immanent forces. And returning the answer to the question
   himself, he declares: "The decisive battle between the
   diesseits-religion,' based on pantheistic ideas of immanence, and the
   traditions of a more robust theism has not yet been fought out."
   Titius, adverting to this, gives his opinion to the effect that a more
   exact investigation of the problem of supranaturalism forms the chief
   task of the Dogmatics of the future, and is of supreme importance for
   the absolute character of Christianity. [27]

   With the reality of revelation, therefore, Christianity stands or
   falls. But our insight into the mode and content of revelation admits
   of being clarified; and, in consequence, our conception of this act of
   divine grace is capable of being modified. As a matter of fact, this
   has taken place in modern theology. In the first place, the
   transcendence of God has assumed for us a meaning different from what
   it had for our fathers. The deistic belief that God worked but a single
   moment, and thereafter granted to the world its own independent
   existence, can no longer be ours. Through the extraordinary advance of
   science our world-view has undergone a great change. The world has
   become immeasurably large for us; forwards and backwards, in length and
   breadth and depth and height, it has extended itself into immensity. In
   this world we find everywhere second causes operating both in organic
   and inorganic creation, in nature and history, in physical and
   psychical phenomena. If God's dwelling lies somewhere far away, outside
   the world, and his transcendence is to be understood in the sense that
   he has withdrawn from creation and now stands outside of the actuality
   of this world, then we lose him and are unable to maintain
   communication with him. His existence cannot become truly real to us
   unless we are permitted to conceive of him as not only above the world,
   but in his very self in the world, and thus as indwelling in all his
   works. [28]

   Thus the divine transcendence was understood by the Apostle Paul, who
   declared that God is not far from any one of us, but that "in him we
   live and move and have our being." The transcendence which is
   inseparable from the being of God is not meant in a spatial or a
   quantitative sense. It is true Scripture distinguishes between heaven
   and earth and repeatedly affirms that God has heaven especially for his
   dwelling-place, and specifically reveals there his perfections in
   glory. But Scripture itself teaches that heaven is part of the created
   universe. When, therefore, God is represented as dwelling in heaven, he
   is not thereby placed outside but in the world, and is not removed by a
   spatial transcendence from his creatures. His exaltation above all that
   is finite, temporal, and subject to space-limitation is upheld.
   Although God is immanent in every part and sphere of creation with all
   his perfections and all his being, nevertheless, even in that most
   intimate union he remains transcendent. His being is of a different and
   higher kind than that of the world. As little as eternity and time,
   omnipresence and space, infinitude and finiteness can be reduced to one
   or conceived as reverse sides of the same reality, can God and the
   world, the Creator and the creature, be identified qualitatively and
   essentially. Not first in our time, nor by way of concession to science
   or philosophy, but in all ages, the great theologians have taught the
   transcendence of God in this Scriptural sense.

   Since, however, we take this idea more seriously at present, because of
   the great enrichment our world-view has received from science, this
   needs must give rise to a somewhat modified conception of revelation.
   The old theology construed revelation after a quite external and
   mechanical fashion, and too readily identified it with Scripture. Our
   eyes are nowadays being more and more opened to the fact that
   revelation in many ways is historically and psychologically "mediated."
   Not only is special revelation founded on general revelation, but it
   has taken over numerous elements from it. The Old and the New
   Testaments are no longer kept isolated from their milieu; and the
   affinity between them and the religious representations and customs of
   other peoples is recognized. Israel stands in connection with the
   Semites, the Bible with Babel. And although the revelation in Israel
   and in Christ loses nothing of its specific nature, nevertheless even
   it came into being not all at once but progressively, in conjunction
   with the progress of history and the individuality of the prophets,
   polumeros kai polutropos. Even as Christ the Son of God is from above,
   and yet his birth from Mary was in preparation for centuries, so every
   word of God in special revelation is both spoken from above and yet
   brought to us along the pathway of history. Scripture gives succinct
   expression to this double fact when it describes the divine word as
   rhethen hupo tou theou dia ton propheton.

   One of the results of the trend of present-day science is that theology
   is just now largely occupied with the second of these two elements,
   that of the historical and psychological "mediation." Its present
   interest centres rather in the problem how revelation has come about,
   than in the question what the content of revelation is. There is
   connected with this investigation the disadvantage that often the woods
   are not seen for the trees; that the striking analogies in other
   religions have dulled perception of what is peculiar to the religion of
   Israel; and that the discovery elsewhere of some trait more or less
   closely parallel is hastily given out as a solution of the problem of
   origin. But, apart from this, these historical and psychological
   investigations are in themselves an excellent thing. They must and will
   con tribute towards a better understanding of the content of
   revelation; the rhethen dia ton propheton will, in proportion as it is
   more profoundly understood, lead to a truer appreciation of the rhethen
   hupo tou theou. For, since all historical and psychological research
   into the origin and essence of the religion of Israel and Christianity
   must leave their peculiarity untouched, what else will remain, but
   either to reject them on account of their alleged foolishness or to
   accept them in faith as divine wisdom?

   Belief in such a special revelation is the starting-point and the
   foundation-stone of Christian theology. As science never precedes life,
   but always follows it and flows from it, so the science of the
   knowledge of God rests on the reality of his revelation. If God does
   not exist, or if he has not revealed himself, and hence is unknowable,
   then all religion is an illusion and all theology a phantasm. But,
   built on the basis of revelation, theology undertakes a glorious
   task,--the task of unfolding the science of the revelation of God and
   of our knowledge concerning him. It engages in this task when seeking
   to ascertain by means of exegesis the content of revelation, when
   endeavoring to reduce to unity of thought this ascertained content,
   when striving to maintain its truth whether by way of aggression or
   defence, or to commend it to the consciences of men. But side by side
   with all these branches there is room also for a philosophy of
   revelation which will trace the idea of revelation, both in its form
   and in its content, and correlate it with the rest of our knowledge and
   life.

   Theological thought has always felt the need of such a science. Not
   only Origen and the Gnostics, but also Augustine and the Scholastics,
   made it their conscious aim both to maintain Christianity in its
   specific character and to vindicate for it a central place in the
   conception of the world as a whole. And after Rationalism had set
   historical Christianity aside as a mass of fables, the desire has
   reasserted itself in modern theology and philosophy to do justice to
   this central fact of universal history, and to trace on all sides the,
   lines of connection established by God himself between revelation and
   the several spheres of the created universe. [29]

   It must be acknowledged that the attempt to outline a philosophy of
   revelation exposes one to losing himself in idle speculation. But,
   besides appealing to the general principle that the abuse of a thing
   cannot forbid its proper use, we may remind ourselves that this danger
   is just now reduced to a minimum, because philosophy itself has become
   thoroughly convinced of the futility of its aprioristic, constructions,
   and looks to the empirical reality for the subject matter of its
   thought. A philosophy which, neglecting the real world, takes its start
   from reason, will necessarily do violence to the reality of life and
   resolve nature and history into a network of abstractions. This also
   applies to the philosophy of the Christian religion. If this be
   unwilling to take revelation as it offers itself, it will detach it
   from history and end by retaining nothing but a dry skeleton of
   abstract ideas. The philosophy of Hegel has supplied a deterring,
   example of this, as is well illustrated by the Leben Jesu and the
   Glaubenslehre of Strauss. Speculative rationalism, to borrow a striking
   word of Hamann, forgot that God is a genius who does not ask whether we
   find his word rational or irrational. Precisely because Christianity
   rests on revelation, it has a content which, while not in conflict with
   reason, yet greatly transcends reason; even a divine wisdom, which
   appears to the world foolishness. If revelation did not furnish such a
   content, and comprised nothing but what reason itself could sooner or
   later have discovered, it would not he worthy of its name. Revelation
   is a disclosure of mysterion tou theou. What neither nature nor
   history, neither mind nor heart, neither science nor art can teach us,
   it makes known to us,--the fixed, unalterable will of God to rescue the
   world and save sinners, a will at variance with well-nigh the whole
   appearance of things. This will is the secret of revelation. In
   creation God manifests the power of his mind; in revelation, which has
   redemption for its centre, he discloses to us the greatness of his
   hearts. [30]

   The philosophy of revelation, just like that of history, art, and the
   rest, must take its start from its object, from revelation. Even its
   idea cannot be construed apriori. There is but one alternative: either
   there is no revelation, and then all speculation is idle; or else there
   comes to us out of history such a revelation, shining by its own light;
   and then it tells us, not only what its content is, but also how it
   conies into existence. The philosophy of revelation does not so much
   make this fit in with its system as rather so broadens itself that it
   can embrace revelation too in itself. And doing this, it brings to
   light the divine wisdom which lies concealed in it. For though the
   cross of Christ is to the Jews a stumbling-block and to the Greeks
   foolishness, it is in itself the power of God and the wisdom of God. No
   philosophy of revelation, any more than any other philosophy, whether
   of religion or art, of morals or law, shall ever be able to exhaust its
   subject, or thoroughly to master its material. All knowledge here on
   earth remains partial; it walks by faith and attains not to sight. But
   nevertheless it lives and works in the assurance that the ground of all
   things is not blind will or incalculable accident, but mind,
   intelligence, wisdom.

   In the next place this philosophy of revelation seeks to correlate the
   wisdom which it finds in revelation with that which is furnished by the
   world at large. In former times Christian theology drew the distinction
   between special and general revelation. But it never wholly thought
   through this distinction, nor fully made clear its rich significance
   for the whole of human life. When modem science arose and claimed to
   have found a key to the solution of all mysteries in the principle of
   evolution, the attempt was made to withdraw successively nature,
   history, man, and his entire psychical life, from the control of the
   existence, the inworking, the revelation of God. Not a few theologians
   have yielded to this trend and with more or less hesitation abandoned
   the, entire world to modern science, provided only somewhere, in the
   Person of Christ, or in the inner soul of man, a place might be
   reserved for divine revelation. Such a retreat, however, betrays
   weakness and is in direct opposition to the idea of special revelation.
   Revelation, while having its centre in the Person of Christ in its
   periphery extends to the uttermost ends of creation. It does not stand
   isolated in nature and history, does not resemble an island in the
   ocean, nor a drop of oil upon water. With the whole of nature, with the
   whole of history, with the whole of humanity, with the family and
   society, with science and art it is intimately connected.

   The world itself rests on revelation; revelation is the presupposition,
   the foundation, the secret of all that exists in all its forms. The
   deeper science pushes its investigations, the more clearly will it
   discover that revelation underlies all created being. In every moment
   of time beats the pulse of eternity; every point in space is filled
   with the omnipresence of God; the finite is supported by the infinite,
   all becoming is rooted in being. Together with all created things, that
   special revelation







     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] H. Winckler, Himmels- und Weltenbild der Babylonier. Leipzig, 1903,
   p.9.

   [2] Groen van Prinsterer, Ongeloof en Revolutie. 1862, pp.138 ff.

   [3] Fr. Paulsen, Philosophia militans. Berlin, 1901, pp.31 ff. J.
   Kaftan, Der Philosoph des Protest. Berlin, 1904. Theodor Kaftan,
   Moderne Theol. des alten Glaubens. 1901, pp.76, 102.

   [4] Busken Huet, Het Land van Rembrandt. F. Pijper, Erasmus en de
   Nederl. Reformatie. Leiden, 1907. Paul Wernle, Die Renaissance des
   Christ. im 16 Jahrh. Tubingen, 1904.

   [5] Lezius, Zur Charakteristik des relig. Standpunktes des Erasmus.
   Güterslohe, 1895. H. Hermelink, Die relig. Reformbestrebungen des
   deutschen Hamanismus. Tübingen, 1907 (comp. the review of this work in
   Theol. Lit. Zeitung, Jan. 4, 1908). Max Richter, Desiderius Erasmus und
   seine Stellung zu Luther auf Grund ihrer Schriften. Leipzig, 1907.
   Hunzinger, Der Glaube Luthers und das religions-geschichtliche
   Christentum der Gegenwart. Leipzig, 1907. Hunzinger strikingly observes
   that the laudation of Erasmus at the expense of Luther is in keeping
   with the attempt perceptible elsewhere to go back from the Christ of
   the Bible to the so-called historical Jesus, the Jesus of the Synoptics
   or the Sermon on the Mount. The line repre sented by Christ, Paul,
   Augustine, Luther, and Calvin is abandoned in favor of that represented
   by Jesus, Pelagius, Abelard, Erasmus, the Enlightenment.

   [6] Troeltsch, Protest. Kirchentum und Kirche in der Neuzeit, pp.
   253-458 of Die Christliche Religion, in: Die Kultur der Gegenwart.
   (comp. for the other side Kattenbusch, Theol. Rundschau, 1907, and
   Herrmann, Zeits. für Theol. und Kirche, 1907). Comp. also Karl Bell,
   Katholizismus und Protestantismus. Leipzig, 1903, pp.56 ff. F. J.
   Schmidt, Zur Wiedergeburt des Idealismus. Leipzig, 1908, pp.60 ff.

   [7] Lechler, Geschichte des engl. Deismus. Stuttgart, 1841. Troeltsch,
   art. Deismus in PRE.

   [8] Schelling, Philos. der Offenbarung, Sämmtliche Werke II, 4, p.5.

   [9] Lechler, op. cit., p.362.

   [10] Groen van Prinsterer, op. cit.

   [11] Haller in Groen van Prinsterer, op. cit., pp.253 ff.

   [12] Comp. the author's essay: Evolutie, in: Pro en Contra, III, 3.
   Baarn, 1907. Eucken, Geistige Strömungen der Gegenwart. Leipzig, 1904,
   pp.185 ff.

   [13] As regards Goethe, to whom Haekel loves to appeal, this is clearly
   shown by Vogel, Goethes Selbstzeugnisse über seine Stellung zur
   Religion. Leipzig, 1906. Comp. also Frank Thilly, The World-view of a
   Poet: Goethe's Philosophy, in the Hibbert Journal, April, 1908, pp.530
   ff.

   [14] Windelband, Geschichte der neueren Philosophie. Leipzig, 1899, II,
   p.311.

   [15] Bruno Wille, Darwins Weltanschauung von ihm selbst dargestellt.
   Heibronn, 1906, pp.4,5,16ff,25.

   [16] Bruno Wille, op. cit., pp.5, 23.

   [17] L. Woltmann, Der hist. Materialismus. Düsseldorf, 1906, p.148. H.
   Pesch, Liberalismus, Sozialismus und christl. Gesellschaftsordnung.
   Freiburg, 1901, II, p.234.

   [18] Bruno Will, op. cit., pp.7,12,14,16,17,19,23,25.

   [19] For instance by von Hartmann, Religions-philosophie. Leipzig, II,
   pp.74 ff. A. Drews, Die Religion als Selbstbewusstsein Gottes. Jena u.
   Leipzig, 1906, pp.184 ff. Reinke, Die Welt als That. Berlin 1903,
   pp.292 ff.

   [20] R. J. Campbell, The New Theology. London, 1907, pp.20,31,34,68ff.
   New Theology and Applied Religion by R. J. Campbell, etc. London,
   Christian Commonwealth Co., pp.12,18,60,62. Sir Oliver Lodge, The
   Substance of Faith allied with Science. London, pp.85ff. Comp. against
   this new theology among others, Charles Gore, The New Theology and the
   Old Religion. London, 1907.

   [21] Funt, Religion der Immanenz oder Transcendenz? in: Religion und
   Geisteskultur, 1907, pp.287-294. Bachmann, Nomen est gloriosum, ibid.,
   1908, pp.104-114.

   [22] Haeckel, Der Monismus als Band zwischen Religion und Wissenschaft.
   Bonn, 1893. Haeckel, Die Welträthsel. Bonn, 1899, pp.381-439. R. H.
   Francé, Der heutige Stand der darwin'schen Lehren. Leipzig, 1907, p.17.

   [23] Troeltsch, op. cit., p.255.

   [24] Fr. Delitzsch, Babel und Bibel. Ein Rückblick und Ausblick.
   Berlin, 1904, p.48. Id., Zur Weiterbildung der Religion. Stuttgart,
   1908, p.53.

   [25] Hegel, Philos. der Religion, I, p.120.

   [26] Gwatkin, The Knowledge of God. Edinburgh, 1906, I,
   pp.92,155-156,248.

   [27] Titius, Theol. Rundschau, Nov., 1907, p.416. The address of Loofs
   to which Titius refers, appeared in English in the American Journal of
   Theol., III, pp.433-472, and has been published recently also in
   German. Das Evangelium der Reformation und die Gegenwart, Theol. Stud.
   u. Krit., 1908, pp.203-244. Kattenbusch, Die Lage der system. Theol. in
   der Gegenwart, Zeits. für Theol. u. Kirche, 1905, pp.103-146 ff.,
   especially pp.128 ff.

   [28] Steinmann, Das Bewusstsein von der vollen Wirklichkeit Gottes,
   Zeits. für Theol. u. Kirche, 1902, pp.429-492.

   [29] Of the many works dealing with the subject directly or
   incidentally the following may be named by way of example : Schelling,
   Philosophie der Offenbarung. Staudenmaier, Philos. des Christ., I,
   1840. O. Willmann, Gesch. des Idealismus, 3 Bde, 1894-1897. James Orr,
   The Christian View of God and the World. Edinburgh, 1893. John Caird,
   The Fundamental Ideas of Christianity, 2 vols. Glasgow, 1904. A. M.
   Fairbairn, The Philosophy of the Christian Religion. London, 1905. A.
   Campbell Fraser, Philosophy of Theism. Edinburgh, 1899.

   [30] Schelling, loc. cit., p.26. For the conception of revelation which
   it was impossible to unfold in these lectures reference may be made to
   the author's Gereformeerde Dogmatiek, 2d ed., I, pp. 291 ff. The
   present lectures elaborate in detail the fundamental ideas expressed by
   the author in an address on Christelijke Wereldbeschouwing, 1904.
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 2 - Revelation and Philosophy


   In entering upon our task we may derive encouragement from the position
   accorded at present to philosophical thought. There is reason for
   rejoicing in the reflection that from an object of contempt it has come
   to inspire the warmest interest. When in the last century the natural
   sciences began their triumphal progress, and the enthusiasm Hegel had
   aroused gave way to sober disenchantment, people turned their backs on
   all metaphysics and for a while cherished the delusion that exact
   science would sometime give a satisfactory solution to all the problems
   of life. This was the so-called "period of Renan," in which physics was
   satisfied with itself and professed to have no need of metaphysics.
   [31]

   But this period now belongs to the past. Natural science, it is true,
   has by no means become insolvent, as Brunetiare asserted. On the
   contrary, it has gone on year after year adding one great discovery to
   another. But many have been disappointed in the foolish expectations
   they had cherished regarding it: the ignoramus et ignorabimus has
   rudely awakened them out of their dreams. Thus toward the close of the
   last century a great change gradually took place in the prevailing
   mental attitude. With the return to mysticism in literature and art,
   the need of philosophy and metaphysics and religion reasserted itself.
   This remarkable reaction has extended into the very camp of natural
   science. Not only has Ostwald published his "Lectures on Natural
   Philosophy," his "Annals of Natural Philosophy," and Reinke his
   "Philosophy of Botany," but natural scientists have eagerly discussed
   philosophical and especially epistemological problems--witness such
   names as W. K. Clifford, Poincare, Kleinpeter, Ostwald, Verworn.
   Haeckel, no doubt, professes to base his conclusions wholly on facts,
   but even he, none the less, recognizes that, in order to reach a
   monistic world-view, thought must be called to the aid of perception,
   philosophy of science, faith of knowledge. [32]

   Nor is this return to philosophy and religion the result of arbitrary
   caprice. It has all the characteristics of a universal and necessary
   phenomenon. It is not confined to one people or one stratum of society,
   but appears in many countries and among men of all ranks. It is not
   peculiar to this or that particular branch of learning, but manifests
   itself in the spheres of history, jurisprudence, and medicine, as well
   as in that of natural science; its influence is no less strong in
   literature and art than in religion and theology themselves. Verlaine
   and Maeterlinck, Sudermann and Hauptmann, Ibsen and Tolstoi and
   Nietzsche are all equally dissatisfied with present-day culture, and
   all seek something different and higher. They endeavor to penetrate
   beneath the appearance of things to the essence, beneath the conscious
   to the unconscious, beneath the outward forms to the inner mystery of
   infinite life, of silent power, of hidden will. From every quarter
   comes the demand for a new dogma, a new religion, a new faith, a new
   art, a new science, a new school, a new education, a new social order,
   a new world, and a new God. The things offered under this label are too
   varied, and often also too silly, to enumerate. Buddhism and
   Mohammedanism and the religion of Wodan are commended to us, theosophy,
   occultism, magic and astrology, daemonism and satan-worship, race- and
   hero-worship, ethical culture and the pursuit of ideals, the cult of
   humanity and of Jesus. Reform movements are the order of the day.
   Modernism is in the air everywhere. [33]

   Divergent as these tendencies may be, they all have two characteristics
   in common. In the first place, the principle of autonomy, expressing
   itself on the one hand in anarchism of thought, on the other hand in
   the auto-soterism of the will. [34] Each individual regards himself as
   independent and self-governing, and shapes his own course and pursues
   his own way. Having nothing to start with except a vague sense of need,
   men seek satisfaction in every possible quarter, in India and Arabia,
   among the civilized and uncivilized nations, in nature and art, in
   state and society. Religion is treated as a matter of purely personal
   invention and individual construction, as a mere product and element of
   culture. Everybody has his own religion,--not merely every nation and
   every church, but every person. Thus we hear of a religion of the
   modern man, a religion of the layman, a religion of the artist, a
   religion of the scientist, a religion of the physician. It has become
   a, vogue to study and expound the religion of Goethe and Lessing, of
   Kant and Schleiermacher, of Bismarck and Tolstoi.

   But in the second place these modern movements are all alike seeking
   after religion, after the supreme good, abiding happiness, true being,
   absolute worth. Even though the word "religion" be avoided and the
   new-fashioned term "world-view" preferred, in point of fact the
   satisfaction of no other need is aimed at than that which used to be
   supplied by religion. As to the proper definition of such a world-view,
   there exists considerable divergence of opinion. But whether with
   Windelband we define philosophy as the theory of "the determination of
   values," as the science of "normal consciousness," or conceive of it
   with Paulsen as a mode of viewing the world and life "which shall
   satisfy both the demands of reason and the needs of the heart," in any
   case it is plain that philosophy is not content with a scientific
   explanation of reality, but seeks to vindicate the higher ideals of
   humanity, to satisfy its deepest needs. Philosophy wishes itself to
   serve as religion, and from an attitude of contempt for all theology
   has veered round to a profession of being itself at bottom a search
   after God. [35]

   The agreement between these various movements of reform extends,
   however, still farther than this. The ways in which satisfaction is
   sought for the ineradicable "metaphysical need" appear to be many and
   divergent. But appearances are deceitful. Some youthful enthusiast
   discovers an idea, which takes him by surprise, and he forthwith claims
   for it the importance of a new religion, or a new philosophy. But
   historical study and scientific reflection will, as a rule, convince
   him in short order that the thing he regarded as new was, in point of
   fact, quite old, having in the past repeatedly emerged and passed away.
   That which has been is that which shall be, and there is no new thing
   under the sun. The new fashions in theology are as much like the old
   Arianism and Socinianism and Gnosticism and Sabellianism as one drop of
   water is like another. The new roads in philosophy have all been
   travelled by the thinkers of ancient Greece. It is difficult to square
   this fact with the theory of evolution and its boast of the wonderful
   progress of our times. But in reality the limitations of the human
   intellect soon become apparent, the originality of human thought is
   readily exhausted. Troeltsch strikingly observes that "the number of
   those who have had something really new to tell the world has always
   been remarkably small, and it is astonishing to observe on how few
   ideas humanity has actually subsisted." [36] The directions in which it
   is possible for our thinking to move are not nearly so numerous as we
   suppose or imagine. We are all determined in our thought and action by
   the peculiarity of our human nature, and then again by each one's own
   past and present, his character and environment. And it is not rare
   that those who seem to lead others are rather themselves led by them.
   [37]

   If, then, we attend to details, to words and forms of ex pression, to
   outward considerations and modes of presentation, we seem in the
   presence of a chaotic mass of religions and world-views among which
   choice is difficult. But when we penetrate to the centre of things and
   consider principles, all this mass reduces itself to a few types. "The
   epochs of human life," as Goethe's saying has it, "traverse in typical
   development a series of world-views." [38] And as every world-view
   moves between the three poles of God, the world, and man, and seeks to
   determine their reciprocal relations, it follows that in principle only
   three types of world-view are distinguishable,--the theistic
   (religious, theological), the naturalistic (either in its pantheistic
   or materialistic form), and the humanistic. These three do not succeed
   one another in history as Comte imagined his trois états to do. They
   rather recur in rhythmical waves, more or less intermingle, and subsist
   side by side. Thus Greek philosophy was born out of the Orphic
   theology, passed over into the naturalism of the old nature-philosophy,
   and became humanistic in the Sophists and the wisdom-philosophy of
   Socrates. Plato in his doctrine of ideas went back to the old theology
   and to Pythagoras; but, after Aristotle, his philosophy gave way to the
   naturalistic systems of Epicurus and the Stoa; and these in turn, by
   way of reaction, gave birth to the teachings of the sceptical and
   mystical schools. Christianity gave theism the ascendancy for many
   centuries; but modern philosophy, which began with Descartes and Bacon,
   assumed in ever increasing measure a naturalistic character till Kant
   and Fichte in the ego once more took their starting-point from man.
   After a brief period of the supremacy of the theistic philosophy in the
   nineteenth century, naturalism in its materialistic or pantheistic form
   resumed its sway, only to induce during these recent years a new return
   to Kant and the principles of humanism.

   At present the materialistic form of naturalism has been generally
   discredited among all thinkers of repute. Practically it still survives
   and counts many adherents, but it has lost all hold upon the leaders of
   thought. Three causes have chiefly contributed to this.

   In the first place, the criticism to which Darwinism in the narrower
   sense of this term has been subjected. It should be remembered that
   Darwin was not the father of the idea of evolution. This existed long
   before him. Bodin and Hobbes, Montesquieu, Voltaire and Roussean, Kant
   and Schiller, had already taught that the original state of man was
   merely animal. Hegel had changed Spinoza's substance into a principle
   of active force, and made out of immutable being a restless becoming.
   But all these earlier thinkers held the idea of evolution in a purely
   philosophical form. Darwin., on the other hand, endeavored to supply it
   with a scientific basis in facts, just as Marx tried to detach the
   socialistic hopes from all utopianism and raise them to the rank of a
   scientific theory. But no sooner had Darwin succeeded in laying such a
   scientific foundation in his "struggle for existence" with its
   correlates of "natural selection" and "survival of the fittest," than
   the attack on his work and its demolition began. In rapid succession
   the principles of struggle for existence, of unlimited variability, of
   gradual accumulation of minute changes during vast periods of time, of
   the heredity of acquired qualities, of the purely mechanical
   explanation of all phenomena, of the exclusion of all teleology, were
   subjected to sharp criticism and in wide circles pronounced untenable.
   The prophecy of Wigand that this attempt to solve the riddle of life
   would not survive until the close of the century has been literally
   fulfilled. And the declaration of J. B. Meyer has met with wide assent
   that Darwin's doctrine of descent was not so much an hypothesis
   proposed to explain facts as rather an invention of facts for the
   support of an hypothesis. [39]

   In the second place, natural science itself has undergone considerable
   modification in its fundamental conceptions. Physics and chemistry for
   a long time proceeded on the assumption of atoms, which, however
   minute, yet had the property of extension and were capable of fillng
   space. With sober scientists this atomism never took the place of a
   scientific theory, but served simply as a working hypothesis within
   defined limits. Materialism, however, elevated this hypothesis into a
   theory capable of explaining the world, regarded the atoms as the
   ultimate and sole elements of the universe, and viewed all change and
   variation in the world as due in the last analysis to mechanical
   combination and separation of these primitive elements. Not merely was
   protest raised against this by philosophical thought as represented in
   Kant, Schelling, and Schopenhauer, on the ground that atoms possessing
   extension and filling space cannot at the same time be conceived as
   indivisible; but modern physics and chemistry themselves through their
   study of the phenomena of light, and their discovery of the Roentgen
   and Becquerel rays, and their insight into the endless divisibility of
   matter, came more and more to the conviction that actio in distans is
   absurd, that empty space between the atoms is inconceivable, that the
   atom itself is a mere figment, and that the existence of a world-aether
   filling all is highly plausible. [40]

   To this must be added, in the third place, the effect of the criticism
   which has been brought to bear upon the naturalistic hypothesis from
   the epistemological point of view. Materialism made pretence to being
   monistic, but could furnish no support for this claim, seeing that in
   its atoms it continued to place matter and force side by side and had
   nothing to say about the relation between these two, and so remained
   obviously dualistic. Hence, in the name of monism materialism was
   condemned. Ostwald dispensed entirely with the conceptions of atom,
   matter, substance, "thing-in-itself," and substituted for them the idea
   of energy. What the vulgar notion regards as matter is a pure product
   of thought, and in itself nothing else but "a group of various energies
   arranged in space." These energies are the only reality. All our
   knowledge of the outside world can be subsumed under the form of
   representation of existing energy. [41]

   But even this "energetic monism," which Ostwald sought to substitute
   for "material monism," did not prove a permanent resting-place. On
   further reflection it appeared that none of the outside world,
   including ourselves, is directly present to our ego, but comes to us
   through the medium of consciousness only. The ultimate elements,
   therefore, which are positively given and form the foundation of
   science, appear to be not, matter and force, aether and energy, but
   sensations and perceptions. The phenomena of consciousness are the only
   fixed reality. Hence it becomes the task of all genuine, empirical, and
   exact science, taking its start from these phenomena of consciousness,
   to strip them of all accretions, and then to proceed to the
   construction of a system on the basis of these ultimate elements of
   "pure experience" only. [42]

   These considerations, drawn from the philosophy of "pure experience,"
   as advocated chiefly by Mach and Avenarius, led the Gottingen
   physiologist, Max Verworn, to a new form of monism, to "psychical
   monism." In the opinion of this scientist, materialism, while capable
   of rendering some service as a working hypothesis, is altogether
   without value as an explanation of the world. Mind cannot be explained
   from matter, nor phenomena of consciousness from the movement of atoms.
   Even the "parallelistic monism" of Spinoza, advocated of late chiefly
   by Paulsen, does not satisfy, because it is neither monism nor
   parallelism. Nor is the "energetic monism" of Ostwald more
   satisfactory, because it continues to distinguish between physical and
   psychical energy, thus falling back into dualism. There is no way of
   saving monism except by abandoning materialism and energeticism alike,
   rejecting altogether the distinction between soul and body as a
   delusion inherited from primitive man, and deliberately reducing
   reality in its whole extent to a "content of the soul." [43]

   In view of the fact, however, that such "psychical monism" may easily
   lead to solipsism and scepticism, others have concerned themselves with
   establishing the objective reality of the phenomena of consciousness.
   The Marburg school, represented by Cohen, Natorp, Cassirer, and their
   colleagues, seeks to secure this end by finding the subject of
   experience, not like Protagoras, in the consciousness of the individual
   as such, but in this as rooted in and supported by a universal,
   objective, transcendental consciousness, which, although incapable of
   individual states of experience, yet bears in itself aprioristic forms
   and so offers to our representation a basis and a norm. [44]

   Others, however, while equally intent upon maintaining the objectivity
   of knowledge, regard such a "transcendental psychical monism" as
   unwarranted and unnecessary. They believe an "epistemological or
   logical monism" sufficient to meet the requirements of the case.
   Especially Rickert, but also Schuppe, Leclair, Rehmke, Schubert-Soldern
   and their supporters, are convinced indeed that in order to escape from
   solipsism a universal consciousness must needs be assumed. But they do
   not understand by this a concrete, objective, real consciousness,
   carrying the individual consciousness in itself, like a sort of deity,
   something as Malebranche said that man sees all things in God. Their
   view rather is that a nameless, general, impersonal consciousness
   suffices, a consciousness which forms the abstract, logical
   presupposition of all human consciousness, but can never itself become
   the content of conscious experience, which therefore as a matter of
   fact amounts to the presence in the world of a universal potency
   attaining to consciousness in man. [45]

   The unprejudiced mind, passing in review these several attempts to save
   monism, can scarcely fail to reach the conclusion that the history of
   this monistic movement provides to a remarkable degree its sufficient
   criticism. Its development is a rapid process of dissolution. The very
   name with which the philosophy of the preceding century loves to
   describe itself is open to objection. It is difficult to find in the
   history of science another such instance of the wanton abuse of a word.
   It is of comparatively recent origin, and came into vogue especially as
   an attractive designation of pantheism, which in its turn, if we may
   believe Schopenhauer, is but another name for atheism, although it
   takes leave of God after a somewhat more polite fashion. But while the
   name "pantheism" still bears some definite meaning, the term "monism"
   is so vague and meaningless as to make it impossible to attach to it
   any clear conception. All possible or impossible systems may be so
   designated. We hear of a materialistic, pantheistic, parallelistic,
   energetic, psychic, epistemological, logical, and still further of an
   empirical, a critical, an idealistic, a naturalistic, a metaphysical, a
   concrete, an immanent, a positive, and of several other kinds of
   monism. [46]

   The name is particularly affected by the pantheistic materialism of
   Haeckel, who wishes by its use to brand every system differing from his
   own as dualism, and so to bar it out as unscientific. By his own "pure
   monism" he understands that there exists but a single substance which
   is at one and the same time God and world, spirit and body, matter and
   force. And in his opinion this monism is the world-view to which modern
   natural science stands committed. He agrees with Schopenhauer in
   declaring it equivalent to atheism, at least if God is to be conceived
   as a personal being. In the name of this monism he condemns as
   unscientific, all who recognize in nature, in the soul, in
   consciousness, in the freedom of the will, I do not say a supernatural
   factor, but even any force different from and higher than that at work
   in the mechanism of natural science. That men of high standing, like
   Kant, von Baer, Dubois-Reymond, Virchow, have kept aloof from this
   mechanical monism, is due, declares the President of the German
   Monistic Alliance, to inconsistency in thought or some decay of mental
   powers.

   Such an act of scientific excommunication in itself betrays an
   arrogance little calculated to commend a theory. No one who has proofs
   to rely on need resort to "energetic language" like this. In the realm
   of science there is no pope to proclaim dogmas, no emperor to
   promulgate laws. All investigations here stand on equal ground, and
   truth alone is lord. But least of all is such a lofty tone in place
   when one's own system utterly fails to meet the scientific requirements
   laid down. Haeckel himself oscillates between materialism and
   pantheism, conceives of his substance as both God and world, ascribes
   to his atoms a principle of life and consciousness, and appears to be
   naively unconscious of the involved antinomies. And the same is true of
   all systems which offer themselves under this name of "monism." The
   name is a mere disguise under which are concealed the distinctions
   between God and world, mind and matter, thought and extension, being
   and becoming, physical and psychical energy, as with Ostwald, or
   consciousness and the content of consciousness, as with Verworn.

   But even more serious is the objection that no one can tell us what
   this straining after monism in science and philosophy exactly means.
   Does it mean that there shall be recognized in the last analysis only
   one single and simple substance or force or law? But to lay down such
   an axiom apriori amounts to a palpable petitio principii, and applies
   to the world perchance a standard by which it neither can nor will be
   measured. The universe is doubtless much richer and more complex than
   we are able to imagine. Reinke very properly says: "I regard monism as
   an abortive attempt to understand the world. . . . The desire for
   unity, natural though it be, should never be given decisive weight in
   determining our world-view. The supreme question is not what would
   please us, but what is true." [47] No doubt science properly strives to
   reduce the phenomena as much as possible to simple principles and to
   subsume them under general laws. And in accordance with this our
   thoughts refuse to rest in a sort of eternal Manichaeism, which assumes
   two powers antithetically related to each other. But Sir Oliver Lodge
   truly observes that in this sense the striving after monism is proper
   to all science: "the only question at issue is, what sort of monism are
   you aiming at?" [48] When the use of this name is intended to imply
   that all multiformity in the world must be merely the manifestation of
   one substance, we must reject the demand as unwarranted, as the
   offspring of an aprioristic philosophical system, and as directly
   opposed to the results of all unprejudiced investigation of the
   phenomena.

   The demand in question appears even more unjustified when we consider
   how the monists attain the desired unity. The actual world presents to
   us an infinite variety of things and phenomena, and by no empirical
   research do we discover that unity of matter and force out of which
   monism seeks to explain the world. If such a unity be assumed, it can
   be reached only by way of abstraction. Greek philosophy was the first
   to conceive the idea of a principle of things, wherein it found both
   the temporal beginning and the efficient cause of all phenomena. Such a
   principle always necessarily bears this characteristic,--that all the
   peculiarities which actuality presents to our view have been
   eliminated, and nothing is left except the notion of universal,
   abstract being, which is not capable of any further definition. Even if
   we suppose, that thought can without logical fallacy reason from the
   full actuality to such an apeiron, this would by no means prove that
   the world really had sprung from and been formed out of this arche.
   Pantheistic philosophy, to be sure, proceeds on this assumption,
   identifying as it does thought and being. But this is to forget that
   logical analysis is something totally different from real decomposition
   or regression. In geometry points are conceived as occupying no space,
   but it does not follow that such points can exist anywhere objectively
   in the real world. Real space and real time are always finite, but this
   does not prevent the attribution to them in thought of infinite
   extension and duration. Similarly the conception of ultimate being
   reached by abstraction is a mere product of thought, upon which nothing
   can be posited in the real world; nothing can come out of it because it
   is itself nothing.

   The proof of this lies in the fact that the relation between the
   absolute and the world is described by pantheism only by the aid of
   varying images and similes. It speaks of natura naturans and natura
   naturata, of substantia and modi, of the idea and its objectivation, of
   reality and appearance, of the whole and its parts, of the species and
   the individuals, of the ocean and the waves. But it utterly fails to
   form a distinct idea or clear conception of this relation. Closely
   looked at, the relation assumed appears in each case to be either that
   of emanation or that of evolution. In former times, when thought was
   more accustomed to the category of substantiality, the former was in
   vogue. The absolute was represented as a fulness of being out of which
   the world flowed as water from a fountain. After criticism had attacked
   this conception of substance, thinking reverted to the category of
   actuality, and, under the influence of Hegel, substance was changed
   into a subject, being into an absolute becoming, and thus the idea of
   evolution was made supreme.

   The term "evolution," in point of fact, has become a magic formula.
   Says L. Reinhardt: "The idea of evolution was like the kindling of a
   torch which suddenly cast a brilliant light upon the mysterious
   processes of nature, the dark recesses of creation, and gave us the
   simple, nay, the only possible explanation of them; evolution is the
   magic formula through which we learn the secret of the apparently
   insoluble riddle of the origin and development of the infinite variety
   of terrestrial creatures." [49] To all questions concerning the origin
   and the essence of things, of heaven and of earth, of minerals and of
   plants, of animals and of men, of marriage and of family, of the state,
   and of society, of religion and of ethics, the same answer is
   invariably given: evolution is the key to the origin and existence of
   all things.

   It is a pity that a conception which is to explain everything should
   itself so much need explaining. [50] The definitions that are given of
   it vary immensely. A widely different sense attaches to it in
   Heraclitus and Aristotle, in Spinoza and Leibnitz, in Goethe and
   Schelling, in Hegel and von Hartmann, in Darwin and Spencer, in Huxley
   and Tylor, in Haeckel and Wundt. And no single definition covers all
   the phenomena that are subsumed under the conception. In the several
   realms of nature, and in the various stages of historical process, the
   element of becoming that is met everywhere bears widely different
   characters. The transformation observed in the inorganic world is of a
   different kind from that seen in living beings. And among the latter,
   again, consciousness and will, science and art, the family and society,
   the individual and the body collective, have each its own nature and
   its own law. There is unity, no doubt, but this unity does not justify
   our dissolving the variety into a mere semblance. There is no formula
   which will fit the universe with all its wealth of matter and force and
   life. "Do not think it likely," says Lodge, repeating with slight
   modification a saying of Ruskin,--"do not think it likely that you hold
   in your hand a treatise in which the ultimate and final verity of the
   universe is at length beautifully proclaimed and in which pure truth
   has been sifted from the error of the preceding ages. Do not think it,
   friend; it is not so." [51]

   The most striking proof of the pertinence of this criticism of monism
   has been furnished in a practical way by the rise of that new form of
   philosophical thought which introduces itself as pragmatism (activism,
   humanism), and already numbers conspicuous adherents in various lands.
   Though it has taken many by surprise, its appearance is easily
   explicable. When naturalism passes over from pure materialism to
   pantheism, this is tantamount to the return of philosophy to the ideas
   of life, mind, and soul. If, having recovered these, philosophy be
   unwilling to refer them to their origin in a personal God, it can find
   no foothold except in man. Hence, taking pragmatism as a general type
   of philosophical thought (as James himself describes rationalism and
   empiricism [52] ) apart from all individual modifications, as these
   appear in James or Schiller, Pierce or Panini, Höffding or Eucken, we
   find in it a reaction of the ego from monism in its several forms, a
   self-assertion of the science of mind against the science of nature, of
   the one against the many, of man against the world. Very properly James
   calls pragmatism "a new name for some old ways of thinking." Wherever
   monism makes of the absolute a Saturn devouring his own children,
   wherever the substance is permitted to resolve the modi, the natura
   naturans the natura naturata, being the becoming, reality the
   appearance, into a mere semblance, there humanity, personality with its
   consciousness and will, with its sense of religious and ethical values,
   with its scientific and aesthetic ideals will never fail to enter an
   emphatic protest.

   Thus Socrates brought philosophy back from heaven to earth. Thus in the
   Renascence and the Reformation the human mind shook off the shackles of
   scholasticism. Thus over against the dogmatism of the rationalists the
   philosopher of Königsberg asserted the autonomy of human knowledge and
   action. And when in the nineteenth century monism had waxed powerful,
   and had found in socialism an ally in the sphere of civil and practical
   life, the birthhour of a new sense of personality could no longer be
   delayed. Of this movement Carlyle was the first, the mighty, the
   paradoxical prophet. During the years 1833 and 1834 he lifted up his
   voice against the intellectualism of the school of Bentham and Mill,
   and pleaded the cause of faith, of personal conviction, of the
   experience of the soul. All of his ego rose in him and set over against
   the no of the world its strong, triumphant yea. I am greater than thou,
   O nature; I stand above thee, for I know and have power; in the life of
   my spirit, in my religion and ethics, in my science and art, I furnish
   proofs of my imperishable superiority. And this cry, born from distress
   of soul, found an echo everywhere. It was the same impulse that led a
   Soren Kierkegaard to revolt against the Christianity and Church of his
   time; that induced a Ritschl to break as a church-historian with the
   Tubingen school; that made a Hoffding range "values" above "facts";
   that determined an Eucken, in the mental life of man, to choose his
   standpoint above the empirical reality; that in the Netherlands filled
   the poet de Génestet with horror at the web which Scholten's monism
   threatened to spin around him; that impelled a Tolstoi, an Ibsen, a
   Nietzsclhe to hurl their anathemas against the corruption of society;
   that caused the men of art to draw back from naturalism to symbolism
   and mysticism, and everywhere procured for the principle of
   "voluntarism" an open door and a sympathetic reception. [53]

   While formerly the attempt was made to explain man from nature, thus
   doing violence to his personality, at present it is proposed to pursue
   the opposite method and seek in man the solution of the riddle of the
   world. Heretofore thinkers have looked backward, and investigated the
   past in order to discover the origin of man and how he became what he
   is; now the eflort is to look forward, to inspire man to work for his
   future, with the watchword, "make life, the life thou knowest, as
   valuable as possible." [54] Hitherto man has learned to know himself
   only as a product of the past: let him now learn to regard himself as
   "creator of the universe." [55] For is it not evident that in man
   evolution has reached its culminating point? Having after endless ages
   of strife and labor, after innumerable failures and disappointments of
   every sort, produced man, evolution now continues its task in and
   through man exclusively, with his co-operation and under his guidance.
   Personality is the most precious product, the most valuable
   quintessence of the process of the development of nature. Goethe's
   words, "Höchstes Glück der Erdenkinder ist nur die Persönlichkeit," are
   being quoted with universal delight and approval.

   We see, therefore, that pragmatism as a philosophical theory stands by
   no means isolated, but is connected with a mighty, ever recurrent
   mental movement. None the less it has a shade and color of its own.
   True, at first sight it seems to be nothing more than the
   recommendation of a new method differing from that usually applied in
   philosophy; and sometimes it introduces itself with an amiable modesty
   befitting this humble claim. It disclaims every desire to advocate any
   dogma, and maintains no preconceived theories. Discouraged by the
   outcome of the philosophical systems, and sceptical as to the
   fruitfulness of philosophic thinking, it turns, we are told, its back
   upon all "verbal solutions, apriori reasons, fixed principles, and
   closed systems," and applies itself to "concreteness and adequacy, to
   facts, to action, and to power." Still this is nothing more than the
   old demand which we have become accustomed to hear from varying
   quarters, that science must not start from preconceived opinions, but
   with strict impartiality build on the simple naked facts. Empiricism
   through the ages has harped on this, and positivism has simply played
   again the same tune in a slightly higher and shriller tone.

   In making this demand these schools of thought have acted under the
   naive impression that they themselves stand outside of the pale of
   philosophy and are absolutely free from all preconceptions. Pragmatism
   also cherishes this conviction, and, through the mouth of Schiller,
   compares itself to a corridor or passage in a hotel through which all
   the guests from the different rooms must pass in order to reach the
   open air. This is, however, nothing but a well-meant delusion.
   Empiricism is as much a guest in the great hotel of science, and as
   truly occupies a separate room, as all other inmates of the building.
   All engaged in the pursuit of knowledge recognize that thought must be
   based on experience, and that no other foundation can be laid on which
   to build science than that of the facts of nature or history. The
   scientific investigator does not resemble the spider or the ant, but
   the bee; he gathers the honey of knowledge from the flowers of
   experience. In order to see one has to open his eyes; in order to hear,
   his ears. Even mediaeval scholasticism, which, owing to various causes
   held the writings of antiquity, especially of Aristotle, in excessive
   reverence, never failed to recognize the principle that "omnis cognitio
   intellectualis incipit a sensu." But there is and always has been
   difference of opinion with regard to the influence which is exercised
   or which should be exercised by the personality of the investigator in
   the discovering, observing, arranging, and systematizing of the facts.
   No difference exists as regards the formal canon that science must
   proceed on the basis of the facts. Pragmatism, in exhorting us to obey
   this canon, does no more than reiterate a well-known and well-nigh
   universally acknowledged principle. The difference begins when the
   question what are the facts is reached, how they are to be found and
   observed, to be classified and elaborated.

   The case of pragmatism itself furnishes the best illustration of this.
   While offering itself as a mere method, it soon appears to be a theory
   and a system. It brings to the investigation of things a preconceived
   judgment of its own, both as to reality and as to truth.

   As regards reality, pragmatism not only declares the philosophy of
   materialism and pantheism aprioristic and dogmatic, but passes the same
   judgment on all philosophy which would recognize the reality of ideas
   and would count ideas among the facts to which consciousness bears
   witness. Appealing to the well-known words of Goethe, "In the beginning
   was not the word but the deed," it rejects all realism in the mediaeval
   sense of this term, to take its stand consciously and unequivocally on
   the side of nominalism. All generic conceptions, such as God, the
   absolute, the world, the soul, matter, force, time, space, truth,
   substance, causation, language, religion, morality, and the like are
   considered, therefore, not designations of objective realities, but
   terms by means of which we put together for the sake of convenience
   certain groups of phenomena, mere "helps to thought," which have to
   prove their serviceableness and value in the using; by no means
   invested capital, but current coin, subject to fluctuation. To the
   pragmatist the world is in itself no unity, no organism, no kosmos, but
   an avowed multiplicity of phenomena, an infinite mass of facts, a hyle,
   a chaos.

   Pragmatism adduces in favor of this nominalistic world-view the
   consideration already urged by Aristotle against Plato's doctrine of
   ideas, namely, that otherwise the world exists in duplicate, or even in
   triplicate. For, as James observes, to the rationalist the world exists
   either from the outset complete in the idea, or, at any rate, finished
   and ready in its objective reality exterior to us, in which case it
   once more appears in the form of a more or less imperfect copy in our
   minds. To the pragmatist, on the other hand, the unity of the world is
   not a given fact, but a growing thing, ever in process of becoming and
   improvement. In itself the world is essentially unformed matter, hyle,
   but "it is still in the making, and awaits part of its completion from
   the future." Or, better still, the world becomes what we cause it to
   be; "it is plastic, it is what we make it." For this reason it is a
   matter of comparative indifference how we conceive that it in the past
   became what it now is, whether we explain it materialistically or
   theistically. For, after all, the world is that which it is. And the
   main question is not, What has it been? but What is it becoming? What
   are we doing with it and making of it? [56]

   From this peculiar outlook upon reality pragmatism reaps the advantage
   of being able to accord unstinted and honest recognition to many facts
   which rationalism has to ignore or explain away. The world is a chaos,
   full of pathetic facts of sin and misery and sorrow, facts which the
   philosophy of the absolute seeks in vain to justify or to reconcile
   with the harmony of the universe. It also gives due consideration to a
   great number of the most diversified phenomena and experiences of
   religious and moral life, and, without in connection with these raising
   the question of truth and right, seeks to respect and appreciate them
   from a psychological and sociological point of view. Since it does not
   take its start from any idea of the absolute, not even of absolute
   goodness or justice or ominipotence, it does not feel called upon to
   furnish a theodicy. It does not sacrifice reality to any theological or
   philosophical theory nor force it into the procrustean bed of any
   apriori system. The world is a miserable world and in itself cannot be
   anything else.

   But while judging thus pessimistically of the past and the present,
   pragmatism cherishes quite optimistic expectations with regard to the
   future. And in connection with this it holds a peculiar conception of
   truth. Behind and around about us, no doubt, gloom and darkness reign,
   but ahead of us the dawn is breaking. For evolution has now so far
   advanced as to produce man, and has committed to him the further
   improvement of the world. On man it depends what the world is to
   become. True, this renders the future more or less uncertain; the world
   is not saved, necessarily, by its own inherent powers; if to be saved,
   it must be saved by man. Still this salvation is possible, and in part
   even probable. Pragmatism is not wholly pessimistic nor wholly
   optimistic; its frame of mind might be described as melioristic.
   Although the world be wretched in itself, the power and the duty of
   saving it belong to us.

   Man possesses such power because through a long series of ages he has
   come to be a knowing, and especially a willing and acting, being; his
   intellect and his will constitute him, in the midst of the sad, ugly
   reality, "a creative power." He has raised himself gradually to this
   plane. He was not endowed with such intellect and will at the start; he
   has slowly acquired them. Nor is he by nature endowed with a so-called
   "common sense," with innate knowledge of apriori forms, as even Kant
   from his rationalistic standpoint still imagined. The intellect itself,
   with all its content of conceptions, categories, laws of thought, etc.,
   has been evolved in the struggle for existence, because it proved
   practically useful and valuable for life. And this consequently is the
   only criterion of truth.

   Truth does not exist before or outside or independent of man. It has no
   more objective existence than the unity, the goodness, or the happiness
   of the world. It is nowhere to be found in its completeness, as though
   man could receive it after a purely passive fashion into his
   consciousness. Nor does its criterion lie in the agreement of our
   representations with the external reality, for it exists only in and
   not outside of man. It is not, but becomes; as the world in general, so
   truth is "in the making." Truth is that which in the experience of the
   life of knowledge and volition approves itself as useful. Its
   changeableness and relativity are necessarily given with this. There is
   no single truth that is settled absolutely, above all possibility of
   doubt; all truth remains subject to revision. Every truth is to be
   measured by its value for life, and for this reason may change any day.
   Science itself gives no knowledge of the objective reality. All it can
   do is to provide us with instruments for using the reality. It
   furnishes no absolute, but only relative, practical truth. It teaches
   no necessary, but only contingent, laws. That system is most true which
   is most useful. Truth, religion, morality, civilization in its whole
   extent, are all subject and subservient to life. The reality may be
   hard and chaotic; it is for us to make it true and good. [57]





     __________________________________________________________________

   [31] Renan, L'avenir de la science, 1890. Bertholot, Science et morale,
   1897. Ladenburg, Der Einfluss der Naturwissenschaft auf die
   Weltanschauung, 1903.

   [32] Haeckel, Die Welträthsel, 1899, pp.345 ff.

   [33] A. M. Weisz, Die religiöse Gefahr., Freiburg, 1904, pp.117 ff.

   [34] L. Stein, Gedankenanarchie, in: An der Wende des Jahrhunderts,
   1899, pp.287 ff. Ed. von Hartmann, Religionsphilosophie, I, pp.624 ff.
   A. Drews, Die Religion als Selbstbew. Gottes. 1906 pp.237 ff.

   [35] Paulsen, Einl. in die Philosophie, Vorwort. Paulsen, Die
   Zukunftsaufgaben der Philos., pp.389 ff., in Systematische Philosophie,
   in: Die Kultur der Gegenwart, 1907.

   [36] Troeltsch, Die Absolutheit des Christ. und die
   Religions-geschichte. 1902, p.56. Comp. A. Vierkandt, Die Stetigkeit im
   Kulturwandel, Leipzig, 1908. pp.1 ff.

   [37] According to the well-known saying of Ledru-Rollin: Je suis votre
   chef, il faut donc que je vous suive.

   [38] In Dilthey, Das Wesen der Philos., p.37, in System. Philos., in :
   Die Kultur der Gegenwart.

   [39] J. B. Meyer, Philos. Zeitfragen, 1870, p. 92. Comp. further on the
   history of Darwinism after Darwin and its critics: Ed. von Hartmann,
   Der Darwinismus seit Darwin, in Ostwald's Annalen der Naturphilos.,
   Leipzig, 1903, pp.285ff. R. H. Francé, Der heutige Stand der
   darwin'schen Fragen, Leipzig, 1907. H. Meyer, Der gegenwärtige Stand
   der Entwicklungslehre, Bonn, 1908. A. R. Wallace, The Present Position
   of Darwinism, Cont. Review, Aug., 1908.

   [40] Dennert, Die Weltanschauung des modernen Naturforschers.,
   Stuttgart, 1907, pp.60 ff.. Ed. von Hartmann, Die Weltanschauung der
   modernen Physik, Leipzig, 1902. Ludwig Baur, Der gegenwärtige Stand der
   Philos., in: Philos. Jahrbuch, 1907, pp.1-21, 156-177, especially
   pp.164 ff. A. Schneider, Der moderne deutsche Spiritualismus, Philos.
   Jahrbuch, 1908, pp.339-357.

   [41] Ostwald, Die Ueberwindung des wissensch. Materialismus, Leipzig,
   1895. Id., Vorlesungen über die Naturphilos., 1905. Comp. on Ostwald:
   Dennert, op. cit., pp.222 ff. W. von Schnehen, Energetische
   Weltanschauung, Leipzig, 1908.

   [42] Comp. on this tendency especially Mach, Populärwiss. Vorlesungen,
   Leipzig, 1897. Id., Erkenntnis und Irrtum., Leipzig, 1905. Also the
   exposition of Mach's philosophy by Hönigswald, Zur Kritik der machsehen
   Philos., Berlin, 1903, and Hell, Ernst Machs Philosophie., Stuttgart,
   1907. The following may also be consulted: Spruyt, Het
   empirio-criticisme, de jongste vorm van de wijsbegeerte der ervaring,
   Amsterdam, 1899. Koster, De ontkenning van het bestaan der materie en
   de moderne physiol. psychologie, Haarlem, 1904. Jelgersma, Modern
   Positivisme, Gids, Oct., 1904. Wobbermin, Theologie und Metaphysik,
   Berlin, 1901. Schapira, Erkenntnisstheor. Strömungen der Gegenwart,
   Bern, 1904.

   [43] Max Verworn, Natur- und Weltanschauung, Leipzig, 1905. Id.,
   Principienfragen in der Natur, Jena, 1905. Id., Die Mechanik des
   Geisteslebens, Leipzig, 1908, pp.1-20. Comp. Dennert, op. cit., pp.130
   ff. As a result of this criticism of the faculty of knowledge modern
   science has once more become conscious of its limitations. Not only
   have Duboise-Reymond in his Sieben Welträthsel and Balfour in his
   Foundations of Belief expressed themselves to this effect, but the same
   views in regard to the limitations of science, and even its exclusively
   empirical character, are taken by H. Poincaré, La science et
   l'hypothèse; Id., La valeur de la science; L. Poincaré, La physique
   moderne; and others whose works have appeared in the Bibliothèque de
   philosophie scientifique under the editorship of G. le Bon. Comp.
   Gustave Dumas, Réflexions sur la science contemporaine, Foi et Vie, 16
   Dec, 1907, pp.752-759.

   [44] H. Cohen, Religion und Sittlichkeit, Berlin, 1907. P. Natorp,
   Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der Humanität, Freiburg, 1894. Comp.
   Ueberweg-Heinze, Gesch. der Philos., III, 2, 1897, pp.198 ff.

   [45] Rickert, Der Gegenstand der Erkenntniss, Tübingen, 1904. Id.,
   Geschichtsphilosophie, pp.51-145, of: Die Philosophie im Beginn des 20
   Jahrh., Heidelberg, 1905, especially pp.110 ff. Heymans, Einführung in
   die Metaphysik auf Grundlage der Erfahrung, Leipzig, 1905, pp.224, 293.

   [46] Eisler, Wörterbuch der philos. Begriffe s. v.; further: Der
   Monismus, dargestellt in Beiträgen seiner Vertreter. Herausgeg. v.
   Arthur Drews. I. Systematisches, II. Historisches, Jena, 1900.

   [47] Reinke, Die Welt als That, Berlin, 1903, p.457.

   [48] Sir Oliver Lodge, Life and Matter, London, 1907. Comp. also: Fr.
   Traub, Zur Kritik des Monismus, Zeits. fur Theol. u. K., May, 1908,
   pp.157-180. U. Flügel, Monismus und Theologie, Cothen, 1908.

   [49] L. Reinhardt, Der Mensch zur Eiszeit in Europa, Munschen, 1906,
   p.2. Haeckel, Die Welträthsel, 1899, p.6. Id., Der Kampf um den
   Entwicklungsgedanken, Berlin, 1905, pp.13 ff. L. Stein, An der Wende
   des Jahrh., Freiburg, 1899, pp.47 ff. C. Stumpf, Der
   Entwicklungsgedanke in der gegenwärtigen Philosophie, 1899.

   [50] Rümelin in de la Saussaye, Geestelijke Stroomingen, Haarlem, 1907,
   p. 288, well says: "The idea of evolution must itself first be
   explained, before anything is explained by it," but what cannot be
   explained is looked upon as evolution. Eyes are being opened, however,
   to the abuse made of the word. Comp. Lexis, Das Wesen der Kultur, in:
   Die Kultur der Gegenwart, I. pp.13-19. H. Schurtz, Altersklassen und
   Männerbünde, Berlin, 1902, pp.6 ff., 69. Steinmetz, De studie der
   volkenkunde, s Gravenhage, 1907, pp.30 ff.

   [51] Lodge, Life and Matter, pp.6, 7.

   [52] James, Pragmatism, a New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking,
   Longmans, Green & Co., 1907, pp.9 ff.

   [53] Comp. an article by Prof. F. J. E. Woodbridge, Naturalism and
   Humanism, Hibbert Journal, 1907, pp.1-17. L. Stein, Der Sinn des
   Daseins, Tubingen, 1904, pp. 22 ff.

   [54] Höffding, Philosophy of Religion, London, 1906, p. 381, reviewed
   in Review of Theol. and Philos., Nov., 1907, p. 318.

   [55] The idea that man's physical evolution has reached its climax, and
   that henceforward it depends on him to direct with his mind the further
   development and to create a new world, occurs in many writers: E.
   Schurtz, Urgeschichte der Kultur, 1900, Vorwort, and pp.3 ff. Stanley
   Hall, Adolescence, 2 vols. London, 1905, I, preface. Henry Demarest
   Lloyd, Man the Social Creator, London, 1906, p.15. In the
   last-mentioned work occur, for example, the following statements. The
   laborer is the creator, he is the remaker of man, nature, and society,
   p.12. As labor is creation, by labor men are divine and become godlike,
   p.13. Every good man (is) a creator and redeemer, p.32. Man is a
   possible God, p.25. an is not under the law, he creates the law, p.41.
   The creature is the creator, every creature. Man is not the creator,
   nor the creator of all, but he is the greatest creator we know on
   earth. He is the creator of himself and society, p. 42, etc.

   [56] James, Pragmatism, pp.122, 127,162, 243, 257.

   [57] James, op. cit., Comp. on the related French philosophy of
   Ravaisson, Boutroux, Bergson, Le Roy, and others, an article by George
   M. Sauvage, New Philosophy in France, Catholic University Bulletin,
   April, 1906; J. de Tonquédec, La notion de la vérité dans la
   philosophic nouvelle, Paris, 1908. G. Rageot, Les savants et la
   philosophie, Paris, 1908.
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 3 - Revelation and Philosophy (cont.)


   To pragmatism belongs the great merit of having freed us from the bane
   of monism and of having exposed the barrenness of its abstract
   conceptions. It deserves appreciation and praise so far as it turns its
   back upon "fixed habits, pure abstractions, and verbal solutions,"
   calls us back to the facts, and places emphasis afresh on the practical
   element in all knowledge and science.

   But if it may be justly demanded of every world-view that it shall
   satisfy both the requirements of the intellect and the needs of the
   heart, it will be seen that pragmatism also is unsatisfactory. It is
   itself not pragmatic enough. While professing to have no dogmas, and
   rejecting alike the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, of Spinoza and
   Hegel, of Bradley and Taylor, in point of fact it aligns itself with
   the humanism of Socrates, links its thinking to that of Locke,
   Berkeley, Hume, and Kant, and simply replaces the philosophy of
   rationalism by that of empiricism. When it not only throws overboard
   the abstract conception of the absolute and its self-realization in the
   world-process, but also refuses to acknowledge as realities "upon which
   it can rest" God and his attributes, mind and matter, reason and
   conscience, and finds in all these names merely "a programme for more
   work, only with a practical value"; when it discards the idea of
   substance and resolves the thing into its properties; when it regards
   religion and philosophy as "largely a matter of temperament, even of
   physical condition," and places the criterion of all truth in
   "satisfactoriness" alone; pragmatism proves that it is far from merely
   a new method, but is to all intents a new philosophy, and comes
   therewith into conflict with its own point of departure and its own
   fundamental principle. No wonder James declares that it cannot be
   refuted by pointing out in it a few contradictions, but that the only
   way to learn to understand and accept it is by becoming thoroughly
   "inductive-minded" one's self through "a real change of heart," "a
   break with absolutistic hopes." [58] Here we touch the real core of
   pragmatism: it has abandoned all hope of knowing anything that bears
   any absolute character,--not only God, but all ideas and names. It is
   born from a sceptical frame of mind, and for this reason as a last
   resort clings to what it considers ultimate, incontrovertible facts.

   It follows from this that pragmatism is not correctly defined by
   indispensable, practically inalienable ingredient of our mental
   equipment." [59] As though idealism had become frightened by its own
   practical consequences, Paulsen and Verworn hasten to assure us, that,
   whether one's philosophy be idealism or realism, everything in life
   remains the same, and science retains its truth and value. [60] But, in
   addition to this, the facts directly contradict the assumption that
   reality is reached only through a process of reasoning from
   representation or will. It is by no means in every case that we posit
   reality behind our representations. Difficult as it may be to point out
   the difference theoretically, practically we all draw a distinction
   between the waking and dreaming states, between the representation of
   reality and hallucination. And in the same manner we ascribe reality to
   many things with which our will has no concern whatever, and from which
   it experiences no resistance whatever. The sun and the moon and the
   stars possess no less reality for us than the stone against which we
   strike our foot or the wall which shuts off our view.

   Now, since we are not in the least conscious of any such process of
   reasoning or inference, some have thought that these activities take
   place in the subconscious region of our mind. [61] This, however,
   entirely fails to make the matter more plausible. For either an
   unconscious inference of this kind must be the precipitate of long
   years and ages of experience, in which case it would presuppose the
   very thing to be established by it; or the human mind must by its very
   nature be under the necessity of connecting its representations with
   reality, in which case the procedure can neither be unconscious nor
   consist of an act of syllogistic reasoning; or, as von Hartmann
   actually represents it, it is something accomplished in us by the great
   Unconscious, in which case it is no conclusion of ours, and all
   self-activity of man in thinking and acting disappears. When idealism
   has begun by severing the representation in its origin and essence from
   reality, it has lost the power to reinstitute the inward connection
   between them. The mind, having once shut itself up in the circle of
   representations, is unable to free itself from this self-constructed
   prison. Whithersoever it may turn, it perceives nothing but
   representations, products of its own consciousness ; its will is a
   representation; the resistance that will encounters is a
   representation; the ego is a representation. Representations gird it
   about on all sides, and nowhere is access open to reality; for no
   inference can be drawn from thinking to being; from the representations
   there is no bridge to reality. Just as little as Satan can be cast out
   by Satan is there escape from representations by means of
   representations. [62]

   Idealistic philosophy is like the she-bear which draws all her
   nourishment from her own breasts, and thus eats herself up, ipsa
   alimenta sibi. [63] The case becomes entirely different if we take our
   starting-point not from the representations as such, but from
   self-consciousness; if for the act of cogitare we substitute the fact
   cogito. But modern psychology seeks to obstruct also this last road to
   reality. It bids us remark that we do not observe in ourselves any ego,
   any soul, any substance, but only a continuous succession of phenomenal
   states of consciousness, and that we lack warrant to infer from these
   the existence of a bearer or substrate. This obstruction, however, is
   easily removed, because the same mistake is made here that before was
   found to vitiate the reasoning with regard to the reality of the
   outside world. As our perception does not have for its object the
   representations, but in and through these the things themselves, so in
   the phenomena of consciousness our own ego always presents itself to
   us. In neither case is there involved any process of reasoning or
   inference. As the external perception, of itself and immediately,
   convinces of the reality of the perceived object, so the perception of
   self in the phenomena of consciousness assures us spontaneously and
   immediately of the existence of ourselves.

   Of course a distinction must be made here between the psychological
   investigation to which the man of science subjects the phenomena of
   consciousness, and by means of which he may abstract these from the
   self-consciousness, and the state of self-consciousness experienced in
   daily life by every man, the scientist not excluded. But in the latter
   case the self is always and immediately given in self-consciousness. If
   this were not so, we should indeed be shut up to the proposition,
   advocated no doubt by idealism, but none the less paradoxical, which is
   formulated by Max Verworn as follows: "There is no such thing as a soul
   dwelling in the human body, nor as a man which is the seat of
   sensations, but a man is a complex of sensations, and to others as well
   as to himself he consists of sensations." [64] That this is a paradox
   is recognized even by John Stuart Mill, for in spite of his actualistic
   standpoint, he declares that here a dilemma confronts us: we must
   either believe that the ego is distinct from the phenomena of
   consciousness belonging to it, or accept the paradox that a series of
   sensations can become conscious of itself as a series. [65] Here, as
   little as in the case of outward perception, does monism suffice. There
   is a distinction, an irremovable distinction, between the
   representation and the thing of which it is a representation, and there
   is an equally sharp and equally indelible distinction between the
   phenomena of consciousness and the subject that manifests itself in
   them. How else could unity and continuity of psychical life, how could
   memory and imagination, thinking and judging, comparison and inference,
   be possible? The ego is not an aggregate of parts, not a mass of
   phenomena of consciousness, afterwards grouped together by man under
   one name. It is a synthesis, which in every man precedes all
   scientific, reflection, an organic whole possessing members. It is
   complex but not compound. [66]

   In self-consciousness, therefore, we have to deal not with a mere
   phenomenon, but with a noumenon, with a reality that is immediately
   given us, antecedently to all reasoning and inference.
   Self-consciousness is the unity of real and ideal being; the self is
   here consciousness, not scientific knowledge, but experience,
   conviction, consciousness of self as a reality. In self-consciousness
   our own being is revealed to us, directly, immediately, before all
   thinking and independently of all willing. We do not approach it
   through any reasoning or exertion of our own; we do not demonstrate its
   existence, we do not understand its essence. But it is given to us in
   self-consciousness, given gratis, and is received on our part
   spontaneously, in unshaken confidence, with immediate assurance. In
   self-consciousness the light dawns for us on our own being, even as
   nature emerges from darkness and stands revealed in the rays of the
   sun. To ignore this fact of self-consciousness, this primary fact, this
   foundation of all knowledge and activity, to make it dependent on our
   own affirmation, to undermine it by doubt, is to commit against
   ourselves and against others not merely a logical but also an ethical
   sin. It is to shake not only the foundation of science, but also the
   indispensable basis of all human conduct; to weaken all confidence,
   spontaneity, volitional energy, and courage. And no effort of the will
   can repair afterwards the injury which has been wrought by thought. The
   will lacks the authority and the power to become the foundation of
   faith and knowledge, of religion and morality. "Practical reason"
   cannot bear the weight which "theoretical reason" has cast off of
   itself, and "theoretical reason" is not in a position to demonstrate
   that which is the presupposition of all demonstration. The "will to
   believe" may be indispensable to faith, but it can never become the
   ground of faith; and every demonstration of the intellect must rest on
   the intuitive certainty of self-consciousness.

   In self-consciousness, however, there is revealed something different
   from and more than our own self. Or rather, the ego that is revealed to
   us in self-consciousness is no cold, bald unity, no dead mathematical
   point, no quiescent, unvarying substance but is rich in content, full
   of life and power and activity. It is no monad without windows, no
   insensible "Reale" lying beneath the psychical phenomena and bearing
   them as the stage bears the players. On the contrary, it is itself
   immanent in the psychical phenomena and develops itself in and through
   and with them; it is capable of working out its own salvation with fear
   and trembling, but also of working its own destruction and ruin. It is,
   but at the same time it becomes and grows; it is a fulness of life, a
   totality of gifts and powers, which do not play their roles behind the
   curtain, but reveal themselves and find development in the multiform
   activities of psychical life, in the whole man with all his works.
   Augustine was the first who so understood self-consciousness. Socrates
   did not comprehend this; for although he brought philosophy back from
   nature to man, he was interested exclusively in gaining true
   conceptions of knowledge and conduct. And later Descartes took, it is
   true, his starting-point from thought, but thought meant for him the
   essence of the soul. Augustine went deeper and found more; he
   discovered reality within himself. The scepticism into which Greek
   philosophy had issued had lost, together with God and the world, also
   the self-certainty of man. But when the Christian religion revealed to
   us the greatness of God's heart, and in the day-spring from on high
   visited us with his tender mercy, it at the same time cast its light on
   man and on the riches and value of his soul. It imparted to him an ew
   certainty, the certainty of faith; it restored to him his confidence in
   God, and therewith his confidence in himself. And by this light of
   revelation Augustine descended deep into his own inner life; forgetting
   nature, he desired to know naught else but God and himself. There he
   found thought, to be sure, but not thought alone; beneath thought he
   penetrated to the essence of the soul, for in himself always life
   preceded thought; faith, knowledge; self-consciousness, reflection;
   experience, science; he first lived through the things which later he
   thought and wrote. Thus Augustine went back behind thought to the
   essence of the soul and found in it not a simple unity, but a
   marvellously rich totality; he found there the ideas, the norms, the
   laws of the true and the good, the solution of the problem of the
   certainty of knowledge, of the cause of all things, of the supreme
   good; he found there the seeds and germs of all knowledge and science
   and art; he found there, even, in the triad of memoria, intellectus,
   and voluntas, a reflection of the triune being of God. Augustine was
   the philosopher of self-examination, and in self-consciousness he
   discovered the starting-point of a new metaphysies. [67]

   The mind of man is indeed no tabula rasa, no empty form, but a totality
   of life from the very first moment of its existence. And when it
   becomes conscious of itself, this self-consciousness is not a mere
   formal apprehension of existence, but always includes in it an
   apprehension of a peculiar nature, a particular quality of mind. It is
   never a consciousness of pure being, but always a consciousness of a
   specific being, of a definite something. This is acknowledged even by
   those who follow Herbert Spencer in assuming that the rational, moral
   mind of man has been slowly evolved out of an animal state and has
   acquired in the struggle for existence a set of general conceptions, a
   common sense, to which attaches, up to the present day, great practical
   value, and which is transmitted as a habitus from parents to children.
   [68] By this evolutionary explanation the difficulty is simply pushed
   back into the past, into the life of our ancestors. In actual life we
   never see mere sensation developing into thought, and it is highly
   improbable that such a transition will ever be witnessed, as, for
   example, in the case of apes. But such an evolution is no easier to
   understand in the past than in the present; between perception and
   intellect, representation and conceptions, association of
   representations and conceptual thinking, there is a fundamental
   difference. Association combines representations according to
   accidental, external points of resemblance; thought combines
   conceptions according to the laws of identity and contradiction, cause
   and effect, means and end. Causation, for example, is something wholly
   different from habitual association, because it has its essence in an
   internal and necessary connection of phenomena. Unless the thinking
   mind be introduced into the explanation from the outset, every effort
   to make it emerge out of the faculty of perception by way of evolution
   must remain futile. Very properly Mr. R. W. B. Joseph, in his criticism
   of James, observes, that in order to acquire a "common sense," man must
   needs be possessed antecedently of mind. "A mind which had no
   fundamental categories and whose experience was purely chaotic would
   not be a mind at all." The nature of mind consists just in "the
   fundamental modes of its thinking." [69] But, be this as it may, the
   evolutionists themselves will have to acknowledge that to the mind of
   man, as at present constituted, this "common sense" is an integral
   possession which belongs to it from the start.

   When we endeavor to determine more closely the nature of this mind and
   descend for this purpose into the depths of self-consciousness, we find
   at its very root the sense of dependence. In our self-consciousness we
   are not only conscious of being, but also of being something definite,
   of being the very thing we are. And this definite mode of being, most
   generally described, consists in a dependent, limited, finite, created
   being. Before all thinking and willing, before all reasoning and
   action, we are and exist, exist in a definite way, and inseparable
   therefrom have a consciousness of our being and of its specific mode.
   The core of our self-consciousness is, as Schleiermacher perceived much
   more clearly than Kant, not autonomy, but a sense of dependence. In the
   act of becoming conscious of ourselves we become conscious of ourselves
   as creatures.

   This dependence is brought to our knowledge in a two-fold way. We feel
   ourselves dependent on everything around us; we are not alone.
   Solipsism, although the inevitable outcome of idealism, is in itself an
   impossible theory. According to the philosopher Wolf, there lived in
   his day in Paris a pupil of Malebranche, who advocated solipsism, and
   still found adherents, quod, Wolf observes, mirum videri poterat. Even
   Fichte felt compelled, chiefly by moral considerations, not to regard
   himself as the only existent being. [70] Every man knows that he does
   not exist alone, that he is not able to do what he pleases, that on
   every side he is curbed and hedged in, and encounters resistance. But
   in the second place we feel ourselves, together with all creatures,
   wholly dependent on some absolute power which is the one infinite
   being. How this power is defined does not matter for the present; the
   main point is that all men feel themselves dependent on a being which
   is the cause and ground of all being. This sense of dependence, with
   its two-fold reference, is not a philosophical conception, not an
   abstract category, not "a verbal solution," but a fact which in point
   of certainty is equal to the best established fact of natural science.
   It is something genuinely empirical, universally human, immediate, the
   very core of self-consciousness, and involves the existence of both the
   world and God.

   True, from the standpoint of idealism this last-named conclusion will
   be rejected. Still, two things need to be sharply distinguished in
   connection with this. That the belief in the existence of an objective
   world (and likewise of God) is a fact nobody can deny. The most
   thorough-going idealist cannot ignore the fact that all men without
   distinction, and antecedently to all reasoning, are convinced of the
   reality of the world, and that he himself in daily life shares this
   conviction, nay, finds it indispensable for knowledge and activity. Nor
   did Kant himself deny this fact. The problem which Kant set himself to
   solve was not how the world of our perception, the
   Wahrnehmungswirklichkeit, is produced,, for it is self-evident that we
   obtain this from perception, and that from the first we conceive of it
   as existing in space and time. But, starting from this world of
   perception and presupposing it, Kant sought to answer this other
   question,--how we can obtain scientific knowledge of this empirical
   world. And for this problem he offered the solution, that such
   knowledge cannot come through sense-perception, because the latter
   discovers nothing but an orderless mass of phenomena; that scientific
   knowledge is possible and attainable only when the human mind
   introduces order into this chaos of phenomena and subjects it to its
   own law. According to Kant the mind has such a law of its own: it
   carries in itself all sorts of apriori forms, which are not called
   apriori because in point of time they precede perception, or because
   they lie ready-made in our minds, but because they are independent of
   perception and are produced and applied by the mind in the very act of
   working on the representations. [71]

   From this activity of the mind in acquiring scientific knowledge,
   idealism (whether rightly or wrongly appealing to Kant cannot and need
   not be here investigated) has drawn the conclusion that the world of
   perception is either in part or in whole a product of the perceiving
   subject. But in doing this it confounds two questions which Kant kept
   distinct. The world of perception is given to us in our consciousness,
   not as dream or hallucination, but as phenomenon and representation,
   involving, according to universal belief, the existence of an objective
   world. This empirical and undeniable fact is recognized, and to some
   degree explained, only when self-consciousness is conceived in the
   sense above defined as the unity of real and ideal being; when it is
   recognized as a matter of intuitive certainty that in
   self-consciousness both the existence and the specific mode of
   existence of the self, the ego, are revealed. For in that case the gulf
   between the reality and the representation, between being and thinking,
   is bridged over. And with the selfsame certainty with which we assume
   the existence of our own ego, the existence of the world is recognized.
   For the representation is connected with reality by the same inner tie
   that binds self-consciousness to the self. It is the same sense of
   dependence that inheres in the mind as a whole which also inheres in
   all its representations and activities; the ego does not exist in a
   quiescent state, nor lie insensible outside of and behind the psychical
   phenomena, but is immanently active in them, and attains in them its
   revelation and development; and self-consciousness does not exist apart
   from the representations, but lives and realizes itself in them; it
   imparts its own certainty to these representations; it in them feels
   assured of itself. To undermine belief in the external world,
   therefore, always carries with it the undermining of self-confidence
   and of volitional energy, of the faith the mind has in itself, and
   hence of the superiority of the mind to nature, of religion and
   morality. Not evolution, but revelation, is the secret of the mind; in
   our self-consciousness, independently of our co-operation and apart
   from our will, the reality of our ego and of the world is revealed to
   us. Whosoever here does not believe shall not be established.

   In seeking to obtain knowledge of this world of perception science must
   needs set out from this fact of inner consciousness. It can and must
   endeavor to understand this; but the reality of the fact should not be
   made dependent on our ability to explain it. We do not know how the
   world can exist, or how, in this world, consciousness is possible, yet
   no one doubts the reality of either. It is imperative, both logically
   and ethically, that science shall respect the reality of the soul's
   inner consciousness, for if it refuses belief here, it undermines its
   own foundation. Epistemological idealism furnishes the most forcible
   demonstration of this. For according to this theory reality is itself a
   hyle, a chaos, and order is first introduced into it by the knowledge,
   and activity of the human mind. The world in itself is neither true nor
   good; it is we who slowly make it true and good. No doubt in this
   proposition, even when thus paradoxically expressed, there is always
   contained this much of truth, that the world apart from man is
   imperfect and unfinished. In the Pentateuchal account of creation the
   preparation of the earth is described from this very point of view; in
   man the world finds its head and its lord. Hence man is given a
   vocation with reference to this world. Though good, yet it is not
   "finished." It exists in order to be replenished, subjected, made the
   object of knowledge, and ruled over by man. To this extent it would be
   proper to say that it was man's task to make the world true and good.

   But the idealistic philosophy understands all this in quite a different
   sense. It takes its position in the second verse of the first chapter
   of Genesis, placing itself not after but before the preparation of the
   earth by God's omnipotent hand. The earth in itself, apart from man, is
   a waste and empty chaos, unformed, without ordinances and laws, without
   light and color. Now right here a difficulty emerges of so serious a
   nature that it divides the idealists into two camps, which we may,
   perhaps, call the "thoroughgoing" and the "half-hearted" idealists. The
   thoroughgoing idealists dispense even with the hyle, and regard the
   entire world as a product of the human mind, and man not merely as the
   orderer, but also as the creator of the world. It was in this sense
   that Fichte aftirmed that the ego posits the non-ego, and Paulsen,
   along with many kindred spirits in our own day, declares that the
   objects of the external world are "a creation of the subject." [72]
   Most idealists, however, draw back from this phenomenalism, which would
   seem bound to issue into solipsism; they, therefore, with Locke, draw a
   distinction between the primary and the secondary qualities of things,
   and, while ascribing to the latter a purely subjective origin, uphold
   the objective reality of the former as something that belongs to them
   independently of man.

   If this latter position, however, be correct, and the primary
   qualities, such as impenetrability, extension, number, motion, can lay
   claim to independent existence, then the assertion that the world in
   itself is nothing but chaos seems overbold; for on such a view there
   must be in it substance and causality, law and government, order and
   measure, and man appears to be not the creator, but merely the orderer
   of the world. And in his ordering of the world he is dependent on these
   primary qualities; he is not absolutely free, or autonomous, but
   determined in his knowledge and activity by the objective world. But in
   that case his activity cannot, even with regard to secondary qualities,
   be held to be an autonomous, creative one. It is true, idealism
   considers the subjective nature of these secondary qualities the
   impregnable fortress of its position, and believes that both
   epistemologically and physiologically the correctness of its view in
   this respect has been irrefutably demonstrated.

   Epistemology, however, teaches the very opposite of what idealism
   asserts. The perceptive and cognitive activity of man is only in a
   psychological, and not in a logical, sense a purely immanent act of the
   mind. Both perception and representation would cease to be what they
   are if nothing existed that was perceived and represented. On both the
   character of logical transcendence is indelibly impressed; by their
   very nature they point to an objective reality, detached from which
   they would become equivalent to hallucinations and illusions. As
   self-consciousness presupposes the self not outside but in the content
   of consciousness, so by the same law and with the same certainty the
   representation, which does not operate outside of self-consciousness
   but is the product and content of it, points back to an object. This
   explanation of the character of perception has not been modified in the
   least by the physiology of sensation. Physiology has clarified to a
   very important degree our insight into the conditions under which, the
   ways by which, and the means through which, perception takes place, but
   the act of perception itself remains precisely what it was before. We
   now know that the sensations of sight and of hearing cannot originate
   except under the condition of some millions of aether-vibrations per
   second, that the sensation of seeing is attended by an image thrown
   inverted on the retina of the eye, that smell and taste depend on a
   chemical dissolution of the constituents of the object, that nervous
   stimuli are transmitted from our sense organs to the centre of the
   brain. But the nexus that exists between all these intermediate
   processes and the perception itself utterly eludes us. What, for
   example, has the sensation of color as such to do with 437 billions of
   vibrations per second? What has the sensation of hardness or softness
   to do with stimulation of the nerves? The distinction between the cause
   and the condition, between the mediation and the object of the
   perception, for all this, retains its full validity. Just as writing
   and reading, telegraphy and telephony avail themselves of all sorts of
   mechanical movements of hand and tongue or of all kinds of visible
   signs and audible sounds, and nevertheless presuppose at each end of
   the process a thinking subject which by means of the signs understands
   the thought, so the sense-organs, together with all further
   intermediaries, are only the conditions under which, the ways in which,
   the subject sees and hears, tastes and smells, but in no wise the
   cause, and hence not in any way the explanation, of these perceptions.
   After all physiological investigation the mental act of perception
   remains as mysterious as before. Before and after there remains
   unshaken and unreduced the distinction between subject and object,
   between the act of perception and the object of perception, between
   sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, on the one hand, and being seen,
   heard, smelled, tasted, touched, on the other hand. Both grammatically
   and logically the distinction between the active and the passive voice
   remains in force.

   The moderate idealists, therefore, were wrong in conceding the
   subjectivity of the secondary qualities. Of course, continued
   observation and reflection may improve and render more accurate our
   perceptions of color and sound, of smell and taste, as well as those of
   space and time, of size and distance; both soul and body, the mental
   faculties and the senses, need teaching and training. But this does not
   affect the fundamental character that should be ascribed to the
   perceptions of the secondary qualities or the maintenance of their
   objectivity. It is already note-worthy that a number of such thinkers
   as Berkeley and Hume, Paulsen and Wundt, Eucken and Stumpf, consider
   the distinction between primary and secondary qualities unfounded and
   arbitrary. [73] In regard to space-- and time--relations errors are no
   more excluded than in regard to perceptions of color and sound. Apart
   from secondary qualities, space, extension, form are incapable of
   becoming objects of perception. The objective validity of the secondary
   qualities in no respect falls behind that of the primary qualities. If
   it be given up with respect to the former, it will be impossible to
   maintain it with respect to the latter; semi-idealism arbitrarily stops
   short half-way. But, apart from this, if such a great difference exists
   between the two groups of qualities, it is hard to understand that
   ordinary observation, in the learned and the unlearned alike, has
   remained entirely unaware of this. And yet ordinary observation in
   other cases draws all kinds of distinctions. It knows quite well that
   an hallucination is different from a, representation; if a person hurts
   his foot on a stone, it predicates the pain, not of the stone, but of
   the subject. It knows that food can be called healthy in a figurative
   sense only, because it promotes health (which is the attribute of a
   human being). And it is likewise aware that the senses of smell and
   taste are much more subjective than the others, so as to lie outside
   the region of disputation. Yet, notwithstanding all this, ordinary
   observation adheres to the conviction that the representations are no
   more light or dark, green or red, sweet or bitter, than they are high
   or low, round or square, near or distant, but that all these qualities
   belong to the object, and that the subject does not produce, but only
   perceives and takes knowledge of them.

   It is impossible, therefore, to remove or separate these qualities--and
   the secondary no less truly than the primary ones-- from the object. It
   will not do to say with Verworn, The stone is hard--a sensation; it is
   heavy--a sensation; it is cold--a sensation; it is gray--a sensation,
   etc., and thence to conclude that what I call a stone is nothing but a
   specific combination of sensations. Or rather, it is possible to talk
   in this way, but it is not feasible to practise it in actual life. We
   may proceed after this fashion in abstract thinking and come to
   maintain that nothing objective remains; but such an abstract procedure
   is no proof that we can act on it in practical life. The important
   point is precisely that the stone is a specific combination, or rather
   a complex, of qualities, which occur in combination with one another,
   and which are not held together subjectively in my consciousness, but
   objectively in the thing itself. [74] And so it is with every object we
   perceive and with the entire world spread out before our eyes. The
   world is not a group of perceptions formed by us for economic reasons,
   for the sake of the practical necessities of life, but a complex of
   qualities which exist objectively and are mutually bound together, a
   totality which cannot be reduced to any representation of ours. As
   little as subjectively the ego, the personality, admits of being
   resolved into a series of sensations, can the world of our external
   perception be reduced to a group of representations. In both cases we
   are face to face with one and the same fact. In consciousness our own
   being, and the being of the world, are disclosed to us antecedently to
   our thought or volition; that is, they are revealed to us in the
   strictest sense of the word. [75]

   In man's self-consciousness, however, still more is implied. Unless
   there were more, the result obtained could not satisfy us. For without
   more we should not be warranted in speaking of revelation, and could
   not maintain our confidence in the testimony of our self-consciousness.
   A true unity would be unattainable for us; naturalism and humanism,
   materialism and idealism, monism and pluralism, would continue to stand
   in irreconcilable opposition to each other. We should in that case have
   to call in doubt even the possibility of objective knowledge, and not
   be able to answer the objection that all our knowledge is pure delusion
   and imagination. Idealism has felt the seriousness of this objection,
   and has been led by it to seek in some way or other in the absolute the
   ground for the objectivity and the reality of our knowledge. In regard
   to the nature of this absolute there is difference of opinion.
   Malebranche conceived of it as a personal God in whom we see all
   things. Green speaks of an eternal consciousness. The Marburg school
   assumes a transcendental consciousness, which bears in itself the
   apriori forms. Rickert believes that an abstract impersonal
   consciousness will suffice. Paulsen and von Hartmann think of an
   absolute substance which is the only true being and of which all real
   things are unsubstantial accidents.

   That idealism has come to such a belief in the absolute cannot cause
   surprise. For it set out by breaking down the bridge between thinking
   and being, and thus created a chasm which, afterwards, no reasoning of
   the intellect could fill up nor any act of the will overleap. Thinking
   lost hold upon being. If, therefore, it was not to lose itself in
   subjective dreaming, but actually to issue in knowledge of the truth,
   it was necessary to re-establish, either high in the air or deep
   underground in the absolute, some connection between thought and being,
   between subject and object. The absolute thus serves to guarantee the
   truth of human thought. According to some it is not even necessary that
   this absolute shall restore the reality of the objective world or shall
   itself know all things according to truth; it suffices if it be no more
   than the objective norm of thinking or that as unconscious force it
   attain to consciousness in man.

   Although the attempt to recover after this fashion the lost unity of
   thought and being deserves appreciation, it is impossible to regard it
   as the true solution of the problem. Here again it is the testimony of
   self-consciousness that enters a protest. It has already been observed
   that Schleiermacher apprehended better than Kant the essence of
   self-consciousness when he defined it as an absolute sense of
   dependence. It now remains to add that in this sense of dependence
   self-consciousness at the same time posits the independence and freedom
   of man. Apparently this is an irreconcilable antinomy, but it will be
   shown presently that these two testimonies of self-consciousness are
   not mutually exclusive, but inclusive, of each other. Even
   Sehleiermacher himself overlooked this, and Kant was so far ustified in
   affirming the autonomy of human knowledge and action. For no matter
   whether learned or unlearned, all of us without distinction are
   conscious that we ourselves perceive, we ourselves think, we ourselves
   reason, we ourselves draw conclusions, and in the same manner that we
   ourselves deliberate, will, and act. Religion and morality,
   responsibility and accountability, science and art, all the labor and
   culture of humanity are built on this basic assumption. Hence the
   absolute cannot be conceived as an unconscious and involuntary force.
   No doubt from time to time the deity has been so conceived by a few
   "intellectuals," but pantheism has never been the creed of any people,
   the confession of any church. Men have, it is true, often broken up,
   along with the unity of the world and the unity of the human race, the
   unity of God, also ; but the personality of God has remained firmly
   established, always and everywhere, among every nation and in every
   religion. Just as confidently as man is convinced in his
   self-consciousness of his own existence and of the reality of the
   world, does he believe also in the reality and personality of God.

   This belief is interwoven with his self-consciousness, more
   particularly with its double testimony to dependence and freedom. These
   are not antagonistic, but rather postulate each the other. The sense of
   dependence is the core of self-consciousness and the essence of
   religion, but it is not a mere de facto dependence, as the unconscious
   and the irrational creation is dependent on God; in man it is a sense
   of dependence; the dependence in him attains to a cognizance, to a
   testimony of his self-consciousness, and thus certainly does not cease
   to exist, but yet assumes a different form. It becomes a felt,
   conscious, voluntary dependence, a dependence of man as a rational and
   moral being, and for this very reason it becomes a sense of absolute,
   schlechthinnige dependence. If the sense of dependence did not include
   this element, if it did not know itself as a conscious and voluntary
   dependence, it would cease to be absolute, because the most important
   factors in man, consciousness and will, would fall outside of it, or
   stand opposed to it. Consequently, if man repudiates his dependence,
   withdraws from it, he does not thereby become independent, but his
   dependence changes in nature. It loses its rational and moral character
   and becomes the subservience of a mere means to an end. Man, in
   becoming a sinner, does not rise, but falls; does not become like God,
   but like the animals. Therefore the feeling, the sense of dependence,
   conscious and voluntary dependence, includes the freedom of man: Deo
   parere libertas; Libertas ex veritate.

   This testimony of self-consciousness, combining dependence and freedom
   in one, is further the basis of religion, and likewise of morality. It
   leads man everywhere and always, and that quite freely and
   spontaneously, to belief in and service of a personal God. In view of
   the universality and the spontaneity of religion many have assumed an
   innate idea of God. But this representation is scarcely well conceived,
   and the name is somewhat unfortunately chosen. Of course, in the strict
   sense of the term innate ideas do not exist. They savor rather of
   rationalism and of a mysticism which separates man from the world, than
   of a Christian theism which finds God's eternal power and divinity
   revealed in the works of his hands. It is the mind of man, with all of
   its peculiar nature and organization, its intellect and reason, heart
   and conscience, desire and will, and with the ineradicable
   consciousness of its dependence and freedom, that is innate, brought
   into the world in principle and germ at birth, not acquired later
   phylogenetically or ontogenetically. Thus, when man grows up and
   develops in accordance with the nature implanted in him, not in
   detachment from the world and the social organism, but in the
   environment in which a place was assigned to him at birth, he attains
   as freely and as inevitably to the knowledge and service of a personal
   God as he believes in his own existence and that of the world. He does
   not invent the idea of God nor produce it; it is given to him and he
   receives it. Atheism is not proper to man by nature, but develops at a
   later stage of life, on the ground of philosophic reflection; like
   scepticism, it is an intellectual and ethical abnormality, which only
   confirms the rule. By nature, in virtue of his nature, every man
   believes in God. And this is due in the last analysis to the fact that
   God, the creator of all nature, has not left himself without witness,
   but through all nature, both that of man himself and that of the
   outside world, speaks to him. Not evolution, but revelation alone
   accounts for this impressive and incontrovertible fact of the worship
   of God. In self-consciousness God makes known to us man, the world, and
   himself.

   Hence this revelation is of the utmost importance, not only for
   religion, but also for philosophy, and particularly for epistemology.
   All cognition consists in a peculiar relation of subject and object,
   and is built on the agreement of these two. The reliability of
   perception and thought is not assured unless the forms of thought and
   the forms of being correspond, in virtue of their origin in the same
   creative wisdom. Philosophy itself has not failed to perceive the
   necessity of this, but by taking a wrong start it has strayed either to
   the right or to the left. It either, with Hegel, has identified thought
   with being and raised logic to the rank of metaphysics ; or with Kant
   and humanism it has separated thought from being, leaving to logic a
   purely formalistic character. In either case the true relation between
   thought and being, and hence the correct principle of all cognition and
   knowledge, are imperfectly recognized. As even von Hartmann admits,
   there is no other way of doing justice to both subject and object
   except by recognizing that it is one and the same reason "which is
   active in consciousness as a principle introducing order into the
   sensations, and in the objective world as the principle of synthesis
   for the things in themselves." [76] The forms of being, the laws of
   thought, and--to add this here for the sake of completeness--the forms
   of conduct, have their common source in the divine wisdom. The three
   departments of philosophy, physics, logic and ethics, form a harmonious
   whole. What monism seeks in the wrong direction, and cannot attain
   unto, has here been reached, viz., the unity which does not exclude but
   includes the multiformity the systema of philosophy.

   On this firm theistic foundation, finally, there is room for belief in
   the progress of science and the realization of the ideal of truth.
   There is some degree of warrant for the assertion that the truth is
   not, but becomes. As a matter of fact, the truth nowhere meets us "cut
   and dried," ready, as it were, to be simply taken into our
   consciousness. On the contrary--and this is the difference between
   "revelation" and "discovery"--man has to conquer the truth in the sweat
   of his brow, with the exertion of all his strength, foot by foot and
   piece by piece. The branches of knowledge have without exception "grown
   up in the practice of life itself"; [77] they have all been born of
   necessity, and possess a practical, economic value. Nor is the truth a
   mere copy, a portrait of reality; it is something different from a
   globus intellectualis. No one, by the mere act of gathering into his
   consciousness a complete account of Goethe's life and labors, to their
   smallest details, will attain the truth concerning Goethe; such
   knowledge is a mere chronicle, not science; a photograph, not a
   painting; a copy, not a living reproduction. Science aims at something
   higher: it seeks not the dead, but the living; not the transitory, but
   the eternal; not the reality, but the truth. Only it does not find the
   truth apart from the reality. Whosoever wants to know Goethe must
   inform himself as to his person and labors. Whosoever wants to know
   nature must open his eyes. Whosoever desires to enter the kingdom of
   truth, no less than he who wants to enter the kingdom of heaven, must,
   to quote Bacon's words, become as a little child which learns by
   obeying. We do not create the truth and we do not spin it out of our
   brain; but, in order to find it, we must go back to the facts, to
   reality, to the sources.

   All science rests on the assumption that reality is not coextensive
   with the phenomena, but contains a kernel of divine wisdom, being the
   realization of the decree of God. In so far the truth is bound to
   reality, and finds its criterion in correspondence with reality. But
   the truth transcends the empirical reality, because and in the same
   degree that scientific investigation descends more deeply and
   penetrates more fully into its essence. And the truth thus found by
   science is adapted to consciousness, as it can be discovered and
   received by consciousness alone. It would, therefore, not be improper
   to say that for us the truth comes into being only by being made the
   object of our knowledge and an element of our consciousness. For this
   purpose God has deposited the truth in nature and Scripture, that we
   might have it, and by knowing it might rule through it. In the
   knowledge of the truth lies the end of its revelation; reality is an
   instrument to enable us to find the truth; reality is intended to
   become truth in our consciousness and in our experience. Reality,
   therefore, does not offer us in the truth a mere copy of itself, so
   that the world, as pragmatism objects, would be duplicated. [78] In the
   truth, reality rises to a higher mode of existence; having first lain
   in darkness, it now walks in the light; having once been a riddle, it
   now finds its solution; not understood at the beginning, it now is
   "declared."

   So the truth obtains an independent value of its own. Its standard does
   not lie in its usefulness for life, for, if usefulness were the
   criterion of truth, then perfect unanimity ought to prevail in regard
   to usefulness, and life itself ought to be a value not subject to
   fluctuation. But in regard to life, what counts is not merely
   existence, or pleasure, or intensity, but first of all content and
   quality. And it is precisely by truth that this content and quality are
   determined. The truth is of more value than empirical life: Christ
   sacrificed his life for it. None the less, by doing so he regained his
   life. Truth is worth more than reality; it belongs to that higher order
   of things in which physis, and gnosis, and ethos are reconciled, and in
   which a true philosophy gives full satisfaction both to the demands of
   the intellect and to the needs of the heart.







     __________________________________________________________________

   [58] James, Mind, 1905, p.191.

   [59] Ed. von Hartmann, Kritische Wanderungen durch die Philosophie der
   Gegenwart, 1890, p.190, in: C. Willems, Die Erkenntnisslehre des
   modernen Idealismus, Trier, 1906, p.13. Comp. also Max
   Frischeisen-Kohler, Die Lehre von den Sinnesqualitaten und ihre Gegner,
   Zeits. f. Wissensch. Philos. und Soziologie, 1906.

   [60] Paulsen, Einl. in die Philosophie, Berlin, 1892, p.363. Verworn in
   Dennert, Die Weltanachauung des modernen Naturforschers, p.147.

   [61] So Helmholtz, von Hartmann, and others, in C. Willems, Die
   Erkenntnislehre des mod. Ideal, pp.42 ff.

   [62] E. L. Fischer, Die Grundfragen der Erkenntnisstheorie, 1887,
   p.424.

   [63] Paulsen, in Willems, op. cit., p.103.

   [64] Verworn, Naturwissenschaft und Weltanschauung, 1904, p.43. Comp.
   Mach. in Hell, Ernst Machs Philosophie, 1907, p.23. Heijmans, Het Ik en
   het psychisch Monisme, Tijdschr. voor Wijsbegeerte, I, 3.

   [65] Stuart Mill, in Willems, op. cit., p.79.

   [66] John McTaggart Ellis McTaggart, Some Dogmas of Religion, London,
   1906, p.108. Over against idealism the unity and independence of the
   ego are upheld by Landmann, Die Mehrheit geistiger personlichkeiten in
   einem Individuum, 1894. Gutberlet, Der Kampf um die Seele, Mainz, 1903,
   pp.121 ff. Rudolf Otto, Naturalistiche und religiose Weltansicht,
   Tubingen, 1904, pp.244 ff.

   [67] Comp. Dilthey, Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften, Leipzig,
   1880, pp.322 ff. Warfield, Augustine's Doctrine of Knowledge and
   Authority, Princeton Theol. Review, July and Oct., 1907.

   [68] James, Pragmatism, pp.165 ff.

   [69] Mr. H. W. B. Joseph, in Mind, 1905, p.33.

   [70] Flugel, Die Probleme der Philosophie, Cothen, 1906, pp.114-115.

   [71] Paul Kalweit, Das religiose Apriori, Theol. Stud. u. Krit. 1908,
   I, pp.139-156.

   [72] Paulsen, Einl. in die Philos. 1892, p.425.

   [73] In Willems, op. cit., pp.36-47. Comp. also Bradley, Appearance and
   Reality, London, 1906, pp.11 ff., and further the article by
   Frischeisen-Kohler, cited in note 4 above.

   [74] Verworn, in Dennert, op. cit., p.140.

   [75] Comp. G. E. Moore, Refutation of Idealism, Mind, N. S. n. 48, and,
   in answer, C. A. Strong, Has Mr. Moore refuted Idealism? Mind, 1905,
   pp.178-189. Further, J. S. Mackenzie, The New Realism and the Old
   Idealism, Mind, 1906, pp.308-328.

   [76] Ed. von Hartmann, in Willems, op. cit., pp.56-79.

   [77] Dilthey, Einl. in die Geisteswissenschaften, pp.26-48.

   [78] James, Pragmatism, p.257.
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 4 - Revelation and Nature


   God, the world, and man are the three realities with which all science
   and all philosophy occupy themselves. The conception which we form of
   them, and the relation in which we place them to one another, determine
   the character of our view of the world and of life, the content of our
   religion, science, and morality. [79]

   But at the very outset there emerges a profound difference of opinion
   in regard to the sciences which are devoted to these important
   subjects. It is often represented as if only the special science of
   theology concerned itself with God and divine things, and as if all the
   other sciences, particularly the natural sciences, have nothing
   whatever to do with God; nay, as if they would even forfeit their
   scientific character and become disloyal to their task, should they
   refer to him or take account of him. A chasm is thus created,
   objectively, in the sphere of reality, between God and the world, and,
   subjectively, in man, between his intellect and heart, between his
   faith and knowledge; even if the very existence of God be not denied
   and all right of existence be refused to faith.

   But such a dualism is impossible. God does not stand apart from the
   world, much less from man, and therefore the knowledge of him is not
   the peculiar domain of theology. It is true, theology especially
   occupies itself with his revelation, in order that its nature and
   contents may be, so far as possible, scientifically understood. But
   this revelation addresses itself to all men; the religion which is
   founded on it is the concern of every man, even of the man of science
   and the investigator of nature; for all men, without exception, the
   knowledge of God is the way to eternal life. Moreover, the man who
   devotes himself to science cannot split himself into halves and
   separate his faith from his knowledge; even in his scientific
   investigations he remains man,--not a purely intellectual being, but a
   man with a heart, with affections and emotions, with feeling and will.
   Not only mankind, but also every individual, finds, as he grows to full
   consciousness, a view of the world already prepared for him, to the
   formation of which he has not consciously contributed. [80] And the
   demand which truth and morality make on him is not, and cannot be, that
   he shall denude himself of himself, but that he shall be, a man of God,
   furnished completely unto every good work. The thinker and philosopher,
   as well as the common citizen and the day laborer, have to serve and
   glorify God in their work.

   This leads immediately to the conclusion that natural science is not
   the only science, and cannot be. The French and English use of the word
   "science" might, unfortunately, lead us to think so, [81] and gives
   support to the idea of Comte that humanity has successively traversed
   the three stadia of theology, metaphysics, and positivism, and only now
   has reached the standpoint of true science. But history knows nothing
   of such a progression; the sciences do not develop successively one
   after the other, but more or less side by side and in connection with
   one another. By all sorts of interrelations they exercise an influence
   on each other, and thus support and promote each other. Nor, in the
   development of science, do all things move on as simply as is
   postulated in the easy and aprioristic scheme of the, doctrine of
   evolution. No universal formula, which endeavors to embrace the entire
   course of history, is true; and Comte's law also fails in the face of
   the criticism of life in its richness. Not uniformity, but
   differentiation and totality, are everywhere the distinctive marks of
   life. [82]

   To the sciences of nature, therefore, there belongs in the circle of
   the sciences the same liberty of movement and work which is the right
   of every other science. They have their own object, and therefore their
   own method and aim. In their effort to know and to explain natural
   phenomena they have no need to call in the aid of a Deus ex machina.
   and make of faith an asylum ignorantiae. As a science, natural science
   busies itself not only with the succession, but also with the causes,
   of phenomena. In searching after these causes the conception of
   evolution, as a working hypothesis, has done eminent service. Analogies
   and relations have been traced out and discovered, which otherwise
   would not so easily have been found and investigated. But here the
   mistake has been made that evolution, which has proved, like, for
   instance, the physical atom, useful as a working hypothesis, has been
   elevated to the rank of a formula of world-explanation and elaborated
   into a system of world-conception. Thus natural science leaves her own
   domain and passes over to that of philosophy. It must acquiesce in the
   other sciences, of religion and ethics, of jurisprudence and
   Aesthetics, coming also to their rights and incorporating the results
   of their investigations too into the structure of an all-embracing view
   of the world.

   The representation is therefore wrong, that faith in the existence and
   providence of God finds its home exclusively in the chasms of our
   knowledge, so that as our investigations proceed, we must be
   continually filled with anxiety, and steadily lose the territory of our
   faith in proportion as more and more problems are solved. For the world
   is itself grounded in God; witness its law and order. [83] Faith
   naturally insists,--how could it fail to do so? --that it shall retain
   a place in the world. It maintains its demand that natural science
   shall retain consciousness of its limitations and that it shall not
   form a conception, out of the narrow sphere in which it works, in which
   no room is left for the soul and immortality, for intelligence and
   design in the world, for the existence and providence of God, for
   religion and Christianity. Natural science remains, therefore,
   perfectly free in its own sphere ; but it is not the only science, and
   must therefore cease striving to construe religious and ethical
   phenomena after the same physico-chemical and mathematico-mechanical
   fashion as is warranted and required in the case of numberless natural
   phenomena. In principle what faith demands is that science shall itself
   maintain its ethical character, and shall not put itself at the service
   of the evil inclination of the human heart in its endeavor to explain
   the world without God and to erect itself into a self-supporting and
   self-sufficient divinity.

   No barrier is thus erected around natural science which it cannot
   respect; but rather a boundary is assigned to its sphere of labor which
   is demanded by its own object and character. For whereas formerly the
   concept "nature" frequently embraced all creation, and, as naturata,
   was distinguished from God as the natura naturans, it is nowadays
   usually limited to sensible objects and phenomena, so far as they are
   not produced by human art. In this sense nature stands, then, as the
   non-ego, in antithesis with the human psyche, as the observing and
   knowing subject. But because the mechanical view has a perfect right of
   existence in a part of the territory which history has gradually
   assigned to natural science, and has indeed led in it to various
   valuable results, many have drawn the conclusion that natural science
   is the only true science, and that the mechanical solution is the only
   true solution of all phenomena. Haeckel goes even so far as to claim
   that every one who still believes in a soul, or a principle of life,
   deserts the domain of science, and seeks refuge in miracles and
   supernaturalism. [84] On the other hand, von Hartmann justly maintains
   that whosoever, as a scientist, deems the mechanical explanation of the
   phenomena of life, for instance, insufficient, and endeavors to explain
   them in another way, namely, by a principle of life, deals with the
   matter just as scientifically as any other. [85] And Ostwald has even
   called the mechanical view of the world "a mere delusion," which cannot
   be utilized even as a working hypothesis. [86] In fact, the conception
   that the world as a whole and in all its parts is one vast machine is
   so absurd and self-contradictory that it is difficult to understand how
   it could even for one moment have satisified and dominated the human
   mind. For aside from the fact that even a machine would postulate an
   intelligent maker [87] the other fact remains that a machine which is
   eternally self-moving, and never has ceased to work and never will
   cease to do so, is in conflict with all our experiences and all our
   thinking. In point of fact the world, far from being intelligible as a
   machine, is "in no respect self-explaining, but in every respect
   mysterious." Its very existence is a riddle. The great miracle before
   which we stand is, that there is something which is, that there is an
   existence of which we are unable to point to the ground. [88] To the
   world, as a whole and in all its parts, we ascribe only a contingent
   existence, so that its explanation is not found in itself. Physics
   points back to and is founded in metaphysics.

   This is already evident from the fact that the science of nature,
   although it has in many respects the advantage over the mental
   sciences, still utilizes, and is compelled to utilize, all sorts of
   ideas which are not derived from experience, but are present from the
   very start. Ideas like "thing" and "property," "matter" and "force,"
   "aether" and "movement," "space" and "time," "cause" and "design," are
   indispensable to natural science; but they are derived from
   metaphysics. They serve as logical apparatus which precedes all
   observation; and yet they are so far from plain and clear that they,
   each in itself and all together, contain a world of mysteries.
   Naturally this does not satisfy the human mind. It endeavors, whether
   successfully or not makes no difference, to apprehend the meaning and
   the truth, the principle and the cause, of these ideas. Natural science
   may for a time despise philosophy; by and by it must return to it,
   because it has itself proceeded from it. [89] When the "thirst for
   facts" has been in a way satisfied, "the hunger for causes" will come
   to the surface. [90]

   The proof of this is found herein, that no one is able to banish from
   his heart or to remove from his lips the question of the origin of
   things. Haeckel justly observes, however, that this question lies
   outside of the domain of natural science. If creation ever took place,
   "it lies entirely beyond the scope of human knowledge, and hence can
   never become the object of scientific investigation." But he does not
   stop there, but immediately proceeds--"Natural science regards matter
   as eternal and imperishable , because the origination or annihilation
   of the smallest of its particles has never yet been proved by
   experience." In announcing this dogma of the eternity of matter,
   however, it is not the student of nature but the philosopher, not
   science but faith, that speaks; for what he objects against faith is of
   force against himself : "where faith begins, there science ceases."
   [91] And this is all the more forcible because elsewhere he is
   compelled to admit: "We nowhere reach a knowledge of ultimate causes" ;
   even if all the riddles of the world and of life were solved, the one
   great riddle of substance would confront us like a sphinx. [92]
   Physics, then, is not the only science solving all riddles, but before
   it and above it stands metaphysics. if, nevertheless, it wishes an
   explanation of the origin of all things, it commits itself to what,
   scientifically considered, as Lodge says, "must be viewed as
   guess-work, being an overpressing of known fact into an exaggerated and
   over-comprehensive form of statement." [93]

   Not less great are the difficulties which confront natural science when
   it investigates the essence of things. Here we have to deal with three
   factors,--space, time, and a quale, howsoever we may further define it,
   which in space and time makes their mutual relations possible. These
   factors, too, the science of nature does not find by its own
   investigations, but rather postulates from the start. And these ideas
   again embrace a whole array of difficulties. We do not know what space
   and time are in themselves. We do not know the relation which they
   sustain to matter and force; and of their finiteness or infinity we can
   form not the slightest notion. [94] Kant points out in his antinomies
   of reason that with these ideas we confront difficulties which are
   insoluble to our thought. The affirmation that the world has had no
   beginning and has no limits, involves us in the self-contradictions of
   an infinite time and an infinite space, for the sum total of finite
   parts, however many they may be, can never equal infinitude. [95] Time
   and space are therefore the existence-form of the world and the
   conception-form of our consciousness; but they cannot be identified
   with that which is the absolute ground and cause of all existence. In
   this sense they belong not to "reality," but to "appearance," or
   rather, they appertain only to creation, but not to the Creator. And
   since an eternal time and a boundless space are like a wooden iron, our
   thinking forces us to distinguish the absolute from the relative.
   Monism does not exist here, and if it nevertheless be sought here, it
   can bring us nothing but confusion. Eternity and time, immensity and
   space, do not differ quantitatively but qualitatively. And since the
   words "absolute," "eternal," "immense," "infinite," are predicates,
   and, when substantivized, form only empty abstractions, they presuppose
   a transcendent subject, differentiated from the world, to whom they
   belong. That is to say, physical science, which thinks through its own
   conceptions, and fathoms its own nature, issues in metaphysics and
   rises straight to God.

   Not less involved is the problem presented by the third conception, of
   which the science of nature makes use, namely, the idea of some sort of
   substance which exists in the forms of time and space and makes their
   interrelation possible. In a formal sense natural science is "the
   exhibition of the coherence of reality as a unified system of regulated
   relations of dependence between elements of space, time, and number."
   [96] Its aim is--whether rightly or wrongly--to comprehend all change
   and movement in a mathematical formula and to reduce all qualitative
   differences to quantity. So far as it strives after this aim, it is a
   formal science. But it is self-evident that reality is not comprehended
   in these formal defintions. Reality is something else and something
   more than a complex of quantitative relations. These presuppose
   precisely a quale, which exists in those relations. Even if we knew all
   the laws of motion and of change to which matter is subject, with all
   that its essence would still remain a mystery. Astronomy maybe able to
   compute the movements of celestial bodies, but this does not enlighten
   us in regard to their nature and composition.

   Now, ideas concerning the substance of things, even among the votaries
   of natural science, diverge very widely. But even the very first
   question, whether such a substance exists, or whether the psychic
   sensations are the ultimate elements of reality, falls entirely outside
   of the bounds of physics and brings us again into the domain of
   philosophy. When Max Verworn attacks materialism and "energetism" in
   the name of monism, he no longer speaks as a physiologist, but as a
   philosopher. But even he, although he repels the antithesis of subject
   and object, of spirit and matter, of soul and body, does not find
   monism. For when he says that the entire physical world is only "a
   content of the psyche," he begins, without admitting it, with the
   reality of the psyche, that is of substance, and differentiates between
   it and its contents. As long, therefore, as science believes in itself,
   it cannot escape the necessity of postulating in and above experience a
   unity, a bond, a subject, which tests and orders this experience. [97]
   And as the experience subjectively presupposes a subject which
   experiences, it also objectively points to a reality, which just as
   little as the subject is exhausted in relations. In the subject there
   is a difference between a Beziehendes and a Bezogenes; and in the
   object there is a difference between the relations and the reality of
   which they are predicated. Very truly Fechner says : "Not merely the
   detailed phenomena, but also that which holds them together, has
   reality; nay, to the latter belongs the highest reality." [98] But
   whatever we may think of this, the question of the reality of the soul
   and the world belongs to metaphysics; it is not answered by empirical
   investigations, but by metaphysics, that is to say, in other words, by
   faith.

   The same is true with reference to the problem of the ultimate nature
   of that reality which must be accepted unless we are willing to sink
   into solipsism. Whether we take the theistic standpoint here, or accept
   some one of the different forms of monism, we do not attain to our
   conception of the nature of reality by the way of experience, but must
   permit ourselves to be led by metaphysical reasoning on the basis of
   observation. And it is not exact science, but faith and the character
   of our personality, which decides the matter here. It is not presumable
   that physics and chemistry, however far they may extend their
   researches, will ever change this state of affairs. Chemistry still has
   some seventy elements, whose resolution or composition it cannot effect
   and which differ from one another in qualities. And although physics
   reduces the phenomena of light, heat, and electricity to vibrations, it
   has not yet succeeded in reducing the qualitative differences, which
   manifest themselves in these phenomena, to quantitative relations. The
   nature of the ultimate element of things is still utterly unknown.
   Whether these elements are atoms, which differ only in size, form, and
   weight, or even in quality, or whether these ultimate elements of
   existence are rather "monads" or "reales," matter or energy, or both
   together--all this is a fit subject for philosophic speculation, but
   must per se far transcend all observation. In our day natural science,
   in order to explain the phenomena of light and electricity, assumes the
   existence of an ether, which fills all space. But this ether has never
   been observed, and its nature is unknown. A great effort is being made
   to discover an original stuff, which lies at the base of all matter,
   especially since Sir William Ramsay's announcement that radium can be
   transmuted into helium and lithium; and hypotheses have already been
   constructed which see such an original stuff in hydrogen or in the
   electron or in the ether. But for the time being W. A. Shenstone is
   perfectly justified in saying, "that we are still very far from knowing
   definitely that atoms are composed entirely of electrons, or that
   electrons are nothing but electric changes; and though electrons have
   been shown to exhibit electric inertia, it has not been proved that the
   inertia of atoms is also electrical." [99]

   And just as little as all matter has been reduced to one original
   stuff, have the different forces been as yet shown to be only forms of
   one original force. Force in itself is a mysterious phenomenon. When
   Ostwald seeks to reduce all matter to energy, he can only hypostatize
   and personify a conception which has been derived from matter by
   abstraction, and mistakenly imagines that he has thus eliminated
   matter. [100] Similarly every specific force is an unexplained mystery;
   the force of gravitation, for instance, is not an explanation, but only
   the name of a phenomenon, and it is even questionable whether the name
   is exact. [101] Especially in regard to the vital force, differences of
   opinion assert themselves. Mechanism and vitalism here stand in bitter
   opposition, and the neovitalists are at war among themselves on the
   question whether the cause of life is to be sought in a special force
   of the organism, or rather in an idea or form dominating and governing
   this organism. And thus the riddles increase step by step, as science
   penetrates more deeply into the essence of things or rises higher in
   the ascending scale of creation. The cell is the last and lowest form
   of life, but the cell-core and proto-plasm, which form the cell, are
   not homogeneous, and point to different compositions; the original
   individua of bioplasts are not of one kind; plants, animals, and man do
   not yet form an uninterrupted ascending chain of creatures; even the
   animals have not been reduced to one primordial type, and are nowadays
   usually divided into eight classes. Everywhere in creation we face an
   endless differentiation, an inconceivable multiformity of creatures, an
   inexhaustible wealth of essence and life.

   Beyond question it is the duty of science to reduce this chaos of
   phenomena to order. It has to give us the thread, following which we
   may not lose our way in this labyrinth, but find the right path. But,
   as has already been said, it is an aprioristic and wholly unjustified
   assumption that this path through the labyrinth of the world must lead
   to monism,--particularly when monism itself has been erected on an
   utterly aprioristic view of the world; namely, on the conception that
   this world must find its explanation in itself. But unity, true unity,
   a unity which does not destroy differentiation, but rather includes and
   enfolds it, may come, and can come, only when the entire world is
   conceived as the product of the wisdom and power which reveal God's
   eternal plan. Only a personal God, who is both will and intelligence,
   can call a world into existence, which is one and yet differentiated;
   just as man alone, who has been created in his image, is a knowing and
   willing being, a knowledge-making and tool-making animal.

   But suppose for a moment that all matter and all force, all existence
   and all life, could be reduced in our thinking to one ultimate
   principle; even so nothing is gained for the truth of monism or for the
   explanation of the world. For first of all the old logical rule is
   still in force--a posse ad esse non valet consequentia. The mere fact
   that in our thought we can form the conception of a world which has
   produced itself from one substance through the action of one force,
   would not prove at all that this conception is the true one and that
   reality corresponds to this conception. For instance, it is well known
   that the elements which constitute the bodies of living beings are,
   besides oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and sulphur. But these four
   elements are never found in a free state, but always in combination
   with oxygen (oxidized), especially in the form of carbonic acid, water,
   sulphuric acid, and saltpetre. In order, therefore, that they may be
   serviceable for the formation of albumen and other organic compounds,
   they must first be separated from the oxygen (deoxidized). To the
   question whether, in earlier periods of this world's existence, free
   carbon, hydrogen and sulphur existed, an answer could be given by
   experience alone; but in the nature of the case this is not available.
   Logical analysis is thus something different from real decomposition.
   Even if chemistry should ultimately discover a single original element,
   even that would not at all prove that this original element existed in
   the beginning separately, and has slowly and gradually, through a
   variety of mechanical combinations, brought into being the several
   existing elements. [102] Physics never is empowered to conclude from
   the posse to the esse, from the conception to the reality; it is not
   limited by any extraneous power, but by its own character.

   Still, for the sake of argument let us also admit that there was
   originally only one element and one force, from which by slow degrees
   everything has developed. Then natural science would be simplified, but
   the riddle of the multiformity of the world would continue
   undiminished. [103] It would be merely transferred and moved backwards;
   transferred to the one substance and moved back to an endless past. And
   by this it would even be increased in intensity. For the question thus
   becomes: how, from one single uniform original element, by any
   possibility, this world, with its endless differentiations, could have
   been produced. The answer to the atomists used to be that the Iliad
   could not have been produced by an accidental collocation of a font of
   type. But there is nothing here to compare to the difficulty of the
   monists in explaining the world. For an alphabet at least consists of
   different letters, and language may illustrate how the human mind can
   from a few sounds form tens of thousands of words. But the new monism
   lets the Iliad of the world arise out of the collocation of the same
   letter and the same sound. Such a process is possible only if the one
   world-substance is elevated to deity and invested with the attributes
   of omniscience and omnipotence, which, according to theism, belong to
   the personal God alone. Without metaphysics, without faith, without
   God, physics does not reach its mark. But the deity which is finally
   invoked is a Deus ex machina; the faith in which it hides itself is an
   asylum ignorantiae; and the divinity which it conceives is one of its
   own making.

   In the conflict which nowadays rages on all sides, and which is
   frequently represented as a conflict between science and faith, physics
   and theology, the principal difference, therefore, does not concern the
   question, What is nature? but rather this other one, What is God? If
   possible, this will be still more clearly seen if we call attention
   finally to the problem, of motion. Nothing proves more clearly that
   this problem cannot be solved than the fact that philosophy throughout
   the ages and among all nations and down to the present day divides
   itself into two tendencies. With Zeno, "becoming" is sacrificed to
   "being," or with Heraclitus, "being" to "becoming." In point of fact,
   we can spare neither, for "becoming" presupposes "being." There can be
   no question of change if there is no identity and continuity of the
   subject. [104] But monism cannot accept this differentiation, endeavors
   to reduce motion to rest or rest to motion, and thus once again
   sacrifices the facts of reality to a play of ideas. And by this
   endeavor it gets, at every subordinate point which is raised by the
   problem of motion, in an impasse which has no outlet.

   For whether motion is reality or appearance, the questions of its cause
   and nature, its laws and aim, can never be suppressed. If now there is
   no primum movens, no "being" which gives existence to the "becoming,"
   nothing is left but to think of motion as eternal. And Haeckel
   accordingly affirms that the substance of the universe, with its two
   attributes, matter and energy, fills infinite space and is in an
   eternal motion, and that this motion thus proceeds in an endless time.
   [105] But such words, though no doubt they endure to be set side by
   side on paper, form in thought an intolerable antinomy. Eternity and
   motion can be just as little correlated in one and the same subject as
   infinitude and space (or time), as the absolute and the relative, as
   God and the world. And this is all the less possible if the world,
   according to Haeckel's notion, is a vast machine. For a machine which
   keeps on working forever, without ever coming to a stop, is an
   inconceivable and impossible perpetuum mobile. If the world is eternal,
   it is no machine; if it is a machine, it cannot be eternal.

   A similar difficulty arises with respect to the nature of motion. Man
   has always lived in the conviction that there is no effect without a
   cause. Even if in earlier times numerous phenomena or occurrences were
   explained by the operation of divinities, of spirits, or of mysterious
   powers, this is merely a proof that the law of causality is not an
   invention of modern times, but is a category of the human mind. Neither
   did men in early times ascribe all phenomena to supernatural
   operations, nor is this done to-day among the so-called
   "nature-peoples." For everywhere and always there has been quite an
   extended sphere in which things were referred to natural causes. From
   his origin man has worked in order to eat; has applied himself to
   fishing and to the chase, to agriculture and stockraising, and, in a
   primitive way, also to knowledge and art. By the aid of the means at
   hand he has obtained food and clothing and shelter. The conception of
   natural causes has never been wholly lacking in man. But no doubt this
   domain of natural causes was much more limited than at the present day.
   Science has gradually expanded the idea of nature and of the natural.
   And every reasonable man rejoices in this expansion of our knowledge,
   which is at the same time power and domination of spirit over matter.

   But when science seeks to apply the law of causality in such sense as
   to permit only a mechanical relation between cause and effect, it not
   only passes beyond its competence, but also cuts itself off from
   explaining the phenomena. For just as motion presupposes no less
   continuity than change, causality implies both that cause and effect
   stand in relation to one another, and that the effect is something more
   than, or at least something different from, the cause. For if this were
   not so, everything would remain where it is, or at least at the same
   level; everything would revolve in a circle, and there could be no
   possible question of progress, ascent, or development. Now reality
   teaches us certainly to recognize such progress and development; there
   is a great differentiation of being. And even in the sphere where we
   speak, and justly so, of mechanical causality, causality is not at all
   exhausted by mechanism. We call it by that name, no doubt, but this
   name does not cover the much richer reality.

   Lodge has said very truly: "There is no necessary justification for
   assuming that a property exhibited by an aggregate of particles must be
   possessed by the ingredients of which it is composed; on the contrary,
   wholly new properties may make their appearance simply by aggregation."
   [106] The simplest combinations of elements already manifest properties
   different from those of the elements themselves. Water differs in
   nature from each of its two components,--oxygen and hydrogen; vitriol
   is different from any of its three components,--iron and sulphur and
   oxygen. [107] And in a much higher measure this is true of organic
   beings. Heredity has been for years the object of keen investigation,
   but no one will affirm that its secret has been disclosed and that its
   explanation has been accomplished. The variety of the theories which
   have been framed concerning it--those of Lamarck and Darwin, Erlsberg
   and Haeckel, Nägeli and de Vries, Weismann and Hertwig--is enough to
   show that not one of them is satisfactory. For the present we can only
   say that there is such a thing as heredity, and that there is such a
   thing as variability, as certainly we might very well have expected
   from the beginning. But of its cause and relations we thus far know
   nothing. All change seems, in varying degrees, to be a sort of
   generation which produces something newer and higher. Thus change,
   progress, and development are possible, but thus also it becomes
   manifest that the attempt to transmute all causality into mechanical
   relationship is doomed from the very start. In causality other forces
   are at work than those which can be expressed by figures.

   This being so, the laws of nature also assume an aspect different from
   that which still is often ascribed to them. Really we can speak of
   natural laws only from the standpoint of theism. Natural laws exist
   only when there is a lawgiver, who stands above nature and who has
   decreed that seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and
   winter, and day and night shall not cease while the earth remains.
   Abstracted from God as the law-giver, the laws of nature are nothing
   but a human and ever fallible description of the way in which things
   operate. Like substance and force and motion, these natural laws are
   frequently no doubt hypostatized and elevated to the rank of powers and
   rulers over things. But against this the words of von Hartmann are
   pertinent, that "Of all entities created by hypostatizing abstractions
   probably that of (natural) law as a power antedating the existence of
   things, hovering over them and controlling them, is the most
   fictitious." [108] Our natural laws are only a formula for the method
   of work and of motion of the things.

   Therefore they are far from fixed, are anything but unchangeable; on
   the contrary they are changed, modified, restricted, enlarged,
   according as we learn to know the things better. Robert Mayer, for
   instance, the discoverer of the law of the conservation of energy,
   completely excluded from this law the entire domain of psychical life,
   and considered it a great error to identify things physical and
   psychical. [109] And although Wundt in the first edition of his
   Lectures on the Human and Animal Soul, published in 1863, applied this
   law in the psychical domain too, he expressly receded from this
   position in the second edition of his work, published in 1892, and has
   since defended the theory of psychophysical parallelism,--a change of
   opinion which brought upon him the gibe of Haeckel, that it was usual
   in old age for "a gradual degeneration to set in, in the brain as well
   as in the outer organs." [110] Similarly Lodge offers very serious
   objections to the laws of the constancy of matter and energy, since at
   best they are applicable only to the forces which we know at present
   and as we now know them. But in case that matter should prove the
   phenomenal form of a complex of ether, production and dissolution of
   matter would be possible. And in case that life should prove to be more
   than a phiysico-chemical force, we would have to modify the law of the
   constancy of energy, as some have already proposed to do, since the
   discovery of radium. So long, therefore, as matter in its essence is
   unknown, and the resident forces of creation are not exhausted by us,
   all formulation of laws is necessarily tentative, and a large degree of
   modesty is the proof of a scientific spirit. [111] For in the last
   analysis all laws of nature, whatever philosophical standpoint we may
   occupy, are determined by the nature of that being which is the ground
   and origin of all things and the force of all forces. Laws, ordinances
   they are, therefore, then only, and in so far only, as they may have a
   metaphysical character.

   And, moreover, only in that case can there be any question, in the
   development of the world, of a meaning and an aim. Darwin rejoiced in
   the discovery of natural selection, because he thought that by its aid
   he could explain the adaptations of nature without a divine
   intelligence. [112] Helmholtz found the novelty of the doctrine of
   descent, in its exhibition how "adaptation in the formation of
   organisms can be produced by the blind reign of natural law without the
   interference of any intelligent factor." [113] And notwithstanding his
   mechanical view of the world, Haeckel continues to talk about means and
   aim, about egoistic and altruistic duties, about a "fundamental law of
   ethics," and about ethics as "the science of norms." [114] The attack
   of the evolutionary hypothesis is really not directed against
   adaptation in nature. On the contrary, although it proceeds from a
   mechanical causality, it lays all its stress on the tendency and aim of
   the development. It loves to pose as the theory of progress, and to
   tell us that evolution has successively originated life, consciousness,
   will, and all that is true, and good, and beautiful; that it has
   gradually ennobled the struggle for existence, and has made it a
   "battle of the spirit," for that which is noblest and best. Causality
   in the doctrine of evolution does not antagonize teleology, but is only
   a means and an element in the process of development. By the one it
   ascribes to nature compulsion; by the other, will and fitness (sollen).
   [115]

   But as soon as this adaptation in the world is taken as a teleological
   proof of the existence and providence of an intelligent power,
   opposition is aroused, and all monstrosities and rudimentary organs,
   all disasters and mishaps are called to the witness-stand, to break
   down the force of this proof. There may be an unconscious and blind
   adaptation, but no conscious and intelligent one. Haeckel once said
   that the eye and the ear are so marvellously constructed that they
   might seduce us into believing in a creation according to a definitely
   thought-out plan of construction. But he steels himself against the
   "seduction." And thus he betrays the fact that the so-called conflict
   between science and faith lies not in the realm of the physical, but in
   that of the metaphysical; concentres not in nature, but in God. What
   nature is to us is determined by what we think of God and who he is for
   us.

   It is, therefore, by no means an indifferent matter for science, and
   especially for physics, what ground we occupy in metaphysics. We may
   not think as we please; even scientific work has a moral character, and
   we have to render an account of it as well as of every idle word. When
   we sever nature from God, and do not consider nature as a work and
   revelation of God, but look on it in the completest sense as atheos,
   this unbelief immediately turns into superstition. Without God all
   things go wrong, both in our living and in our thinking. The denial of
   the existence of God includes, in the same moment, the elevation of the
   creature into the place of God. This is manifested in the materialism
   of Haeckel, when he openly avows his atheism, but at once invests his
   substance with the predicates of eternity, omnipresence, omnipotence,
   etc., which belong to God alone. It comes even more clearly into
   evidence in the energetic-psychical and logical monism. For there is
   bound up with this the acknowledgment that the world is no machine,
   which man can take apart and put together again, but an unconscious,
   mysterious power, which produces and directs everything. The
   intelligibility of nature, which was so long believed in by science, is
   therefore more and more giving place to the confession of its
   unknowableness. Some years ago Fechner preached his hylozoism and, as
   many Greek philosophers had done, conceived of the universe literally
   as a living organism, and this conception has of late found acceptance
   with many. In 1889 Vogt ascribed to atoms a sense of pain. Haeckel not
   only sees in the attraction and repulsion of atoms the forces of love
   and pain, but he animates all plastidules and replaces the wood--and
   water--nymphs of the Greeks by countless elementary souls and spirits,
   which are the properties of cells. [116] The laws of nature--although
   they are only a defective formulation of the way in which forces, which
   are but imperfectly known, are working--are elevated to the rank of
   mythical beings, like the abstracta of the Romans. [117] All
   investigators of nature apply to nature the conceptions of power,
   force, industry, labor, resistance, tension, etc., without stopping to
   consider that all these things are borrowed from human personality,
   have a psychological content, and are therefore, when robbed of it,
   nothing but empty forms. In the essence of the thing, what is done is
   what is ascribed as a naive error to primitive man: nature is explained
   by animistic, or anthropomorphic conceptions. [118] The issue of
   science in our day, in a remarkable manner, reaches out the hand of
   fellowship to man, such as he existed, according to the common idea, in
   his infancy. [119]

   Recent literature and art afford even more startling proof of this
   deification of nature than science. For without in the least belittling
   its value, it may be said, on good grounds, that recent art, as a
   whole, has as its aim to represent man as powerless over against
   nature. Its revival in the last century was a reversion to mysticism.
   The essence of things did not exist in material atoms, but it was life,
   infinitely deep life, eternally operative force. From this principle
   advance could be made to symbolism, which sees in art an attempt to
   give a suggestion, in sound or color, in line or arabesque, of the
   inexpressible; and then further to a glorification of the mystici, and
   an aesthetic prizing of religion, especially of the Romish worship, as
   happened with the "néo-Chrétiens" of France. But from the pantheistic
   and agnostic conception of the universe, the conclusion could just as
   well be drawn that the everywhere operative force is a mysterious blind
   fate, of which man is the plaything and against which nothing can
   prevail. It is thus that in the art of the present day nature is
   pictured. It is provided with secret powers, dark operations, soft
   moods, and over against it man is degraded to the point of a mere
   natural being, which, borne down by heredity, is abandoned to the play
   of his lusts and passions, stripped of his spontaneity, liberty, and
   personality, and left incapable of aught but living himself out, like a
   plant in the field. [120] Thus the relation of man to nature,
   notwithstanding the victories of science, becomes the very opposite of
   what it was before. The Christian view of nature is gradually giving
   place to that of the heathen peoples; and the widely spread movements
   of theosophy and spiritism, of telepathy and astrology, assist in this
   degradation of man under nature. The un-deification of nature turns
   into deification of nature, the royal liberty of man into fatalistic
   subjection.

   Man can attain to a true, free relation to nature only when bestands in
   his true relation to God. And this we owe to Christianity alone. In the
   polytheistic religions of India and China, Babylon and Egypt, Greece
   and Rome, man cannot obtain his freedom over against nature, because
   all creatures, plants and animals, woods and trees, mountains and
   brooks, stars and suns, are conceived as inhabited by gods or spirits.
   Over against all this man is tortured by a continuous fear and unbroken
   anxiety. But this relation is utterly changed when we listen to Moses
   and the prophets, to Christ and the apostles. They are all free over
   against nature, because, through communion with God, they are elevated
   above nature. Deification of nature is here just as inconceivable as
   contempt of nature. "Paganism oscillates between overbearing abuse of
   the world and childish dread of its powers." But in Israel this is
   wholly different. "With sovereign self-consciousness the Hebrew faces
   the world and nature. Fear of the world is unknown to him; nevertheless
   he meets it with a sense of the highest responsibility. As God's
   representative man rules the world, but in that capacity only. He may
   not obey his caprice, but only the revealed will of God." [121]

   Man owes this free and royal relation to nature first of all to the
   fact that all the world is recognized as created by God. Here at once
   the truth is found for which monism seeks in vain. There must be a
   unity, which lies at the bottom of all diversity. But this unity cannot
   be found within the world, for matter and force, spirit and matter, the
   physical and the psychical, the psychical and the ethical, personality
   and association cannot be reduced to one another; they do not exist
   after each other, but each with its own concept and valuation, side by
   side with each other. Whosoever, within the world, tries to reduce
   unity to multiformity, being to becoming, spirit to matter, man to
   nature, or the reverse, always plays false with the other half of the
   distinction. Thus physics calls for metaphysics; nature itself shows,
   in the core of its existence, that it does not exist of itself, has not
   been originated by evolution, but is grounded in revelation.

   And revelation, by the word of prophets and apostles, confirms this and
   gives us, in the wisdom and omnipotence of God, in his sovereignty and
   counsel, that unity for which the human spirit thirsts. So soon,
   therefore, as this theistic monism is surrendered, after a brief and
   unsatisfactory trial of materialism and pantheism, polytheism in
   different forms returns. [122] The power of nature and the power of the
   morally good fall asunder as in Manichaeism; to man and nature, nations
   and religions, different origins are ascribed; and since the forces at
   work in the world cannot be reduced to unity, each of them in its own
   sphere is hypostatised, and first in the conception, but later also in
   the imagination, they are made gods. But the revelation which comes to
   us in Christ protects us from all this. It joins itself to the
   revelation, which nature itself makes known to us; it elevates this to
   its fullest right, and maintains it in its real value, and by its
   doctrine of creation cuts all polytheism and all dualism up by the
   roots. Not only mind but also matter, not only man but also nature, is
   of divine origin, and has lain in the thought of God before it came
   into being.

   The doctrine of creation maintains the divinity, the goodness and
   sacredness of all created things. In this world man now receives his
   own independent place. He is of kin to all the world, formed out of
   matter, earthy of the earth; nothing natural is strange to him. But in
   one respect he is different from all creatures; he is the son, the
   image, the similitude of God, his offspring. Thereby he is elevated
   above animal and angel, and destined and fitted for dominion over all
   the world. In this relation of man to God and to the world is the
   foundation laid and the origin given of all science and art. For how
   can it be explained that man through his senses can observe the world,
   and through his intelligence can know and understand it? Whence this
   wonderful correspondence of knowing and being? What is the basis of the
   belief that the conception and the thought in the human brain are no
   imagination and no hallucination, but correspond with the reality? What
   is the ground for the harmony between subject and object, the ego and
   the non-ego? What is the root from which springs the unity of the laws
   of existence, the ideas of our thinking, the norms of our actions? In
   what do physis, gnosis, and ethos find their common systema? What is
   the foundation of the symbolism of nature, not in the sense of an
   unfounded nature-theosophy, but in the sense in which Christ saw in the
   world a parable of the kingdom of heaven; in the sense in which Goethe,
   said that "all transitory things are but a parable"; in the sense in
   which Drummond in "the natural law" detected an analogy of the law of
   the spirit? On what, in a word, are founded comparison, metaphor,
   poetry, art, and all science and all culture? On what else do they rest
   but on the confession that one word, one spirit, one divine,
   intelligence lies at the foundation of all things and maintains their
   unity and mutual relations?

   And thus finally place is found for the acknowledgment of the diversity
   of the world. Nothing is simpler than to allow, according to the scheme
   of emanation, all things gradually to descend from above; or, according
   to the scheme of evolution, all things gradually to ascend from below.
   In a museum, and equally in the mind, it is a very easy matter to place
   one creature by the side of another and to fill in the missing links by
   some hypothesis or individual construction. It is just as easy as--to
   use a humorous example--to explain the origin of the English fox, from
   the Greek word alopex, by assuming that the transitional forms, lopex,
   pex, fex, have disappeared. [123] But reality laughs at this system
   just as it laughs at the aprioristic world-construction in Hegel's
   philosophy. Creatures do not exist in succession to one another, in a
   straight line of development, but side by side; they thus live out
   their lives and hold continually with one another a living, organic,
   diversified, reciprocal relation. So it was throughout all the ages,
   and so it is yet, in our day. The constancy of the species is an
   undeniable fact, in the face of all variability of which we are
   cognizant in the historical period which we know. The weaker specimens
   and species do not die out, according to the law of "natural
   selection," but continue to exist, side by side with the stronger, to
   this day. Existence is not simply and alone a battle of all against
   all, but also a continuous mutual supporting and aiding. There is much
   hatred, but there is also much love in the world. The diversity of the
   world is a fact which, taken in connection with its harmony, can find
   its explanation only transcendently in a personal God. For F. A. Lange
   has said very correctly: "When after a free and grand fashion we
   ascribe to the one God a unified plan of operation on a large and
   comprehensive scale, then the coherence of all things according to the
   principle of law and effect, not only becomes conceivable, but even
   appears a necessary consequence of this assumption." [124]

   Against this organic view of the world only one argument is advanced.
   But it is an argument which is of very great weight, for it is drawn
   from the awful misery of the world. And this misery, viewed both as sin
   and suffering, is a touching and heart-breaking fact. The whole
   creation is in travail. Anguish is the fundamental trait of all living
   things. A great secret pain throbs through nature. Everywhere the
   lawless, the chaotic, lies at the base of the orderly; there is an
   inexplicable restlessness in all things. Vanity, change, death are
   written on all existing things. Humanity walks by the margin of an
   abyss of guilt. It perishes under the anger of God and is troubled by
   his wrath. How can such a world be reconciled with the wisdom, the
   goodness, the omnipotence of God? Both philosophy and theology have
   made many attempts to solve this problem. It has been sought to find
   the explanation of misery, metaphysically, in the finite, or to give
   it, aesthetically, a part in the harmony of the world as a whole, or to
   interpret it, paedagogically, as a strengthening of man's spiritual
   life. The infralapsarians have deduced it from the justice of God.
   Others, with Lotze, have despaired of finding any explanation, or have
   even taken refuge in a limitation of God's omnipotence and wisdom, and
   have found in matter or in the laws of nature a limit to his working.
   [125]

   But even if there is a measure of truth in each of these various
   theories, the misery of the world is too great and too diversified to
   be explained from any single cause, or to be subsumed under any single
   formula. And it is not lessened by it all. What profit is there, for
   instance, in saying, "Who to-day thinks of the San Francisco earthquake
   as an act of God and not as a mechanical occurrence?" [126] Is God then
   no longer the God whose providence extends over all? Pragmatism is so
   far within its right that it finds all these explanations insufficient
   and misleading, and calls attention once more to realities. It breaks
   mere appearance, it snatches the blindfolding from our eyes, and it
   avows openly that this world is a chaos, which can become good and true
   only through the hands of men.

   But in so doing it forgets that, in its deepest sense, the struggle
   lies not between man and nature, but is fought out in the heart of man
   himself, between his what is and his what ought to be. The struggle is
   primarily of an ethical rather than of a physical nature. This is
   proved first of all by the fact that all the acquisitions of culture,
   however rich they may be, do not quiet the restlessness of the heart
   and are unable to silence the voice of conscience. Moreover, according
   to the testimony of the heroes of our race, all the misery of the world
   can be overcome by faith. And that is the only way which
   revelation--that in nature already, but far more plainly that in the
   Scriptures--points out to us for the reconciliation of the discord. It
   makes no effort to explain all the suffering of the world. It allows it
   to remain where it is and accepts it: accepts it so fully that no
   pessimistic literature can surpass the pathos of its complaint. But
   revelation does not incite man to resistance and rebellion, but lays
   bare to his consciousness the guilt in his own life. It casts him down
   in his littleness, and says to him, Who art thou, O man, that repliest
   against God? But then, also, it immediately raises him from his
   humiliation; it preaches to him no stoical apathy or fatalistic,
   acquiescence in things, but it makes him through the Word to know the
   will of God to save the world notwithstanding all its misery, and it
   fills his soul through the Spirit with the patience of faith, so that
   weak man can endure all his pain, can glory in tribulation, and, with
   God, can overcome the world. If God is for us, who can be against us?
   And this is the only victory which overcomes the world, even our faith.




     __________________________________________________________________

   [79] A. C. Fraser, Philosophy of Theism, 1899, pp.24-34.

   [80] Mach, Erkenntniss und Irrtum., p.5.

   [81] Ladd, The Philosophy of Religion, I, 1906, p.11. Gwatkin, The
   Knowledge of God, I, 1906.

   [82] Frischeisen-Köhler, Moderne Philosophie, Stuttgart, 1907,
   pp.18-37. L. Stein, Der Sinn des Daseins, pp.225-239.

   [83] Otto, Natural. und relig. Weltansicht, p.44.

   [84] Haeckel, Die Welträthsel, p.209. Id., Der Kampf um den
   Entwicklungsgedanken, p.23. Comp. Otto, op. cit., pp.78, 112 ff, 200
   ff.

   [85] Ed.. von Hartmann, Mechanismus und Vitalismus in der modernen
   Biologie, Archiv f. syst. Philos., 1903, p.345. Id., Philos. des
   Unbew., III, 1904, p.vi.

   [86] Ostwald, Die Ueberwindung des wissensch. Materialismus., 1895, in
   Dennert, op. cit., pp.235-236.

   [87] Reinke, Die Welt als That, pp.464 ff.

   [88] Otto, op. cit., pp.39, 46, 47.

   [89] Alfred Dippe, Naturphilosophie, München, 1907, pp.3-14.

   [90] L. Stein, Der Sinn des Daseins, p.24.

   [91] Haeckel, Schöpfungsgeschichte. 1874, p.8. Comp. Die Welträthsel,
   p.15.

   [92] Haeckel, Schöpfungsgesch., p.28. Welträthsel, p.18.

   [93] Lodge, Life and Matter, p.23.

   [94] Bradley, Appearance and Reality, ch. IV, pp.35 ff.

   [95] Otto, op. cit., pp.50-57.

   [96] Lipps, Naturwissenschaft und Weltanschauung, 1906, p.13.

   [97] Ed. von Hartmann, Die Weltanschauung der modernen Physik, pp.195,
   197 ff., 204 ff. Dennert, Die Weltanschauung des mod. Naturforschers,
   p.143.

   [98] Fechner, Ueber die Seelenfrage, 1907, p.214. Comp. also Bradley,
   op. cit., ch. II, pp.25 ff.

   [99] Shentone, The Electric Theory of Matter, in Cornhill Magazine,
   quoted in The Literary World, Aug., 1907, p.381. Comp. also A. J.
   Balfour, Unsere heutige Weltanschauung. Einige Bemerkungen zur modernen
   Theorie der Materie. Deutsch von Dr. M. Ernst, Leipzig, 1904. M. Shoen,
   Bestaat er een oer-grondstof? Wet. Bladen, May, 1908, pp.249-259, after
   an essay in Naturwiss. Wochenschrift, 2 Febr., 1908. Reinke, Die Natur
   und Wir. Berlin, 1908, p. 38.

   [100] Dippe, Naturphilosophie, pp.86, 89.

   [101] Rethwisch, in Dippe, pp.79 ff. Reinke, op. cit., pp.40-50. Th.
   Newest, Die Gravitationslehre ein Irrtum. Wien, 1905. For the various
   views on Vital Force the reader is referred to the article by von
   Hartmann, quoted above in note 7, and f urther to Karl Braeunig,
   Mechanismus und Vitalismus in der Biologie des neunzehnten
   Jahrhunderts, Leipzig, 1907.

   [102] W. von Schnehen, Die Urzeugung, Glauben und Wissen. Dec., 1907,
   pp.403-415.

   [103] Otto, op. cit., p.37.

   [104] Kant, in Eisler, Wörterbuch, p.618.

   [105] Haeckel, Die Welträthsel, pp.15-16.

   [106] Lodge, Life and Matter, p.49. Reinke, Die Natur und Wir, pp.25,
   26, 33.

   [107] Kleutgen, Die Philosophie der Vorzeit, II, pp.314-335.

   [108] Von Hartmann, Die Weltanschauung, etc., p.203.

   [109] E. Schmid, Das naturwiss. Glaubensbekenntnis eines Theologen,
   Stuttgart, 1906, p.87.

   [110] Haeckel, Welträthsel, pp.117-118.

   [111] Lodge, Life and Matter, pp.54 ff. Comp. also J. Froehlich, Das
   Gesetz von der Erhaltung der Kraft in dem Geist des Christ, Leipzig,
   1903.

   [112] Bruno Wille, Darwins Weltanschauung, etc. Comp. Lect. I, note 16
   ff.

   [113] In K. Dieterich, Philosophie und Naturwissenschaft, Freiburg,
   1885, p.9.

   [114] Haeckel, Welträthsel, pp.342, 404, 405.

   [115] Haeckel, op. cit., pp.388 ff., 439. Nat. Schöpf., pp.156, 656. L.
   Stein, An der Wende des Jahrh., p.51. Id., Der Sinn des Daseins, pp.42
   ff. Dippe, Naturphilos, p.153. Reinke, Die Natur und Wir, pp.209 ff.

   [116] Dr. W. H. Nieuwhuis, Twee vragen des Tijds, Kampen, 1907, pp.39,
   66.

   [117] Ed. von Hartmann, Die Weltanschauung, etc., p.203.

   [118] Lipps, Naturwiss. und Weltanschauung, p.19.

   [119] Ritter, Schets eener critische geschiedenis van het
   Substantiebegrip in de nieuwere wijsbegeerte, Leiden, 1906, p.471.

   [120] Natur und Christenthum, Vier Vorträge von D. Lasson, Lüttgert,
   Schäder, Bornhäuser. Berlin, 1907, pp.49 ff. Richard Hamann, Der
   Impressionismus in Leben und Kunst, Köln, 1907.

   [121] Smend, Lehrbuch der altt. Religionsgeschichte, 1893, p.458.
   Martensen Larsen, Die Naturwiss. in ihrem Schuldverhältnis zum
   Christenthum, Berlin, 1897. Lange, Gesch. des Materialismus, 1882,
   pp.129 ff. Sellin, Die alttest. Religion und die Religionsgeschichte,
   pp.28-34.

   [122] James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, 1906, p.525. Id.,
   Pluralism and Religion, Hibbert Journal, July, 1908. Wundt,
   Völkerpsych., II, 2, p.223. McTaggart, Some Dogmas of Religion, pp.257
   ff. Rogers, according to Hibbert Journal, Jan., 1908, p.445. Comp. Dr.
   Rashdall, who denies to God omnipotence; Dr. Harrison, who denies him
   even creation (in McTaggart, p.221, note), and the so- called "ethical
   modernists" in the Netherlands, who distinguish between God as
   nature-power and as ethical power. Hooijkaas, God in de geschiedenis,
   Schiedam, 1870, p.35. Goethe already said: "I cannot satisfy myself in
   the manifold tendencies of my being with one mode of thinking : as poet
   and artist I am a polytheist, but on the other hand a pantheist as a
   student of nature, and one just as decisively as the other. If I need a
   God for my personality as a moral being, this also is already provided
   for."

   [123] In Nieuwhuis, op. cit., p.82.

   [124] Lange, Gesch. des Material., p.130.

   [125] Paul Grunberg, Das Uebel in der Welt und Gott, Lichterfelde,
   1907. Bruining, Het geloof aan God en het kwaad in de wereld, Baarn,
   1907.

   [126] Hibbert Journal, Oct., 1907, p.9.
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 5 - Revelation and History


   The indispensability and significance of revelation appear in history
   in an even higher and richer measure than in nature. But so soon as we
   set foot on this domain, our attention is immediately attracted by an
   interesting controversy which for several years has been waged by
   historians among themselves.

   When the natural sciences in the last century attained all manner of
   brilliant results through the application of the inductive method, the
   wish arose in many breasts that history might be studied after the same
   method, and thus reach equally certain results. There was ultimately
   only one science, that of nature; whatever was reckoned to the
   so-called intellectual sciences must be reduced to and embodied in
   natural science if it were to retain its claim to the name of science.
   Thus historical investigation could be considered a true science only
   if its object--historical occurrences--were conceived as a mechanical
   process, dominated from the beginning to the end by the same laws as
   nature. But in the attempt to make of history an empirical, positive
   science there were developed from the very beginning different
   tendencies. All were at one in the conviction that the events of
   history were just as inevitable as the phenomena of nature, and that
   they should be observed and fixed just as unprejudicedly and
   objectively as the latter. But a great difference of opinion arose upon
   the question how these facts were to be understood and from what causes
   they were to be explained.

   There are some who, like Buckle, de Greef, Mongeolle, seek the ultimate
   and principal causes of historic events in the physical environment of
   climate, soil, and food, and base history on anthropogeography. There
   are others who, like Taine, and especially Gobineau and H. St.
   Chamberlain, consider the race the principal factor in history and ask
   of ethnology the solution of historical problems. Men like Le Bon,
   Tarde, René Worms, Ratzenhofer, and Sighele try to find the explanation
   of historical facts in psychology and social circumstances; whilst many
   scholars like Hobbes, Rousseau, Comte, Spencer, von Hellwald, Shäffle,
   Durkheim, and others, cherish the idea that society itself is to be
   looked upon as an organism of a higher order, which, like all living
   things, stands under the dominion of biological laws, and is gradually
   developed and perfected in the struggle for existence by natural
   selection and heredity. The Socialists, Marx, Engels, Kautsky, and
   their fellows, look at everything from the viewpoint of the conflict
   between the classes, and defend the materialistic or economic view of
   history, according to which the consciousness of man does not determine
   his being, but reversely his social being his consciousness. And
   finally, in these last years, Karl Lamprecht has appeared as a defender
   of the culture-historical method, which discovers the deepest ground of
   historical events in the folk-soul, and therefore seeks after a
   social-psychological solution of the problem. [127]

   This endeavor to bring in these different ways, surety and certainty
   into the science of history, is easy to understand. For history differs
   from physics in this respect, that it does not have the object of its
   investigation immediately at hand so as to be able to experiment upon
   it, but can know it only by means of a testimony which others, either
   intentionally or unintentionally, directly or indirectly, have given.
   Even though this testimony is not accepted unconditionally, but is
   first subjected to a severe criticism, there must enter into the study
   of history, through the interposition of tradition, a certain personal
   element of trust which is not found, or at least not in such a degree,
   in the investigation of natural phenomena. This personal element in
   historical research is considerably augmented by the fact that we are
   unable to assume as objective and dispassionate an attitude to the
   persons and testimonies with which history brings us into contact as to
   natural phenomena. In history we are not disinterested observers, but
   live the lives of other men, are attracted or repelled by them, feel
   sympathy or antipathy towards them. And especially in the case of
   important persons or great events, such as, for instance, the, origin
   of Christianity, the Reformation, the Revolution, etc., our
   convictions, our heart, and our emotions play an important part. From
   the very start personal interest makes itself felt in our criticism of
   the witnesses, and it continues to exercise its influence in the
   pragmatic description and judgment of events. A believer in and a
   denier of the divinity of Christ cannot judge the books and contents of
   the Old and New Testaments in the same way; and we cannot expect the
   same history of the Reformation from a Roman Catholic and from a
   Protestant. [128] In historical research the personality of the student
   is felt much more strongly, therefore, than in natural science; the
   science of history splits into tendencies and thus seems to lose its
   claim to the name of science. We can therefore perfectly understand the
   effort which is made to rescue history, as a science, from this
   subjectivity, and to make it just as objective and exact as the science
   of nature, which seems the same to all men, without distinction of
   religious convictions.

   To this was added in the last century that the field of history was
   expanded in an extraordinary way, in no less degree indeed than that of
   natural science. What in the fifteenth century the travels of Vasco de
   Gama, Columbus, Magellan, Cook, etc., had been for our knowledge of the
   earth, the discoveries of Champollion, Rawlinson, Grotefend, Layard, W.
   Jones, Burnouf, and others, became for our knowledge of history. Whilst
   historical knowledge was formerly confined to a few countries and
   peoples, it has now widely extended itself to all sorts of peoples, and
   reaches back into the past to times far earlier than Moses. This
   extraordinary extension of the domain of investigation has, naturally,
   increased the material inconceivably, and made it necessary, in order
   to create order in this chaos, to conceive the events in their mutual
   relations and to discover the process and the law which is hidden in
   them. It was inevitable that the ideological view of history presented
   by Hegel and the Tübingen school should give place under the
   inspiration of natural science to a positive and homological treatment
   of history. It was no longer permissible to construe the facts in
   accordance with a preconceived idea; but, inversely, from the facts the
   laws must be learned which controlled them in their development.

   Apparently this positive treatment of history goes to work in an
   utterly unprejudiced manner, purely empirically and inductively. But
   actually it is just as much dominated by a preconceived idea as the
   ideological treatment of Hegel, and this idea is in both cases that of
   evolution, conceived in a mechanical or in a dynamic sense. It is
   silently presupposed that, in the last analysis, one and the same
   causality originates all events and causes them to succeed each other
   according to the law of progressive development, in a straight, upward
   line. Monism and evolution are the principia of the modern view of
   history, just as in the last lecture they proved to be such in the
   investigation of nature. But it deserves attention at the outset that
   the conception of evolution, when applied in history to a family or a
   tribe, to a people or to humanity, has an entirely different sense from
   that which it bears in individual organisms. In a remarkable study of
   the idea of development and its application to history Mr Galloway says
   perfectly correctly that the idea of development is an idolum fori, "a
   stock phrase in the scientific market-place." [129] We can conceive
   what must be understood by development in an organism. The germ, the
   egg, the embryo expands itself, through the working of the power of
   assimilation, and becomes bigger and stronger; the child grows up into
   a youth and a man. But when development is spoken of in a people or in
   humanity, we fall immediately into difficulty with the question of what
   is here the subject, the germ or the embryo of the development, and in
   what this development consists. We can no doubt speak of a unity in the
   case of a people or of humanity; but this unity is necessarily of a
   different kind from that of an individual organism. The comparison not
   only,--for this has to a certain extent the right of existence,--but
   the identification of society and of a people with an organism, led
   Spencer, Schäffle, and others, into all kinds of error and
   artificiality, which no one would now be willing to take responsibility
   for. Society is not a biological organism, but an organization, which
   no doubt is not exclusively established by the will of man, but
   certainly not without it. Before we can investigate the origin and the
   development of such an organization as a family, society, or people,
   other factors than merely biological ones must come into consideration;
   just as in an organism forces are at work which are not found in a
   machine. Monism overlooks the difference between a biological, a
   psychical, and an ethical organism, just as it does that between an
   organism and a mechanism; but nevertheless this differentation
   continues to exist in reality without any abatement. [130]

   We might speak of evolution in families, nations, or humanity if men
   successively increased in height, in size and weight, in strength or
   length of life, or even in intellectual, moral, or religious capacity,
   in "capability of culture." But this is by no means the case. Years ago
   Buckle said that the child born in a civilized country probably does
   not excel that of barbarians; and when this remark is understood
   strictly as referring to the capacity and not to the milieu of the
   child, it is rather strengthened than weakened by ethnological
   investigation. [131] The capacities and gifts of the culture-people of
   to-day are, on the average, no greater than those of the Greeks and
   Romans, Babylonians or Assyrians; the seventy or eighty years of which
   the Scriptures speak are still the limitation of the life of the
   strong; the religious sensibility, moral capacity, adaptation to art,
   etc., by no means advance with the years; "every-where," as Professor
   de Vries says, "the characteristics of individuals librate about an
   average, and everywhere they do it according to the same law." [132] We
   might cherish the hope of progress, however slow it might be, if it
   were established that characteristics, once attained, are transmitted
   by heredity. But on this there exists the greatest possible difference
   of opinion. Experience teaches us that numberless characteristics, both
   intellectual and moral, are not transmitted from parent to child.
   Learned men not rarely have stupid children; pious parents frequently
   bring up godless children; the gifts of grace prove to be no heirloom.
   Newly acquired variations do not always continue, but disappear after
   one or more generations. Every variety displays a tendency to return
   again to the original type, and nowhere, among plants, animals, or men,
   do we find an inclination to continue to vary in any one given
   direction. And yet, on the other hand, we see organisms appreciably
   modify themselves under the influence of climate, soil, food, and other
   circumstances, and transmit their variations to their descendants.
   Races and national types, the nose of the Bourbons and the lip of the
   Hapsburgs, the varieties among the descendants of the horse and the
   dog, prove this conclusively. But a straight line of development is
   nowhere indicated. Heredity is a dark region. We can do no more for the
   present than with Delage state the fact that modifications acquired
   under the influence of environment generally are not, but sometimes
   are, hereditary. [133]

   Thus we can predicate with certainty only this of the idea of evolution
   in humanity, that later generations are more favorably situated than
   the earlier ones, by reason of the inheritance which has come to them,
   in money and goods, in science and art, in civilization and culture.
   But this inheritance can hardly be denominated by the name of
   evolution; for these several possessions of culture have not
   organically developed from a germ and have not evolved themselves, but
   are the product of the thought and will of man. The discovery of
   America, the discovery and application of steam power, the knowledge
   and use of electricity, did not come spontaneously, nor are they the
   necessary product of economic or social factors, but they presuppose
   thirst for knowledge and intense intellectual labor in man. It is true
   man is here subject to the influence of his environment, and is perhaps
   as much indebted to it as it is to him. But the influence certainly
   does not come exclusively from one side; discoveries and inventions
   frequently are due to extraordinary personalities, whose origin and
   existence remain a mystery, despite all biographical investigation. A
   genius like Goethe is far from explained when we know that he inherited
   his "stature" from his father and his "cheerful disposition" from his
   mother. Evolution is a great word, but it turns its back on
   difficulties and sums up a rich and complicated reality under a vague
   formula. [134]

   This appears all the more clearly when we consider that the advantages
   of culture, handed down by progenitors, cannot be taken up, conserved,
   and increased by their descendants without some action on their part.
   Although every man is born from the community, and is formed by it, he
   has to begin again for himself at the very beginning. He has to begin
   with the exercise of his bodily members and senses, with learning to
   read and write and cipher. From his birth on he must strive to make the
   inheritance of the past his own; he must "labor for it in order to
   possess it." And there is the possibility and danger that he may
   squander, dissipate, and turn to his own destruction the treasures
   which fall in his lap at his birth. Individuals, but also families,
   tribes, and peoples, are exposed to this danger. Culture may be a
   blessing, but it can also be a curse; it does not always advance, it
   may degenerate and come to nothing; it can be augmented, but it can
   also be destroyed and annihilated through the decadence of nations,
   through calamities and wars. And in the strifes between peoples it is
   not always the cultured peoples which are victorious, but as the
   history of the Babylonians and Assyrians, of the Greeks and Romans, of
   the Franks and Germans teaches us, very frequently those peoples who
   are poor in culture and well-nigh devoid of civilization. [135] When
   they take over the culture of the conquered peoples afterwards, this
   does not happen on their part, except in the course of a long lapse of
   time and by the eflorts of their own intellectual strength.

   All these considerations show that history presents a character far too
   involved and complicated to be reduced to one common formula or to be
   explained from one cause. Monism, no doubt, endeavors to do this with
   history as well as with nature. But all efforts to comprehend
   historical personages and occurences exclusively from mechanical,
   physical, biological, psychological, social, or economic factors, have
   only succeeded in making evident the richness of life and the
   complication of conditions.

   Lamprecht, for instance, goes back to the folk-soul, and finds in it
   the ultimate cause of history. But questions multiply themselves as
   soon as we try to give to ourselves a somewhat clear account of this
   folk-soul. What are we to understand by it, and where is it to be
   found? How did it originate, and what factors influenced its formation?
   And if it exists, what is its dominant element? For no more than the
   soul of a man can it be a simple phenomenon. If the folk-soul is really
   a soul, what plays the chief role in it? Intelligence, the emotions, or
   the will; concepts or feelings, hunger or love? And further, what is
   the connection between the folk-soul and the folk-body, and between it
   and all nature, climate and soil and nourishment? As many questions, so
   many enigmas. [136] Instead of attaining unity, we come to an infinite
   diversity. For the folk-soul is no unity; it lacks the unity of
   self-consciousness, which in man is expressed in his soul. [137] ] And
   it is a matter of great wonderment that, at a time in which psychology
   is endeavoring to dissolve the individual soul into a complex of
   experiences, historical science wishes to believe in the unity of the
   folk-soul. In point of fact, it thus walks in the same path which is
   followed by natural science when it just abstracts in thought the
   forces of nature, and then personifies them through the imagination.
   The conception of a folk-soul is just as useless for history as that of
   an organism. There may be analogy, there is no identity. In a much
   higher degree than is the case in nature, we stand in history before a
   complex of causes and operations which are utterly unknown to us in
   their essence and interrelations, and cannot be, comprehended in one
   single word. "There is just as little such a final and simple word of
   history, which can express its true sense, as nature has such a word to
   offer." [138]

   The same difficulty which erects itself against the monistic doctrine
   of causality returns when the attempt is made to distinguish in history
   an aseendin series of periods, and to express each of those periods in
   a single name. Of course, we are compelled to speak of periods in
   history, and to characterize them by some trait or other. If that could
   not be done, it would be quite impossible to bring order into the chaos
   of events. We speak, therefore, without hesitation, of ancient,
   mediaeval, and modern history; of the age of the Reformation and of the
   "Enlightenment." But we must not forget that we do not comprehend the
   totality of such a period, by any means, in such a formula. The age of
   the Reformation, for instance, was also that of the Renascence, of the
   revival of philosophy and of natural science, of the origin of
   world-communication and world-commerce. The eighteenth century was the
   golden period of the "Enlightenment," but it also witnessed the
   activity of Pietism, Moravianism, and Methodism; it also gave being to
   Winckelmann and Lessing, Goethe and Schiller, Rousseau and Kant. And
   when the children of the nineteenth century felt the need of
   characterizing their own age, they called it the age of historic sense
   and of the natural sciences, of commerce and communication, of steam
   and electricity, of autonomy and anarchy, of democracy and popular
   power, of reason and of mysticism, of cosmopolitanism and of the
   national consciousness; and all felt that no one of these names answers
   to the fulness of the reality. [139]

   And we must further keep in view that all division of the world's
   history, however unprejudicedly it be studied, quietly assumes the
   unity of the race and a monistic-evolutionary conception of its
   history. The consequence is that only a narrow strip of peoples is
   taken into account and is abstracted from all other peoples. And at the
   same time events and conditions are deliberately placed in succession
   to one another which in reality occurred side by side. A distinction is
   made between the stone, bronze, and iron ages; between the chase, the
   pastoral life, agriculture, manufacture, and commerce; between an
   Asiatic-despotic, mediaeval-feudal, and civil- capitalistic society;
   between a natural-, money-, and credit- system of commerce, a home-,
   city-, and national- organization, a form of economy based on the
   principle of need, and one based on the principle of acquisition;
   between symbolism, typism, conventionalism, individualism, and
   subjectivism in the history of the German people; between savagery,
   barbarism, and civilization; between matriarchy, patriarchy, polygamy,
   and monogamy; between fetichism, polytheism, and monotheism; between
   theological, metaphysical, and positivistic phases, etc. But in all
   these distinctions it is forgotten that the relations and conditions
   which are thus placed in a series one after another exist throughout
   the ages side by side in different peoples, and even within the same
   people in different strata of society. The excavations in Assyria and
   Babylon, in Egypt and Greece, have informed us that a high civilization
   existed even in antiquity; industry and technic, science and art,
   commerce and society had even then reached a high degree of
   development.

   It is therefore futile to attempt to divide the history of humanity
   into sharply defined periods, in accordance with the evolutionary
   hypothesis. Ranke saw better when he said that not every succeeding
   period stands above the preceding. A period precedent in time does not
   serve exclusively, as the system of Hegel demanded, to prepare for a
   succeeding one: it also occupies an individual, independent position,
   and represents an independent value. Even if a period is older in
   history, it is very possible that it may have something which it alone
   possesses and by which it excels all others. The classical period, the
   middle ages, and also every one of the succeeding ages, have each
   something peculiar to itself, a special gift and calling, and they add,
   each in its own way, to the capital of humanity. The same is true of
   the nations. They do not simply stand in regular order, the one after
   the other; but, whether isolated or in communion, they live on
   together. And all these periods and peoples have not only a horizontal
   significance for what succeeds, but each period and each people has
   also vertically its own significance for God, who created and guided
   it. "Each period stands immediately related to God, and its value does
   not at all depend on what proceeds from it, but on its very existence,
   on its very self." [140]

   In the division into period's the monistic-evolutionary view of history
   comes into still greater difficulties. It may at best point out that
   the history of a people here or there has followed a certain course. It
   can never furnish the proof that this course is really necessarily and
   universally prescribed to all peoples. True, it makes this the
   starting-point of its monistic law of causality, and this is
   inevitable. But this starting-point is arbitrarily chosen and is
   contradicted by facts. Who dares to contend that every people has
   passed through or must pass through the periods of stone and copper and
   iron; of the chase, agriculture, and industry; of theology,
   metaphysics, and positivism, and the like? Even more than in nature, in
   history laws, if they exist at all, must bear an empirical character.
   They cannot be determined beforehand, but have to be derived from the
   facts. But this exposes us to the greatest difficulties. It is true, it
   is thoroughly justifiable to search in history also for the reign of
   law, for a connection between cause and effect, for an order and a
   plan. In the chaotic, in the arbitrary, in the accidental, we find no
   resting place, either for our intelligence or for our heart. But it is
   equally certain that this reign of law has not yet been found in
   history, and presumably never will be.

   If we do not know, in one way or another, and to a certain extent from
   elsewhere, it is impossible to determine in a purely empirical way from
   the facts, what course history takes and must take, and to what end it
   is advancing. We feel the need of this knowledge; in our innermost soul
   we all believe in such a course and such an aim in history. For if
   history is to be truly history, something must be accomplished by it.
   It is the very sense and value and meaning of history that in it and by
   it something shall be realized which makes it worth while for history
   to exist, with all its misery and pain. But the positivistic method
   does not enable us to find this order and this aim of history. In
   nature we scarcely know as yet what laws really are; but, as is seen
   and acknowledged more and more, in history we have as yet got no
   farther than that we perceive a certain rhythm in its events. [141]

   And accordingly opinions about the meaning and aim of history are
   widely divergent. There is difference of opinion as regards the place
   which should be assigned to the great men in history, and to each man
   and people in particular. Are the individual men only thoroughfares for
   the idea, phenomena of the Universal Being, expressions of the
   folk-soul, waves of the ocean; or have they each a significance for
   eternity? There is difference as regards the method by which a rule of
   judgment may be found. We stand over against the persons and the events
   not only as onlookers, but also as judges; we cannot assume a neutral
   attitude with respect to them as we may do in the case of nature. But
   where is the standard which we have to apply to be found, and how is it
   to he applied? And in the closest connection with this there is a great
   difference about the true contents, the moving-forces and the aim of
   history. Are these to be found in the development of the understanding
   and in the advance of science as Buckle thought; or in the idea of
   liberty as Kant and Hegel imagined; in the establishment of an order of
   government as Breysig thinks; or in production as Marx supposes? Are
   they to be found in mind or in matter, in man or in culture, in the
   state or in society? The history which is studied in an exclusively
   empirical way gives no answer. And since every one seeks an answer and
   cannot live without such an answer, the science of history raises
   itself to philosophy of history; for the cause and aim, the essence and
   development of history cannot be understood without metaphysics.

   In recent years this conviction has reasserted itself in the minds of
   many. A strong reaction has arisen against the monistic-evolutionary
   view of history. In 1883 Dilthey already declared the need of a
   "criticism of the historical reason;" in 1894 Windelband pronounced an
   oration on "History and Natural Science," in which he laid stress on
   the independence of the former; Heinrich Rickert followed him in 1899,
   with an essay on "The Science of Culture and the Science of Nature,"
   and published in 1902 an important logical introduction to the
   historical sciences, entitled, "The Limits of the Application of
   Conceptions framed by Natural Science." Since then the scientific
   discussion of the character of the science of history has been
   unbrokenly prosecuted, and flows out in a long series of orations and
   treatises, which apparently increases day by day. [142] And still
   further there is also a difference among those who antagonize the
   nomological science of history. According to Windelband and Rickert the
   sciences of nature and history are alike empirical and positive; but
   they are distinct in the aim with which they are studied. The natural
   sciences take their start, like the mathematical sciences, from general
   propositions, axioms, and postulates; or else search, like the
   empirical sciences, in the natural phenomena for the universal, the
   idea, the law; they are therefore nomothetic in character. On the other
   hand the historical sciences do not search out the universal, but the
   particular, das Einmalige ("the singular"), and they have their
   strength in the realizing power of conception; they have an ideographic
   character. But this is not all. For historical science by no means
   takes up everything which is particular and has occurred at some time
   or other, but it makes selection and treats only that which in a
   definite sense is important and possesses a real value. Just as the
   individual man retains in his memory only that which has been of
   importance for his life; so the history of a people or of humanity
   retains the memory of those persons and occurrences only which were
   significant for the universal progress, for the development of the
   whole. To accomplish this sifting of the material the historian must
   therefore be "a man of judgment." He must proceed from the belief that
   there are "universal values" and must derive these from ethics. Ethics
   is therefore the "epistemology of the historical sciences." According
   to the system of "values" which this science offers, the facts of
   history are sifted, ordered, estimated. History, in a word, is not a
   science of nature, but a science of culture.

   Others, such as Dilthey, Wundt, Sigwart, go back one step farther
   still. They seek the difference between natural and historical science,
   not only logically in the aim with which they are cultivated, but also
   in the contents of each group. The character of the historical sciences
   is not sufficiently expressed by the name "sciences of culture," but
   receives full justice only when they are indicated as mental sciences
   over against the natural sciences. The historical sciences occupy
   themselves with their own distinct object; they come into touch with
   other factors than the natural sciences. They concern themselves with
   man, with his psychic faculties and functions, and therefore they
   follow a different method and have a different name from the natural
   sciences. [143]

   This reaction against monism in the science of history is already
   remarkable, because it does not stand alone, but is connected with the
   entire movement which manifested itself toward the close of the last
   century, in many different countries and in various spheres, and which
   has in a previous lecture been characterized as a revolt of the will
   against the reason, of the heart against the understanding, of liberty
   against necessity, of man against nature. [144] But it is also
   remarkable on its own account, because it has once more clearly
   enunciated the difference in aim and contents between the natural and
   historical sciences and has demanded for the latter independence and
   liberty of movement. History is something else and something more than
   a process of nature which develops itself after a dialectic method, is
   independent of the consciousness, the will, and the aim of man, and is
   the necessary product of a power which works, as a whole, without
   consciousness and will. [145] But we cannot halt even at the conception
   of history as science of culture or mental science. For if history, in
   distinction from natural science, were to teach us really, in a
   definite sense, only the particular das Einmalige ("the singular"), it
   would cease to be science and would become art.

   Rickert has the courage to draw this conclusion, and refuses to
   acknowledge any laws in this domain. The so-called "laws" in history
   are nothing but Wertformeln, formulas of valuation. [146] Now we admit
   that das Einmalige ("the singular") has great significance in history.
   [147] But when this is postulated, in contradistinction to and to the
   exclusion of the "particular" in nature, this position cannot be
   assumed without criticism. For if the natural sciences generalize and
   search for laws which apply to a multiplicity of cases, this does not
   permit us to conclude that these particular cases are without value and
   have only served as illustrations of the universal laws; we must hold,
   rather, that they all have an historical significance in the process of
   the world, a place and task of their own. [148] Moreover it is not true
   that natural science, in its entirety, directs itself only to the
   discovery of the universal; it is easy to say this, as is explained by
   Professor Heymans, so long as one thinks only of the abstract natural
   sciences, like physics and chemistry; but it can by no means be applied
   when the concrete natural sciences, like geology and astronomy, are
   taken into consideration. For the student of geology the physical and
   chemical laws are not ends, but means, the means to account for the
   appearance of definite phenomena in the earth-crust, which, as they
   appear and are to be explained, mostly occur only once and no more.
   [149]

   On the other hand historical science cannot avoid all abstraction and
   generalization. It is true, history does not, like nature, make us
   acquainted with laws, although even here more and more doubt arises
   whether, in any sphere, we have really attained to the knowledge of the
   laws of elementary phenomena. [150] But this does not in the least
   hinder us from concluding that the historian by no means fixes his
   attention on das Einmalige (",the singular") alone, but connects every
   person and every event with the past, searches out the connection of
   facts, and thus carries on his investigations under the guidance of an
   idea,, a plan, a course in history. He who would deny this would make
   history itself an impossibility and reduce it to the viewpoint of a
   chronicle. From this point of view the historian would see trees but no
   forest; would retain facts but no history; would have bricks but no
   building; would have details but no living, organic whole. It cannot be
   denied that historical investigation has at times lost itself in such
   details, and in that way has called into existence the danger of
   historicism and relativism. And Nietzsche was fully justified when he
   broke out in wrath against such a treatment of history, for the
   overwhelming flood of details does not elevate us, but crushes us down;
   it robs us of our independence and freedom; it denies the, superiority
   of mind over matter. [151] Troeltsch remarks, therefore, that "All
   history uses the study of details rather as a means and never views it
   as a.final aim. And in truth it is the means of understanding the great
   closed cycles of human civilization, of the leading nations, of the
   important circles of culture, of the great branches of culture." [152]
   Without undervaluing the significance of details, history aims at the
   knowledge of the idea, of the sense of history. Bare facts do not
   satisfy us; we want to see behind the facts the idea which combines and
   governs them. [153]

   The newer view of history so far recognizes this that it makes the
   essence of history to lie in the realization of values. If this is so,
   the historian must be "somewhat of a man of judgment," and must possess
   a standard by which he can judge of the values in history. The danger
   is here far from imaginary that the historian, in determining these
   values, will permit.his own interest to intrude itself and will test
   all facts by his own limited insight and his own selfish advantage.
   Rickert sees this danger, and discriminates therefore between practical
   and theoretical, personal (individual) and general valuations,
   demanding that the historian shall lay the former aside and thus be
   wholly objective.

   But granting the practicability of this certainly very difficult
   discrimination proposed by Rickert, the question will nevertheless
   remain whence we must derive the standard of the general valuations. It
   is not to be supposed that history itself will furnish it. It would
   seem, no doubt, that Troeltsch is of this opinion when he says that
   history, notwithstanding that everything in it is relative, yet sets
   forth and maintains "norms, ideals of life, contents of life," which
   may be compared with one another by the historian. He therefore
   proposes wholly to lay aside the old historico-apologetic and
   speculative method, to replace it by that of the history of religions,
   and in this way to prove the (relative) truth and value of
   Christianity. [154] But if history, as Troeltsch says elsewhere, makes
   everything relative, occupies itself only with das Einmalige ("the
   singular") and the individual, and cannot "find a standard of universal
   application," it must be impossible for it to furnish us with the norms
   and ideals by which we may estimate facts and persons. In a fact, by
   itself, there is of course no qualitative difference ; the crime
   "happens" just as well as the noblest act of self-sacrifice; to a
   purely objective view sin and virtue are in the same sense products as
   vitriol and sugar. [155] The expectation that history is to realize
   ideals of life and norms proceeds from the assumption that history is
   not a "play of endless variants," but forms a whole which is animated
   by a governing idea, by the providence of God. [156] A comparison of
   persons and facts in history is possible only, then, when the historian
   is from the start a "man of judgment" and brings to his task a standard
   of judgment acquired elsewhere. And the question remains, whence we
   must derive the standard for measuring "universally valid values."

   The outcome and the result, the use and the profit,--culture, in a
   word,--can scarcely serve the purpose of such a standard, although
   Rickert sometimes seems to incline to this idea. For the standard would
   then be wholly utilitarian, even if it be social-eudaemonistic in
   character; and all truth and virtue would become subordinated to
   utility. But, apart from this, such a standard would be no standard at
   all, i.e. it would be no norm or rule, which is fixed in itself, and
   therefore can serve for impartial and fair judgment of phenomena and
   facts. If their culture-value is to determine the truth and goodness of
   things, this value itself ought to be fixed for all. But this is so
   little the case that the greatest possible difference exists about the
   contents and the value of the products of culture. And this entirely
   without considering the other question how we who have our place in its
   midst can take the final issue of history for a standard. The question,
   therefore, continues to clamor for an answer, where the standard is to
   be found which can be used in judging historical facts and personages.
   History itself does not present it; immanently, within the circle of
   historical phenomena, it cannot be found. If history is to be truly
   history, if it is to realize values, universally valid values, we
   cannot know this from the facts in themselves, but we borrow this
   conviction from philosophy, from our view of life and of the
   world,--that is to say, from our faith. Just as there is no physics
   without metaphysics, there is no history without philosophy, without
   religion and ethics.

   Very certainly there is no history without religion, without faith in a
   divine wisdom and power. For suppose that philosophy, especially
   ethics, could offer us an absolute standard, by which historical values
   may be judged--a possibility which is by no means unconditionally
   determined--still the final and most important question is not
   answered: What is the ground for the belief that such an absolute value
   has an objective existence and must be realized in history,
   notwithstanding all opposition? What right have we to expect that the
   good will ultimately be victorious? Rickert is of the opinion that the
   existence of such an absolute, transcendent value can be accepted and
   maintained without postulating a transcendent reality. But he himself
   does not entirely escape this postulate. For he has to assume that the
   idea of value, which, in accordance with the German idealism, he
   considers as the highest, namely, "development unto freedom," is
   "itself in some way inherent in the nature of the world." [157] This
   idea, then, has an objective reality, perhaps not in a personal,
   transcendent God, but immanently in the nature of the world. It is
   difficult, however, to attach a clear conception to these words. The
   ideas of freedom, of truth, of goodness, of beauty, have no existence
   in themselves, but are abstractions, which we have formed by our
   thinking. They are no transcendent powers or forces which realize
   themselves and can break down all opposition, but they are conceptions
   which we have derived from reality and have disassociated from it by
   our thinking. When later on we hypostatize these abstractions, and when
   we clothe them with divine wisdom and power, then we do in reality
   nothing but what natural science frequently does with its force and
   laws, and what the Roman of old did when he elevated justice and truth
   and peace and all sorts of possible and impossible abstractions to the
   rank of divinities. It is therefore in vain when we say that this idea
   is grounded in the nature of the world. For it passes comprehension how
   the idea of freedom, if it is no more than an idea, can be grounded in
   the nature of the world and can realize itself. And if it is indeed
   capable of so doing, then it must be more than an idea, and we cannot
   conceive of it in any other way than as an attribute and power of a
   personal God. In point of fact, goodness, justice, wisdom, etc., have
   no existence in this world but as personal attributes. And therefore
   not only the theology of all the ages, but also philosophy in a good
   number of its interpreters, has postulated the existence of a personal
   God. In the newer philosophy Kant here set the example, and at the
   present time he is followed in this respect by Eucken, Howison, and
   many others. [158] If history is to remain what it is and must be, it
   presupposes the existence and activity of an all-wise and omnipotent
   God, who works out his own counsels in the course of the world. The
   more we penetrate in our thinking to the essence of history, as to that
   of nature, the more we grasp its idea and maintain it, the more it will
   manifest itself as rooted in revelation and as upborne by revelation;
   the more it will lift itself up to and approach that view of history
   which Christianity has presented and wherewith Christianity in its turn
   confirms and supports revelation in nature and in history.

   Historians, it is true, to the detriment of their own science,
   sometimes assume an inimical or indifferent attitude towards
   Christianity. Rickert, for instance, will have none of it. He is of the
   opinion that the philosophy of history has done wholly away with it,
   that the image of the world has been totally changed, and that the idea
   of "a closed, explorable, (übersehbar) cosmos" is utterly destroyed.
   The doctrine of Giordano Bruno about the infinitude of the world has
   caused shipwreck to all world-history in the strict sense. [159]
   Indirectly, however, this declaration is a confirmation of the
   importance of Christianity for history; for it is indeed the special
   revelation in the Scriptures which has made a world-history possible
   and without which it is threatened with destruction. The significance
   of Christianity for history is therefore universally acknowledged.
   [160]

   In the first place the confession of the unity of God is the foundation
   of the true view of nature and also of history. If this be denied, we
   must either abide by the multiplicity of reality, by a pluralism of
   monads and souls, spirits or "selves," demons or Gods; or because man
   can never find satisfaction in such a multiplicity, we have to search
   in the world itself for a false unity, as is done by monism in its
   various forms, and then all differentiation is sacrificed to this false
   unity. The souls of men then become parts and phenomena of the one
   world-soul, and all created things become modi of the one substance.
   Only, then, when the unity of all creation is not sought in the things
   themselves, but transcendently (not in a spacial but in a qualitative,
   essential sense) in a divine being, in his wisdom and power, in his
   will and counsel, can the world as a whole, and in it every creature,
   fully attain its rights. A person alone can be the root of unity in
   difference, of difference in unity. He alone can combine in a system a
   multiplicity of ideas into unity, and he alone can realize them by his
   will ad extra. Theism is the only true monism.

   But to the Unity of God the unity of humanity stands very closely
   related, and this also is of fundamental importance for history. The
   evolutionary hypothesis usually accepts this unity, although the right
   to do so from its own standpoint may well be doubted, and it considers
   man as the highest creature, as the crown of all creation. Thus
   Heinrich Schurtz, for instance, says that, whilst the question cannot
   be scientifically decided whether humanity originates from one couple
   or more, yet all investigation of the races must proceed from the fact
   that "humanity forms one great unity." [161] And not only this, but
   human nature also is considered one and unchangeable. The same
   historian of culture says elsewhere, that changes of bodily structure
   still proceed with animals, but that man, having attained the height at
   which he now stands, no longer reacts on his environment by unconscious
   bodily changes, but by weapons and instruments, by science and art. The
   development of the mind has put a stop to changes in bodily structure.
   And this mind itself is stationary in its structure. Years ago Virchow
   declared this; Ammon has proved it; and Hugo de Vries assents to it:
   "Man is a stationary type" (Dauertypus); he continues at the same
   height, as concerns his hereditary attributes, i.e., the average
   attainment and the degree of development of the race. [162]

   However thankful we may be that the evolutionists usually accept this
   unity of humanity and human nature, and thereby show that life is
   stronger than doctrine, we must bear in mind that this unity does not
   rest on scientific grounds, but is derived from revelation. And yet it
   is an indispensable presupposition for history. For thereby only is a
   history in the true sense made possible,--a history of the world and a
   history of humanity, in which all men, all peoples, nay, all creatures,
   are embraced, and are held together by one leading thought, by one
   counsel of God. And this unity is important for history in still
   another sense. Eucken says with perfect truth: "A type of human nature
   ever stands between the historian and his sources." [163] Knowledge of
   history is possible, then, only when the men who act on its stage,
   whenever and wherever they may have lived, have been of like passions
   with us. For when the historian wishes to give an account to himself of
   their conceptions and emotions, of their words and deeds, he can do so
   only by transporting himself in his imagination into the characters and
   circumstances of the persons he desires to depict. He must endeavor to
   reproduce within himself their inner life, and thus to form a plausible
   conception of the way in which they came to act as they did. [164] He
   finds the key to explain the thinking and willing, the feeling and
   acting of his historical personages, in his own spiritual life. The
   unity of human nature and of the human race is the presupposition of
   all history, and this has been made known to us only by Christianity.

   But this unity in its contents is entirely different from that after
   which monism is striving. Monism always understands by unity a
   universal principle, which is abstracted from all that is particular,
   and which is then, as a universal origin, made the ground of all that
   is particular. The psyche of man, for instance, is, according to
   monism, a unity only when all psychic phenomena can be deduced from one
   principle, whether from conception or from feeling. The organisms are a
   unity when they have successively originated from one original cell.
   The world is a unity when all existence has developed itself from one
   matter and from one force. Monism knows no other unity than a genetic
   one, and can therefore never do full justice to the differentiation of
   the world, the difference between the inorganic, and organic, between
   irrational and rational creatures, the dependence and liberty of
   man,--the difference between the true and the false, good and evil. The
   unity of monism is a dead, stark, uniform unity, without life and its
   fulness. This is plainly shown in the judgment which it passes upon the
   heroes of history, who are sacrificed to the idea, to the mechanical
   interaction of matter, to the one power which necessarily produces all.
   Against this view pragmatism continually raises protest, just as
   one-sidedly seeing in the great men the makers of history, and
   resolving the historic content in their personality, and ultimately
   arriving at the apotheosis and adoration of genius.

   The unity which revelation makes known to us is of another kind and of
   a higher order. It is the unity of harmony, which includes riches,
   multiformity, differentiation. Just as soul and body in man are not
   genetically one and have not originated from each other, and yet form
   in the "ego" of man an inner organic unity; just as the members of an
   organism are neither exclusively producent nor exclusively product of
   the organism, but stand in reciprocal relations with it and thus form a
   unity ; so the matter stands with every man and every people in
   history, and also with all humanity. Therefore history is so rich, its
   life so full, and therefore so many factors are at work in it. But
   therefore it is also that the monistic attempt to explain the entire
   process of history from specific biological, psychological, or economic
   factors is so mistaken. Life resists this view, the personality of man
   perishes in it. Over against it the Scriptures teach us that the unity
   of humanity does not exclude, but rather includes, the differentiation
   of man in race, in character, in attainment, in calling, and in many
   other things. Every man lives in his own time, comes into being and
   passes away, appears and disappears; he seems only a part of the whole,
   a moment of the process. But every man also bears the ages in his
   heart; in his spirit-life he stands above and outside of history. He
   lives in the past and the past lives in him, for, as Nietzsehe says,
   man cannot forget. He also lives in the future and the future lives in
   him, for he bears hope imperishably in his bosom. Thus he can discover
   something of the connection between the past, the present, and the
   future; thus he is at the same time maker and knower of history. He
   belongs himself to history, yet he stands above it; he is a child of
   time and yet has part in eternity; he becomes and he is at the same
   time; he passes away and yet he abides.

   All this Christianity has made us understand. But it does more than
   that. The special revelation which comes to us in Christ not only gives
   us the confirmation of certain suppositions, from which history
   proceeds and must proceed, but itself gives us history, the kernel and
   the true content of all history. Christianity is itself history; it
   makes history, is one of the principal factors of history, and is
   itself precisely what lifts history high above nature and natural
   processes. And that it says and proves by its own act; Christ came to
   this earth for a crisis; the content of history lies in a mighty
   struggle. Monism knows nothing about this; it schematizes everything
   with its before and after. It has only one model--earlier and later,
   lower and higher, less and more, not yet and already past. It knows no
   pro and contra, but thus it does despite to life, to the experience of
   every man, to the terribly tragic seriousness of history. Revelation is
   a confirmation and explanation of life when it says the essence of
   history lies in a mighty conflict between darkness and light, sin and
   grace, heaven and hell. The history of the world is not the judgment of
   the world; and yet it is one of the judgments of the world.

   Furthermore revelation gives us a division of history. [165] There is
   no history without division of time, without periods, without progress
   and development. But now take Christ away. The thing is impossible, for
   he has lived and died, has risen from the dead, and lives to all
   eternity; and these facts cannot be eliminated,--they belong to
   history, they are the heart of history. But think Christ away for a
   moment, with all he has spoken and done and wrought. Immediately
   history falls to pieces. It has lost its heart, its kernel, its centre,
   its distribution. It loses itself in a history of races and nations, of
   nature- and culture-peoples. It becomes a chaos, without a centre, and
   therefore without a circumference ; without distribution and therefore
   without beginning or end; without principle and goal; a stream rolling
   down from the mountains, nothing more. [166] But revelation teaches
   that God is the Lord of the ages and that Christ is the turning point
   of these ages. And thus it brings into history unity and plan, progress
   and aim. [167] This aim is not this or that special idea, not the idea
   of freedom, or of humanity, or of material well-being. But it is the
   fulness of the Kingdom of God, the all-sided, all-containing dominion
   of God, which embraces heaven and earth, angels and men, mind and
   matter, cultus and culture, the specific and the generic; in a word,
   all in all.







     __________________________________________________________________

   [127] On these various tendencies the reader may consult: R. Flint,
   History of the Philosophy of History in France and Germany, I, 1893.
   Rocholl, Die Philosophie der Geschichte, 1878, 1893. M. Giesswein,
   Determin. und metaph. Geschichtsauffassung. Wien, 1905. Fr.
   Oppenheimer, Neue Geschichtsphilosophie, Die Zukunft, Nov., 1905. Fr.
   Eulenburg, Neuere Geschichtsphilosophie, Archiv. f. Sozialwiss. und
   Sozialpolitik, 1907, pp.283-337. Colenbrander, Hedendaagsehe
   Geschiedschrijvers, Gids, May, 1907 pp.319, 341. P. Schweizer, Die
   religiose Auflassung der Weltgeschichte. Zurich, 1908.

   [128] The appointment of Prof. M. Spahn at Strassburg in 1901 furnished
   a striking proof of this.

   [129] Mind, Oct., 1907 pp.506-534.

   [130] H. Pesch, Liberalismus, Sozialismus und christl.
   Gesellschaftsordnung, II, 1901, pp.283 ff. L. Stein, Die soziale Frage
   im Lichte der Philos. Stuttgart, 1903, p.47. H. Elsler, Soziologie,
   Leipzig, 1903, pp.40-45.

   [131] L. Stein, An der Wende des Jahrh., p.50, enters a protest.

   [132] Hugo de Vries, Afstammings- en Mutatieleer, Baarn, 1907, p.35.

   [133] In Nieuwhuis, Twee vragen des tijds, p.77.

   [134] Lexis, Das Wesen der Kultur, in Die Kultur der Gegenwart, I,
   pp.13-19.

   [135] Dr. E. R. Lankester, Natur und Mensch, Mit einer Vorrede von Dr.
   K. Guenther, Leipzig, pp.xi ff, 28.

   [136] Lamprecht, Die Kulturhist. Methode, Berlin, 1900. Id., Moderne
   Geschichtswiss., 1905. Compare on him the above mentioned articles of
   Eulenburg and Colenbrander; also E. Pesch, Lehrbueh der
   Nationaloekonomic, I, 1905, pp.95 ff.

   [137] Dilthey, Einl. in die Geisteswiss., pp.39, 51.

   [138] Dilthey, ibid., p.115.

   [139] Theob. Ziegler, Die geistigen und sozialen Strömungen des 19
   Jahrh., Berlin, 1901, pp.1 ff. H. St. Chamberlain, Die Grundlagen des
   19 Jahrh., 1903, I, pp.26 ff.

   [140] Ranke, Ueber die Epochen der neueren Geschichte, 1888, quoted by
   de la Saussaye, Geestel. Stroomingen, pp.301 ff. Comp. also H. Pesch,
   Der Gang der wirtschaftsgesch. Entwicklung, Stimmen aus Maria Laach,
   Jan., 1903, pp.1-16, and Lehrbuch der Nationaloekonomie, I, pp.107 ff.

   [141] The following writers deal with the subject of laws of history.
   L. Stein, Die soziale Frage, pp.35-42. Elsler, Soziologie, p.12.
   Rümelin, Reden unel Aufsätze, 1875. Tiele, Inleiding tot de
   godsdienstwetenschap, I, pp.193 ff.. H. Pesch, Lehrbuch, I, pp.443 ff.
   Dilthey, Einl. in die Geisteswiss., I,1883. Gumplovicz, Grundriss der
   Sozologie. Wien, 1905, pp.361 ff.

   [142] Dilthey, op. cit., p. 45. Windelband, Geschichte und
   Naturwissenchaft. Strassburg, 1900. Rickert, Kulturwiss. und Naturw.,
   Tübingen, 1899. Id., Die Grenzen der naturw. Begriffsbildung, Tübingen,
   1902 (cf. Troeltsch, Theol. Rundschau, 1903). Id.,
   Geschichtsphilosophie, in: Die Philosophie im Beginn des 20 Jahrh., II,
   pp.51-135. Eucken, Philosophic der Geschichte, pp.247-280 of System.
   Philos. in Die Kultur der Gegenwart. Lindner, Geschichtsphilos.,
   Stuttgart, 1901. Richter, Die Vergleichbarkeit naturwissenseliaftlicher
   und geschichtlicher Forschungsereignisse, Deutsche Rundschau, April,
   1904, pp.114-129. G. Heymans, De geschiedenis als wetenschap, Versl. en
   Meded. der Kon. Ak. v. Wet. Afd. Lett. 1906, pp.173-202. Van der Wijck,
   Natuur en Geschiedenis, Onze Eeuw, March, 1907, pp. 419-445.

   [143] Frischeisen-Köhler, Moderne Philos., pp.385 ff.

   [144] Eucken, Philos. der Gesch., loc. cit., pp.261 ff.

   [145] Marx in Woltmann, Der histor. Materialismus, p.183, comp. Engels,
   ibid. p.241.

   [146] Rickert, Geschichtsphilos., loc. cit., p.104.

   [147] Dilthey, Einleitung, pp.114-116, 129.

   [148] Frischeisen-Köhler, Moderne Philos., p.385.

   [149] Heymans, De geschiedenis als wetenschap, loc. cit., p. 185.

   [150] Heymans, ibid. p.182.

   [151] In Frischeisen-Köhler, op. cit., p.202.

   [152] Troeltsch, Die Absolutheit des Christ., pp.50 ff.

   [153] Buckle in Giesswein, Determ. und metaph. Gesch., p.6.

   [154] Troeltsch, op. cit., pp.23 ff. Id., Theol. Randschau, VI. pp.
   1-3.

   [155] Rickert, Geschichtsphilos., I. c. p. 82.

   [156] Troeltsch, op. cit., Comp. Reischle, Hist. u. dogm. Methode der
   Theologie, Theol. Rundschau, 1901. Traub, Die religionsgesch. Methode
   und die syst. Theol., Zeits. Für Theol. u. Kirche, 1901.

   [157] Rickert, Geschichtsphilos., I. c. p.131.

   [158] Eucken, Philos d. Gesch., I. c. p.271. In this class must be
   reckoned in general all advocates of so-called Personal Idealism. Comp.
   Personal Idealism, ed. by H. C. Sturt, Oxford, 1902.

   [159] Rickert, loc. cit., p.121.

   [160] Dilthey, Einl. in die Geisteswiss., pp.123, 135 ff. Eucken,
   Geistige Strömungen der Gegenwart., Leipzig, 1904, pp.190 ff. Hipler,
   Die christliche Geschichtsauffassung, Köln, 1884. Harnack, Das
   Christentum und die Geschichte, 1904. Sellin, Die alttest. Religion,
   pp.34 ff. Fairbairn, The Philos. of the Christian Religion, pp.169-185.
   H. H. Kuyper, Het Geref. beginsel en de Kerkgeschiedenis, Leiden, 1900.

   [161] H. Schurtz, Vö1kerkunde, Leipzig und Wien, 1900, p.5. Steinmetz,
   De Studie der Volkenkunde, p.46

   [162] Hugo de Vries, Afstammings- en Mutatieleer, pp.35, 36. Schurtz,
   Urgesch. der Kultur, 1900, Vorwort. Wundt, Vö1ker-psychologie, II, 1,
   pp. 16, 587 ff., 589, II, 2, pp.168. Steinthal, Zu Bibel und
   Religionsphilosophie, Berlin, 1890, p.128. R. C. Boer, Gids, Jan.,
   1907, p. 83. Stanley Hall, Adolescence, I, preface, p. vii.

   [163] Eucken, Geschichtsphilos., loc. cit., p. 40.

   [164] Heymans, De geschiedenis als wetenschap, loc. cit., p.191, 194.
   Comp. also Emerson's Essay on History.

   [165] Eucken, Geistige Strömungen, p. 190.

   [166] H. H. Kuyper, op. it., p.19.

   [167] Dilthey, Einleitung, p.41.
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 6 - Revelation and Religion


   We shall be strongly confirmed in the view that history as well as
   nature is rooted in revelation and needs it for its explanation, if we
   fix our attention upon one of its most prominent motive powers, namely,
   religion. The bare fact that religion exists already means much. Demons
   have no religion; they are no doubt convinced that God exists, but the
   thought of God moves them only to fear and hatred. We cannot speak of
   religion in animals; the idea of God is indispensable to religion, and
   animals entirely lack this idea, as they lack all abstract conceptions.
   The veneration of a dog for his master may show some resemblance and
   likeness to what religion is in man, but analogy is not identity. [168]
   On the other hand, religion is characteristic of all peoples and all
   men; however deeply a human being may be sunk in degradation, he is
   conscious of the existence of God and of his duty to worship him.

   This fact is of extraordinary significance; however far man may wander
   from God, he remains bound to heaven; in the depths of his soul he is
   linked to a world of unseen and supernatural things; in his heart he is
   a supernatural being; his reason and conscience, his thinking and
   willing, his needs and affections have their ground in that which is
   eternal. And religion is the irrefutable proof of this. It is not
   thrust upon him by force or foisted upon him by deceit, but it rises
   spontaneously from his own nature, although it is nourished from
   without. The religion of man in the fallen state is no doubt always
   arbitrary, but at the same time also voluntary, service. Thereby every
   man acknowledges and confesses that he can be free only in absolute
   dependence; that he can be true to himself and he a human being only
   when serving God. The feeling of absolute dependence includes freedom;
   the subjection of man to God bears a character of its own, and is
   distinguished from that of demons and animals by being inseparably
   conjoined with his affinity to God. In religion these two things are
   always united, although sometimes the theocratic, and then again the
   theanthropic, element predominates. [169]

   It is true there is an effort being made to remove religion from the
   central place which it occupies in the life of the individual as well
   as in the history of the race. This effort, however, is doomed from the
   outset to prove abortive, because it clashes with the unchangeable
   needs of human nature.

   When the Mercure de France last year opened a discussion on the
   dissolution or evolution of religion, some, it is true, used the
   occasion to air their hatred of the church and religion or to predict
   their approaching disappearance. But even among those there were some
   who sought a substitute for religion in altruism and socialistically
   organized society, in morality, science, or spiritualism. And an
   overwhelming majority were convinced that religion, although its forms
   may change, nevertheless in its essential nature is ineradicable and
   will survive all the crises through which it may have to pass. They
   based their conviction especially upon these two considerations, that
   religion is deeply rooted in human nature, [170] and that science,
   which can make known only the inter-relations of things, but never
   their origin, essence, and end, will never be able to satisfy the needs
   of the human heart. [171] Beyond that from which science has drawn away
   the veil there always remains unexplored the domain, sublime, immense,
   and silent, where the supreme power dwells on which we depend; and from
   the innermost recesses of man's personality religion always rises anew.
   [172]

   What is thus said of the present and expected in the future finds its
   foundation and support in the past; there are no peoples without
   religion, and history takes us back to no past in which religion is not
   already the universal possession of man. [173] And not only so, but
   from the beginning it has ever been the vitalizing element of all
   culture. Of course we must beware here of one-sidedness and take care
   not to construe actuality in the terms of a theory. From his origin man
   has been not only a religious, but also a moral and corporeal being;
   various wants and powers have been implanted in him from the beginning
   of his existence, which have worked together harmoniously. Morris
   Jastrow's assertion that science, art, and morality have grown out of
   religion, is too strongly put; they rather have come forth together in
   intimate connection with one another, out of the several wants and
   inclinations of human nature as such. [174] No monistic abstract
   principle, but the totality of human nature has been the starting-point
   of all development; just as little as the need of food and drink,
   shelter and raiment, have there been developed immediately from
   religion, agriculture, and industry, science and art and the several
   constituent parts of culture; every one of them has its own root in
   human nature, and hence its own particular character and life. But
   religion certainly belongs, and always has belonged, to the most
   intimate movements of the human heart, and has made its influence felt
   upon the whole life, with all its experiences and activities. Most
   certainly other agencies besides religion have been at work in the
   development of science, philosophy, art, etc., as, for instance,
   curiosity, desire for adornment and sport, and the like. But the more
   deeply we sink ourselves in the past, the more we find religion,
   morality, knowledge, art, in fact all the elements of civilization
   together, undivided and undifferentiated. They do not yet exist
   independently side by side with one another, but lie still undeveloped,
   enclosed in the same germ. A complex, a totality of experiences
   preceded the differentiation. And among these those of a religio-moral
   kind took the first place. In this sense it may be said that religion
   has been the deepest cause of the process of civilization, the mother
   of arts and of all sciences. [175]

   This consideration of human nature is of great importance for the
   investigation of the origin of religion. At present there is a tendency
   among men of science first to dissolve the organic connections in which
   religion appears in life, and then to investigate its origin. They
   treat religion as a chemist does the substances, which he separates
   from their actual connections and then analyzes into their component
   parts. Scientifically this is of high value, if only we do not forget
   that the process to which science subjects its object differs entirely
   from that which happens in actuality. There is no proof at all that the
   elements have all existed originally in an unmixed state; and similarly
   there is no ground for asserting that the factors which we at present
   discover in the religious life ever existed separately. Actuality
   presents a different appearance from theory. Life, full, rich life, is
   always first; the abstractions of our thinking come only later. When
   science in its search for the origin of things allows itself to be
   exclusively guided by the idea of evolution, and therefore ever
   endeavors to go back to the most insignificant beginnings, to the most
   meagre principles, it simply elevates the abstractions of thought into
   concrete powers, and in its interpretation of things takes refuge in
   mythology. No abstract principle, however, no simple power has been the
   origin of human life in all its richness, and no rectilinear law of
   evolution has directed the development. When we go back in the actual
   as far as possible to the origins, we find a human nature which already
   contains everything which it later on produces out of itself. Natural
   and spiritual life, religion and morality, knowledge and art, sense of
   beauty and consciousness of values, have been united in man from the
   beginning. The experiences of life are the background of all
   development and civilization. [176]

   The researches of recent years into the origin of things, of religion
   and morality, science and art, family, society, and state, have put
   this in the clearest light. Of course we cannot speak here in the
   strict sense of the word of a scientific investigation, whether
   naturalistic or historical, for the elements of culture we have
   mentioned have always existed, as far as history carries us back. When
   Lubbock tried to prove that all peoples have passed through a phase of
   atheism, [177] he not only overstepped the limits of our empirical
   knowledge, but he also invented a condition which, if it ever had
   existed, would be totally unintelligible to us, in whose life religion
   forms an essential part. [178] We can form no conception of beings
   which are not animals, but men, and which yet wholly lack religion;
   they are unthinkable and impossible. The case is, in fact, the same
   with all the component parts of human civilization; men are not
   thinkable without some knowledge and art, without some kind of family
   and social life, without some conception of morality and justice. If,
   notwithstanding all this, science continues to attempt to penetrate
   behind all culture and to form a conception of the way in which all
   these phenomena arose in human life, it is in the nature of the case
   shut up to conjectures and guesses. Thia is frankly acknowledged by
   many. For instance, Oscar Hertwig, speaking generally of descent in the
   past, says: "When we try to trace the genealogical chains of the
   mammals, amphibians, and fishes in primitive times, we launch into a
   darkness which even the bright light of science cannot penetrate with a
   single ray, and scientific research is accordingly exposed to the
   danger of deviating from that path in which alone it can reach
   knowledge of the truth and consequently permanent results." [179] It is
   "a fatal and yet unavoidable necessity for the science which
   investigates the origins of the family, property, society, etc.," says
   Ludwig Stein, "that it is compelled to operate with hypotheses." [180]
   And with respect to the origin of religion it is agreed by Lehmann and
   Troeltsch, Tiele and Pfleiderer, and many others, that it is as
   impossible now as in former days to speak of a knowledge of these
   things, and we have to be content with conjectures and hypotheses.
   [181]

   That these hypotheses may not hang wholly in the air an attempt is made
   to support them with data derived from embryology and anthropology,
   from palaeontology and ethnography. Study of the animal and the child
   on the one hand, and on the other study of the so-called
   nature-peoples, is pressed into service in order to form in some sense
   an idea of primitive man still wholly without culture. But the method
   which is thus employed, and the results which some think they have
   obtained, inspire little confidence, and on better acquaintance
   evacuate the hope that along this road we shall ever reach any
   certainty about man's original condition.

   Commonly the truth of the doctrine of the descent of man is tacitly
   presupposed. In Darwin himself this assumption had at least the
   foundation that he could explain it by means of "natural selection" and
   "the struggle for existence;" but although many have now discarded
   Darwinism in its original form, either altogether or in part, as an
   explanation of the development of living beings, they still hold the
   theory of descent unimpaired. As a working hypothesis the idea of
   evolution undoubtedly is of undeniable significance; it leads to the
   discovery of analogies which otherwise probably would not have been
   noticed, and offers a clue which opens a way through the labyrinth of
   phenomena. Nevertheless, science must never lose sight of the fact that
   it is dealing in it with an hypothesis and not, as Haeckel supposes,
   [182] with a "firmly established fact." Sober naturalists, who give ear
   to facts alone, express themselves differently, not only formerly
   through the lips of Virchow, but now also through the lips of Branco,
   Reinke, Wasmann, and others. Reinke, for example, acknowledged in 1900
   : "We must confess unreservedly that there is not at our disposal a
   single unexceptionable proof of its correctness." Two years later, in
   still stronger language, he affirmed that science knows nothing about
   the origin of man. And at the International Congress of Zoologists at
   Berlin, in 1901, Branco bore witness that palaeontology knows no
   ancestors of man, but that man suddenly and immediately appears before
   us in the diluvial age as a perfect homo sapiens. [183] The mental and
   physical gap between animal and man remains at present as wide as it
   ever was. In the structure of the skull and brains, for example, the
   interval between the other mammals and the apes may possibly be bridged
   over, but not between the apes and man. Among all the mammals now
   existing there is not one which in this respect can be compared with
   man. Stanley Hall also has to acknowledge that what intervenes between
   the highest anthropoid brain of 500 cubic centimeters and that of the
   lowest man, 1150 cubic centimeters, is almost as lost as a sunken
   Atlantis. When he adds that all the ancestors of man have been
   accidentally extirpated, this is nothing but a make-shift, entirely
   without scientific value. [184] The common ancestor of ape and man is a
   mere invention of the mind. [185] All inferences from the animal to the
   original man lack thus firm scientific foundation. It is not without
   significance that many adherents of the doctrine of descent have
   recently turned their backs upon historical zoology and look for their
   salvation to experimental morphology. [186]

   It may be doubted, however, whether this new science will be able to
   shed more light on the subject. The opposition to Haeckel's biogenetic
   law is growing in strength day by day. Geganbaur and Oscar Hertwig both
   intimate that ontogeny is a sphere where a lively imagination may no
   doubt carry on a perilous game in seeking phylogenetic relations, but
   where assured results are by no means easy to get at; and they warn
   against the false paths which lead to the construction of fictitious
   conditions, or even of entirely fictitious organisms. [187] The
   embryological forms of the mammals show, it is true, correspondences
   with amphibians and fishes, but this "ancestral similarity" does not,
   according to Professor Emery, authorize an inference to "ancestral
   inheritance." The simple germ cell is already a life-form, which
   comprehends a fulness beyond belief of great and small varieties, and
   which already is the product of a phylogenetic process of development.
   Further, the fertilized germ cells of the several species of animals
   differ as much from each other in their nature as the individuals which
   come forth from these germ cells. And finally, there is a very great
   essential difference between the stages of ontogenesis which pass into
   one another and the forms of an ancestral series which do not pass into
   one another at all. This is the reason why Hertwig finds the hypothesis
   improbable that our earth in a former period produced only one kind of
   cells; and in view of the hundreds of thousands of species of animals
   and plants prefers the polyphyletic supposition, according to which the
   organisms now living are not derived from one primitive cell, but from
   a large number of cells, which are already differently organized, and
   which in a former period have been produced in some way or other by the
   creative power of nature. Closer study thus leads in this domain not to
   uniformity, but to multiformity. Nature is far from being as simple as
   the advocates of the mechanical theory conceive it to be. There was not
   in the beginning the poverty of the monistic principle, but the fulness
   and wealth of created life.

   The biogenetic law grows still more improbable when it is applied in
   detail, and the conditions of the life of the embryo, of childhood and
   of youth are considered a recapitulation of those of the ancestors of
   men and of the first men themselves. The small stature of human beings
   in youth certainly ought to prove that the original men were very
   small; but, according to Stanley Hall and others, they were rather of
   gigantic stature. [188] The late appearance of the teeth in children
   ought to be considered a proof that original men were toothless, but
   this also is not at all acknowledged. [189] In the man of our time the
   brain is of early growth, and has reached its full size at the age of
   about fourteen years, but the doctrine of the descent of man
   postulates, on the contrary, a very late development for it in the
   phylogenesis. [190] The heart develops before the blood-vessels, but in
   the history of the human race the reverse must have taken place. [191]
   If the rudimentary tail of man is to be looked upon as an argument for
   his animal descent, then certainly the breasts of the male should be a
   reminder and a remainder of the period when man was androgynal; but few
   are inclined to draw this conclusion. [192] It is no wonder that
   Stanley Hall, having in mind all these considerations, reaches the
   conclusion that there are "many inversions" in the ontogenetic law:
   "ontogeny often reverses the order of phylogeny." [193]

   A similar change is noticeable also with regard to the notion that the
   nature-peoples afford us the means of learning to know primitive man.
   The name itself is misleading; nature-peoples are nowhere to be found,
   any more than wild or cultureless peoples. The cultured peoples are no
   less dependent on nature than the so-called nature-peoples; the
   difference between the two is not to be sought in the degree, but in
   the character of their relation to nature. [194] And wild or
   cultureless peoples do not exist either. The ridiculous fancies about
   men who formerly or even now clamber up into the trees like apes,
   covered over the whole of their bodies with hair, knowing nothing of
   fire, without language or religion, reappear, it is true, now and then;
   but they are antiquated. All men and peoples, though they may be poor
   in culture, yet possess at least its fundamental elements, the crest
   walk, the average weight of brain, the hand and the thumb, fire and
   light, language and religion, family and society. [195] Furthermore,
   the nature-peoples do not form a separate group, and do not all stand
   on the same level; they cannot be dealt with all alike, nor brought
   together under a common name. [196] They are related to higher peoples
   by means of all kinds of links, and upon better acquaintance do not
   seem to be nearly so barbarous and uncivilized as at first they were
   thought to be. The savage of Australia does not stand intellectually
   below the level of other peoples of little culture. The decision about
   the Batakudes and other South American peoples is on the whole
   favorable. Among the Bushmen and the Esquimaux the imagination
   exhibited in their drawings, toys, fairy tales, and legends, is a clear
   proof of their capabilities. [197] There can then be no question of
   nature-peoples and civilized nations differing in fundamental
   endowment, as if the one were predestinated to barbarism and
   destruction, the other to progress and high culture. Repeated instances
   have occurred of transitions from the one group to the other. The
   Bedouins of Arabia, Syria, and Mesopotamia live now just as they did
   hundreds of years ago, but they have produced civilized races. Finns
   and Magyars have recently become cultured peoples, while their kindred
   are still living in the barbaric state. The Japanese have all of a
   sudden accepted Western culture, while the Mongols and the Kalmucks
   remain stationary at the old stage of civilization. Thus it has
   repeatedly happened that nature-peoples have become culture-peoples.
   [198] Missions, especially, furnish abundant proofs of this fact. [199]

   While the nature-peoples are thus again being gradually looked upon as
   men, our eyes are being opened on the other side to the sins and
   imperfections of the culture-peoples. Experience has taught us that
   even here it is far from everything that glitters that is gold. Not
   only were the ancestors of the culture-peoples of today, for instance
   the Germans and the Gauls, who were idealized by Caesar and Tacitus,
   poor in culture, but also with regard to many peoples, for instance the
   Chinese, the Mongols, the Thibetans, the Russians, it is a question to
   which of the two groups they ought to be reckoned. Rude and barbarous
   customs still prevail among the Russians, Letts, Bulgars, Magyars,
   etc.; and in general the so-called culture-peoples, when carefully
   considered, are far from standing on the high level which many ascribe
   to them. The percentage of those who occupy the highest round of the
   ladder is very low. Many individuals and circles among the
   culture-peoples fall below the nature-peoples in civilization.
   Vagabonds and pariahs, the enfeebled and deficient, such as we meet
   with in our large cities, are all but never found among the
   nature-peoples. The mass among those peoples is more intelligent than
   with us. Animism, spiritism, superstition, sorcery, belief in witches
   and ghosts, prostitution and alcoholism, crimes and unnatural sins,
   occur among the culture-peoples no less, and sometimes in more
   aggravated forms, than among the nature-peoples. When the
   nature-peoples become civilized, they gain much, but lose no less. Many
   beautiful qualities, such as faithfulness, truthfulness, simplicity,
   artlessness, sincerity, ingenuousness, are lost in civilization. [200]
   There are many today who are not far from thinking of the
   nature-peoples after the idyllic fashion of the age of Rousseau.
   Tolstoi and Nietzsche return along different paths to nature ; in
   literature and art there is a reaction against the conventional, and a
   recurrence to the unconscious, instinctive, passionate life. Stanley
   Hall describes savages as amiable children: "Most savages in most
   respects are children, or because of their sexual maturity, more
   properly adolescents of adult size. Their faults and their virtues are
   those of childhood and youth. He, who knows them, loves them." [201]

   Yet both theories are one-sided: equally that according to which the
   nature-peoples are semi-animals and that according to which they are
   innocent children. The notion that all peoples are on the road to
   progress is as incorrect as that they are continuously declining and
   degenerating. Neither development nor degeneracy covers the course of
   history; this is wider than our thinking, and is not disturbed by the
   logic of our reasoning. There are peoples who have developed and have
   attained a high level of civilization ; it may even be not impossible
   that this development in some cases, as, for instance, in Peru and
   Mexico, has been autochthonous. But it is no less evident that a number
   of peoples have declined from a more or less high degree of
   civilization. This has been the case with many peoples of antiquity in
   Asia and North Africa, which have either totally disappeared or sunk
   into complete insignificance. [202] Virchow called the Laplanders and
   the Bushmen even "pathologically degraded, degenerated races," and
   Darwin, Spencer, Tylor, Wallace, Max Müller, and many others, have
   acknowledged the decline and ruin of many peoples. [203] Environment
   has had a great deal to do with degeneracy. "It is of great importance
   for the development of a people, whether it dwells in the midst of the
   inhabited world, where it is exposed to numerous influences, or near
   its margin; peoples living on the margin of the inhabited world are
   mostly poor in culture and few in numbers." [204] The peoples cannot,
   therefore, be arranged in succession, one after the other; it is
   arbitrary to place the nature-peoples at the beginning of the
   genealogical table of the human race and to represent their condition
   as the original condition of mankind. [205] The theory of development
   which in every case maintains apriori, "that the human race only knows
   aspiration, progress, development, and no retrogression, decline and
   decay," [206] is just as one-sided as the theory of degeneracy. History
   declines to follow in its course a single straight line. Every people
   and every group of peoples, spread over the globe, has its own life,
   and continues it in the midst of the others. [207] We must return from
   the "after-one-another" to the "by-the-side-of-one-another," from
   uniformity to multiformity, from the abstract theory of monism to the f
   ulness of life.

   The nature-peoples supply us, therefore, just as little as embryos and
   children with the desired material for the construction of original
   man. The primitive man, wherewith the historian of our day operates, is
   nothing but a fiction [208] of the same kind as the contrat social, of
   which Rousseau made use in order to explain the origin of society, and
   as the ape-man, who is placed by zoology at the beginning as our common
   ancestor, and, according as circumstances require, is thought of
   sometimes as an ape and sometimes as a man. In the same manner Wundt
   says: "It is impossible to exaggerate the enormousness of the gap which
   separates the man of today from primitive man. But we must not think of
   this gap in such a way, as if no connection existed any longer between
   them, or as if the narrow path of a single thought were the only one to
   lead from one side to the other. . . . Every view which conceives of
   primitive man in a one-sided manner puts itself self not only in
   contradiction with the facts, but deprives itself also of the
   possibility of comprehending a psychological development. For every
   change of motive, however vast it may be in some cases, presupposes at
   least this, that some germs of the motives which come into activity
   later on, were already present originally." [209] Primitive man, in
   other words, must be constructed physically and psychologically in such
   a manner that an ape and a man can be derived from him. Thus you can
   make whatever use of him you like; you wield a two-edged sword. If you
   desire to explain the animal or the animal character in man, you
   asscribe to primitive man the qualities of the ape; if, on the
   contrary, you wish to explain man, you acknowledge in him as easily the
   necessary human qualities. [210] Primitive man accordingly is a worthy
   counterpart of the animated atoms, the personified powers of nature,
   the apotheosized natural laws, the deified evolution idea. In reality
   he has never existed; he is nothing but a poetical creation of monistic
   imagination.

   This is gradually becoming understood by many. We have already remarked
   that Oscar Hertwig looks upon the polyphyletic hypothesis as much more
   probable than the monophyletic, and thus assumes that the creative
   power of nature in the beginning produced at once a great number of
   variously organized primitive cells. Just as Haeckel, not being able to
   give a satisfactory explanation of them, declares matter and force,
   motion and life, consciousness and will to be eternal, so Hertwig
   places the idea of species already in the very first cells which were
   produced by the creative power of nature. Whether, however, we assign
   priority to the cells or to the organisms proceeding from them, or, in
   other words, to the egg or to the chicken, amounts to much the same
   thing. The starting-point in both cases is not a monistic principle,
   but the multiformity of life, and the miracle, and faith in miracles as
   well, remains in either case equally great. Sociology also is beginning
   to see, now and again, that the sociological problem cannot be solved
   by the single formula of imitation (Tarde), local association or clan
   (Mucke), division of labor (Durkheim), struggle of the classes
   (Gumplowicz), blood-relationships (Morgan), or consociation (Schurtz).
   [211] Many accordingly assume the existence from the beginning of what
   lies to be explained. Gustav Ratzenhofer, for example, maintains that
   society has not in the strict sense of the word been originated : man
   did not create society, but society man; the human race was from the
   beginning subject to its social nature, the social is what is original,
   the individual is derived. [212] According to Zenker even property did
   not gradually come into existence, but existed from the beginning.
   "Without social life and self-consciousness, that is, with common life
   and without personal work, the pithecoanthropos would never have been
   able to lift himself out of his animal state." [213] The theory of
   original promiscuity, which was advocated by Lewis Morgan and found
   favor with many, has later on been strongly contradicted by
   Westermarck, Starcke, Grosse, and others. [214] Among economists,
   according to Schmoller, a conviction is growing more and more towards
   unanimity, that a psychologico-ethical view of social life is necessary
   which shall recognize not only the emotions and passions, but also the
   ethical powers in man, and shall investigate political economy in
   connection with the state, religion and morals; "all great social
   communities are a result of human nature in general, founded on
   language and writing, on custom, law, morals, religion, and
   intercourse." [215] In general men have become more cautious in the
   application of the theory of evolution along single- and straight-lined
   processes of developments. [216]

   This is also apparent in the investigation of the origin of religion.
   History does not lead us back in this domain, either, to the
   beginnings; all beginnings, said Schelling, are from darkness to light.
   If we are nevertheless determined to seek out a beginning, we are
   driven to conjectures which endeavor to support themselves upon the
   psychology of the child and the savage. Nature-peoples furnish us,
   however, very little material for the investigation of the origin of
   religion, because religion has already long existed among them all and
   is intimately interwoven with their whole life. Instead of offering a
   solution of the problems which the man of culture proposes to himself,
   the savage is himself a problem. This is also the case with the
   children; no more than the animal can the child serve to explain the
   adult; the adult, on the contrary, is needed to explain the child. It
   is extremely difficult, accordingly, to penetrate into the life of the
   child soul and to understand it truly. [217] Moreover it will not do to
   compare present-day children with, and to take them as an example of,
   original adult men. For our children on the one hand have advantages
   far above any enjoyed by primitive men, by their birth and education in
   the midst of a rich, cultured life; and yet on the other hand they, as
   children, are far behind the adults of the past ages in the development
   of bodily and spiritual powers. If the comparison contained any truth
   and entitled us to a conclusion, it could only be that primitive men
   received and learned their language and religion by communication from
   others; that is, ultimately by revelation of God. [218]

   The many and manifold theories which have been presented as an
   explanation of religion have all again been abandoned one after the
   other. They all have the defect that they derive religion from
   non-religious factors, and either cannot find the transition, or, if
   they indicate such a transition, always presuppose religion; they thus
   oscillate between a metabasis eis allo genos and a petitio principii.
   The result of all the research is accordingly the humble confession,
   ignoramus, we do not know. How religion arose, and out of what causes,
   "is entirely unknown to us," says Troeltsch, "and just as in the case
   of morals and logic, will always remain unknown to us. An absolute
   equivocal generation is denied to us." [219] Openly or secretly all
   turn back to an inborn disposition, to a religio insita. Just as matter
   and force, life and consciousness, society and state, so also the
   religion which is to be explained is already assumed in the
   explanation. Troeltsch does this, but also Schroeder, who is certainly
   an adherent of the doctrine of descent, and speaks, therefore, of
   Untermenschen ("undermen"), but nevertheless presupposes already in
   them a divine spark, which develops them into men. Tiele goes back to
   an inborn feeling and need of the infinite, and even Hugo de Vries
   speaks of the need of religion as an inborn quality of man. [220] In
   the beginning, therefore, there did not reign the dead unity of monism
   but the totality of human nature.

   If, however, religion as religio insita is an essential element of
   human nature, it points directly back to revelation. We stand here
   before essentially the same dilemma as in the case of
   self-consciousness. If this is not a delusion or imagination, the
   reality of the self is necessarily included in it; hence religion is
   either a pathology of the human spirit, or it postulates the existence,
   the revelation, and the knowableness of God. It is, as we have seen,
   necessary because of the peculiarity of human nature; and it is
   universal, as is apparent from the history of the human race and all
   the peoples. And wheresoever it manifests itself it is a relation of
   man, not to his neighbor or to the world in general, or to one of its
   parts, but to a personal being, who stands above nature and the world,
   and is therefore able to raise man above them and to unite him to
   himself. Religion is always a service of God, and hence it is either
   folly or necessarily implies the existence of God. Furthermore, faith
   in the knowability of God is inseparable from the existence of God,
   which is pre-supposed in and with the truth of religion; for a God who
   is wholly unknowable is practically for us a God who does not exist.
   Consistent agnosticism amounts practically to atheism. And finally, if
   God, even in however small a measure, is knowable, there can be no
   explanation of this except that he has revealed himself; for what we
   cannot perceive at all cannot be known, and what we cannot know at all
   we cannot love and serve, ignoti nulla capido. All who recognize and
   defend religion as truth believe accordingly, whether they are willing
   to confess it or not, in the existence, knowableness, and revelation of
   God. Naturalism in the strict sense and religion are irreconcilable.
   All religion is supernatural, and rests upon the presupposition that
   God is distinct from the world and yet works in the world. Men may
   impose limits on revelation and not recognize it in nature and history,
   but only in their own consciousness; the thing itself remains in
   principle the same: religion has its foundation in revelation and
   derives from it its origin. [221]

   The investigation into the essence of religion has led to the same
   result as that into its origin. When the study of religions came into
   vogue, it was thought that by means of comparative research the essence
   of religion might be determined, and thus the value of all forms of
   religion be estimated. But so many and such serious difficulties have
   been met with in the prosecution of this task that it may be reasonably
   maintained that it has now come to the dead point. It is undoubtedly
   impracticable for any one to obtain a thorough knowledge of all
   religions, or even of the principal religions, and to compare them with
   one another. Religion is of such a complex nature that it is scarcely
   possible to characterize accurately the essence of a single religion,
   or even of the religion of a single person. Very various opinions
   obtain among us of the essence of Christianity, of Romanism and of
   Protestantism; how, then, would it be possible to penetrate into the
   essence of all the different religions and to compare them with one
   another? To this must be added, that the study of the history of
   religions professes no doubt to be undertaken without any prejudice
   whatever, but facts disprove the assertion. Even the idea, from which
   it as a rule proceeds, that religion is neither an illusion nor a
   disease, but a necessary element of man's nature, a habitus and a
   virtue which has a right and reason to exist,--even this idea, I say,
   is an assumption of such importance that it is impossible to speak here
   of unprejudiced investigation; it is an assumption which from the
   outset binds and dominates the entire science. But every student of the
   history of religions approaches his task, whether he intends it or not,
   with his own conception of religion, which guides him in his
   investigation and serves him as a rule. If he proceeds, let us say,
   merely from the view that that religion is true which lies at the basis
   of all and manifests itself more or less purely in each, he thereby
   puts forth a dogma which is derived from philosophy and has
   far-reaching results for his investigation. Already in the case of the
   physical sciences, and yet more so in the case of the sciences of the
   mind, it is impossible to begin investigation without assumptions, for
   they all are founded on ideas and canons which have their basis in the
   rational and moral nature of man. [222] This explains the fact that the
   search for the essence of religion has ended by resolving it into a
   vague, indefinite formula which is intended to embrace all religions,
   but cannot do justice to a single one of them, and which, as far as it
   contains anything positive, has given expression only to the notion
   which each investigator had formed beforehand of the essence of
   religion. [223]

   Many have for this reason turned their backs upon this comparative
   historical investigation of the essence of religion, and have even run
   into the opposite extreme. They say there is no universal, objective
   religion valid for all, and there is no essence which is everywhere the
   same and only clothes itself in different forms. But religion is always
   something thoroughly personal,--a thing which concerns the individual
   man, and hence it is endlessly variant and incapable of being
   comprehended in a general definition. He who desires to know it must
   watch it in particular men, and especially in the splendid specimens,
   the geniuses and heroes of religion, the mystics, the enthusiasts, the
   fanatics; they are the classics of religion. It is not history but
   psychology which will tell us what religion really is. [224] Even a man
   like Troeltsch, who persists in maintaining the historical point of
   view, and upbraids the psychology of religion with the lack of an
   epistemology, is compelled to confess that the expression "essence of
   religion" leads into error on account of its obscurity, and creates the
   false impression that it is possible "to answer with one stroke the
   different questions which are bound up with it in one and the same
   investigation." [225] As it was in the case of the origin, so again in
   the consideration of the essence, of religion, many turn back from
   abstract monism to the totality of religious life. There is not one
   principle which governs all religions and religious phenomena, and
   there is not one formula under which they all can be summed up. The
   investigation of the essence of religion has, however, by no means been
   unfruitful. On the contrary, it has made as clear as the day that
   religion and revelation are bound together very intimately, and that
   they cannot be separated. All religion is supernatural in the sense
   that it is based on faith in a personal God, who is transcendently
   exalted above the world, and nevertheless is active in the world and
   thereby makes himself known and communicates himself to man. Let it
   remain for the present undetermined whereby and how God reveals
   himself, whether in nature or in history, through mind or heart, along
   ordinary or extraordinary ways. Certain it is that all religions, in
   harmony with their own idea, rest upon conscious and spontaneous
   revelation of God. This is confirmed by the consideration of what man
   seeks in religion. Siebeck divides religions into nature-, morality-,
   and redemption-religions. Tiele, however, rightly observes that, in a
   wide sense, the idea of redemption is common to all religions, and
   therefore all religions are redemption-religions. As to the evil from
   which redemption is sought, and the supreme good which men desire to
   obtain, their conceptions diverge widely. But all religions are
   concerned with redemption from an evil and the attainment of a supreme
   good. The first question always is, What must I do to be saved? [226]
   This being so, religion everywhere, by virtue of its very nature,
   carries along with it the idea of revelation. Religion and science
   differ in many things, and in this too, that the one owes the contents
   of its knowledge to divine revelation, the other to human
   investigations. [227]

   To a considerable extent religion and science (philosophy) stand in
   relation to the same objects. To separate between religion and
   metaphysics, however often it may have been attempted, is impossible;
   religion is not merely a certain frame of mind, an emotion of the
   heart, but it always includes certain conceptions, and the emotions are
   modified in accordance with the nature of these conceptions. These
   conceptions of religion extend to man, the world, and God, and hence
   enter the same domain which science also tries to cultivate. But
   religion gives to its conceptions the character of dogmas which it
   accepts on divine authority; science endeavors to obtain its
   conceptions by means of independent investigation, and has no other
   authority except reasoning and proof. Now, according to Tiele, all
   religious conceptions move around three centres,--God, man, and the way
   of salvation. [228] All these three elements are most intimately
   connected with the idea of revelation. Regarding the first element, the
   doctrine concerning God (theology proper), this is clear; there is no
   knowledge concerning God, except so far as he has revealed himself ;
   the distinction of nature- and revelation-religions, in the sense that
   religions may exist without appealing to revelation, is untenable. But
   also in the case of the other two elements, the connection with the
   idea of revelation is clearly traceable. For when religion carries
   along with it a distinct conception of man, it soars far above
   experience. The religious anthropology speaks of man's origin and
   destination, of his needs and ideals, of his disobedience and communion
   with God, of his sin and atonement, [229] --all of which are elements
   that cannot be obtained by means of empirical investigation and
   scientific reflection, but can be known, so far as they are true, only
   by means of revelation. Nearly all the religions have their
   reminiscences of paradise and their expectations of the future, and
   trace them back to revelation. And regarding the third element,
   soteriology, this also is either untrue or derived from revelation. For
   this part of religious dogmatics indicates the means by which communion
   with God can be restored, the power of evil broken, a new life begun,
   and the hope of abiding happiness realized. [230] Among these means a
   chief place is assigned in all religions to mediators, sacrifices, and
   prayer. Those persons are considered mediators through whom the Godhead
   makes known its revelations to man. Sacrifices, whatever theory of
   their origin and purpose may be favored, always include the idea that
   man is dependent upon God, owes everything to him, and is acceptable in
   his sight through a special service (cultus) distinguished from the
   ordinary ethical life. And prayer, which forms the heart of religion,
   has its ground in the belief that God is not only a personal being, but
   also is able to govern the world by his power, wisdom, and goodness,
   and make it subservient to man's salvation. Prayer never, not even in
   its highest form, loses this character; the petition for the remission
   of sins, for a pure heart, for communion with God, is as
   supernaturalistic as that for the healing of the sick or for
   deliverance from some danger to life. [231] Revelation is the
   foundation of all religion, the presupposition of all its conceptions,
   emotions, and actions.








   Finally, all the attempts to classify the religions have led to the
   acknowledgment of the necessity of revelation. All the proposed
   divisions--into such as have grown and such as have been founded, into
   nature- and revelation- religions, into polytheistic and monotheistic,
   into particular and universal religions, etc.,-- suffer, according to
   the increasing conviction of many, from excessive one-sidedness; they
   ignore other elements, do no justice to the richness and variety of
   religious life, and all proceed tacitly from the Hegelian notion that
   the chapters which successively treat of the several religions
   represent so many steps in the development of religion. No one,
   however, believes that a satisfactory distribution has been found.
   [232] As little as natural phenomena, societies, and the peoples, can
   the religions be ranged one after the other in a formal system without
   violence to reality.

   In view of this it is worthy of remark that the old distribution of
   religions into true and false has been revived in a new form. The more
   accurately the nature of the conceptions of the peoples was
   investigated, the clearer it became that they contain various elements
   which cannot be derived from one single principle. Thus it appeared
   that their religious conceptions are essentially distinct, not only
   from legends and fables, but also from myths. In the beginning of the
   last century, under the influence of the romantic school, the idea
   prevailed, and through the Grimm brothers found acceptance almost
   everywhere, that mythology was the real science of religion. This
   mythology accordingly arose out of nature- myths, was to be looked upon
   as the embodiment of religious, often sublime, ideas, but afterwards
   had faded into hero-sagas and fables. But deeper study has led to a
   different view. Myths, sagas, and fables no doubt often bear relation
   to one another; originally, however, they are distinct in origin and
   aim. "Myths axe primitive philosophy, the most simple intuitive form of
   thought, a series of attempts to understand the world, to explain life
   and death, fate and nature, gods and cults. Sagas are primitive
   history, artlessly shaped in hatred and love, unconsciously formed and
   simplified. Fables, on the contrary, have grown out of and serve only
   the need of entertainment." [233] Religion is always distinguished from
   all these in that it is always connected with a cult. [234]

   It is of still greater importance to observe that religion is more and
   more being recognized as distinct from magic. J. G. Fraser has no doubt
   attempted to explain religion just by means of magic, [235] and with
   him K. Ph. Preuss is of the opinion "that primitive human stupidity is
   the original source of religion and art;--for both proceed directly
   from sorcery, which on its part is the immediate result of that
   prudence which proceeds from instinct." [236] This theory, however, is
   very strenuously opposed by Andrew Lang and others; we gather, says
   Tiele, no figs from thistles; superstition cannot be the mother of
   religion. [237] Superstition and magic are indeed often connected with
   religion, but they are neither the source nor the essence of it. They
   are rather to be regarded as morbid phenomena, which occur by no means
   only among the lowest, but also among the most advanced peoples and
   religions; and even in the present time, in Christendom, not only among
   the common people,--but relatively more markedly among the cultured and
   educated, where they number their adherents by the thousands; they are
   not "a lower stage or a first step of a religious development, but
   under-currents of real religion." [238] If this distinction is
   correctly drawn, it follows immediately that it is impossible to reduce
   the religions and the religious phenomena among the different peoples
   to one head and to derive them from one principle. Monism as truly as
   the doctrine of evolution is contradicted by the facts. The religions
   have no common root; various factors, fetichism, animism,
   ancestor-worship, etc., have worked together in bringing them into
   existence. [239] Particularly have religion and magic different sources
   and must receive distinct explanations.

   The great question in the history of religions is thus no longer, How
   in general did religion originate? but Whence dosuperstition and magic
   derive their origin? This is the problem that confronts us, namely, the
   old question, Pothen to kakon? Existence, the good, the true, the
   beautiful are eternal and have no beginning; but becoming, error,
   false-hood, sin, shame, cannot be eternal and must have been originated
   in time. In superstition and magic ignorance in general and lack of
   knowledge of nature in particular certainly play a ro1e. And yet
   "original stupidity" cannot be their only source. For not only do these
   morbid phenomena finer credence in the highest circles of civilization
   even to-day, but even the most artless man distinguishes emphatically
   between the natural and the supernatural, although he draws his line of
   demarcation differently from us; and recognizes a domain which is
   subject to himself and governed by his knowledge and action. [240] To
   this must be added, that superstition and magic bear not only an
   intellectual, but also a moral character; they are errors of the head,
   but more especially errors of the heart. They furnish us proof that
   nature, but equally that God, is not known. The knowledge of nature and
   history also is intimately conjoined with that of God. Prophets and
   apostles had no knowledge of natural science, as it has been developed
   in these later centuries, but they had a very sound conception of
   nature, because they knew God and saw in the world his handiwork, and
   they left no room for superstition and magic. So soon, however, as the
   pure knowledge of God disappears, nature too in its true character is
   disowned, and either exalted into the sphere of the godhead or degraded
   to the sphere of a demoniacal power. And this mixture of God and the
   world, which results from vain speculations of the mind and a darkening
   of the heart, always was and still remains the origin of all
   superstition and magic.

   But as sickness reminds us of former health, and aberration calls to
   remembrance the right path, so these phenomena of superstition point
   back to the original image of religion. Superstition and magic could
   not have arisen if the idea of another world than this world of nature
   had not been deeply imprinted on man's self-consciousness. They
   themselves are of a later origin, but they presuppose religion, which
   is inherent in human nature, having its foundation and principle in the
   creation of man in the image of God. Hence religion is, not only with
   reference to its origin and essence, but also with reference to its
   truth and validity, founded in revelation. Without revelation religion
   sinks back into a pernicious superstition.






     __________________________________________________________________

   [168] George Trumbull Ladd, The Philosophy of Religion, London, I,
   1905, pp.138ff. Gutberlet, Der Mensch, sein Ursprung und seine
   Entwicklung, Paderborn, 1903, pp.522 ff.

   [169] Tiele, Inl. tot de Godsdienstwet., I, pp.141 ff.

   [170] Het Vraagstuk van den Godsdienst, Ontbindin of Evolutie,
   beantwoord door de grootste Denkers der Wereld, Amsterdam, 1908, pp.5,
   10, 79, 80, 84, 90, 106, 115, 117, 119, 121, 197, 289, 316.

   [171] Ibid., pp.13, 21, 57, 59, 99, 212, 252, 290, 301.

   [172] Ibid., pp.21, 79.

   [173] Ladd, op. cit., I, pp.120 ff.

   [174] Morris Jastrow, in Tiele, Inleiding tot de Godsdienstwet., II,
   pp.219.

   [175] Het Vraagstuk van den Godsdienst, etc., pp.34, 112 ff.

   [176] Dilthey, Einl. in die Geisteswiss., pp.170, 184, 185.

   [177] Lubbock, Entstehung der Civilisation. Deutsche Ausgabe, 1875,
   p.172.

   [178] Dilthey, op. cit., pp.168, 172.

   [179] Oscar Hertwig, Das biogenetische Grundgesetz, Intern.
   Wochenschrift f. Wissenschaft, Kunst und Technik, April 20, 1907,
   pp.97, 98.

   [180] L. Stein, Die soziale Frage, pp.38, 63, 105, 107.

   [181] Lehmann, Die Anfänge der Religion und die Religion der primitives
   Völker, in Die Kultur der Gegenwart, I, III, p.1. Troeltsch, Die
   Christl. Religion, ib., p. 483. Tiele, Inleiding, II, p. 183.
   Pfleiderer, Religion und Religionen, München, 1906, p. 53.

   [182] Haeckel, Der Kampf um den Entwickelungsgedanken, pp.56, 70.
   Haeckel is sometimes more modest and refers to his "Stammesgeschichte"
   as an "hypothetical structure," because the empirical records
   underlying it remain to a high degree defective; comp. H. Meyer, Der
   gegenwärtige Stand der Entwickelungslehre, pp. 59, 60.

   [183] Reinke, Die Entw. der Naturwiss. insbes. der Biologie im 19
   Jahrh., 1900, pp.19, 20. Id., Die Natur und Wir, Berlin, 1907, pp.151
   ff. Branco in Wasmann, Die moderne Biologie und die Entwickelungslehre,
   1904, pp.302, 304.

   [184] Stanley Hall, Adolescence, II, p.91. H. Meyer, op. cit., p.71.
   Lankester, Natur und Mensch, p.24. Dr. H. C. Stratz, Wij stammen niet
   van de apen af. Baarn, 1907, p. 23.

   [185] Wasmann, op. cit., p.295.

   [186] Prof. Dr. C. Ph. Sluiter, Het Experiment in Dienst der
   Morphologie, Amsterdam, 1907.

   [187] Oscar Hertwig, Das biogenetische Grundgesetz nach dem heutigen
   Stand der Biologie, Intern. Wochenschrift, April 13 and 20, 1907, p.93.
   Most botanists, zoologists, and palaeontologists are at present
   believers in polyphyletic development. H. Meyer, Der gegenw. Stand der
   Entwickelungslehre, pp.50 ff. Reinke, Die Natur und Wir, pp.126 ff.,
   139 ff. Wasmann, Der Kampf um das Entwickelungsproblem in Berlin,
   Freiburg, 1907.

   [188] Stanley Hall, Adolescence, pp.35,45,49. Stratz, op. cit., p.17.

   [189] Gutberlet, Der Mensch, sein Ursprung und seine Entwickelung.
   Paderborn, 1903.

   [190] Stanley Hall, Adolescence, I, p.107; II, p.67.

   [191] Ibid., I, p.55.

   [192] Ibid., II, p.568.

   [193] Ibid., I, p.241.

   [194] Fr. Ratzel, Völkerkunde, 3 Bde. Leipzig, 1885, I, p.5.

   [195] Schneider, Die Naturvö1ker, 2 Bde., 1885, 1886. Gutberiet, op.
   cit., pp. 380 ff., 412 ff. 474 ff. Froberger, Die Schöpfungsgeseh. der
   Menschheit in der voraussetzungslosen Völkerpsychologie, Trier, 1903.

   [196] Steinmetz, De Studie der Volkenkunde, p.31.

   [197] Wundt, Völkerpsychologie, II, 2, 1906, p.150.

   [198] Steinmetz, op. cit., p.41.

   [199] Orr, God's Image in Man, London, 1906, pp.163 ff.

   [200] Steinmetz, op. cit., pp.32 ff. Fr. Ratzel, op. cit., I, p.10. H.
   J. Koenen, Het Recht in den Kring van het Gezin., Rotterdam, 1900,
   pp.65, 69.

   [201] Stanley Hall, Adolescence, II, pp.649-650, 685, 713 ff., 726 ff.

   [202] Korte Beschouwingen over Bloei en Verval der Natiën, Wetensch.
   Bladen, July, 1904, pp.117-128.

   [203] Zöckler, Die Lehre vom Urstand des Menschen, Gütersloh, 1879,
   pp.140 ff. Orr, God's Image in Man, p.301.

   [204] H. Schurtz, Völkerkunde, 1903, p.25. Stoinmetz, op. cit., p.49.
   Orr, op. cit., p. 186. Zöckler, op. cit., p.135.

   [205] Fr. Ratzel, Vö1kerkunde, I, p. 14.

   [206] Ibid.

   [207] Steinmetz, pp. 45, 54.

   [208] Dilthey, Einleitung, pp.38, 39.

   [209] Wundt, Völkerpsychologie, II, p.428.

   [210] Gutberlet, Der Mensch.

   [211] L. Stein, Der Sinn des Daseins, pp.220-239.

   [212] G. Ratzenhofer, Die soziologische Erkenntniss. Leipzig, 1898,
   p.125. Comp. L. Stein, op. cit., p.226.

   [213] In L. Stein, op. cit., pp.227 ff.

   [214] Dr. Joseph Müller, Das sexuelle Leben der Naturvölker. Leipzig,
   1906.

   [215] Schmoller, Grundriss der allgem. Volkswirtschaftslehre, Leipzig,
   1901, I, p.122; II, p.654.

   [216] Steinmetz, op. cit., p.54.

   [217] Wundt, Völkerpsychologie, II, 1, Leipzig, 1905, pp.64, 85, 335.
   II, 2, p.165. Id., Vorlesungen über die Menschen und Tierseele, 1906,
   p.17. Fr. Ratzel, Vö1kerkunde, I, p.13. Gwatkin, The Knowledge of God,
   I, pp.253 ff. Reinke, Die Natur und Wir. 1908, p.84.

   [218] Wundt, Völkerpsychologie, II, 2, p.165. Gutberlet, Der Mensch.,
   pp.398 ff.

   [219] Troeltsch, Die Christ. Religion in Die Kultur der Gegenwart,
   p.483.

   [220] Schroeder in Beiträge zur Weiterentw. der Christl. Religion,
   1905, p.8. Tiele, Inleiding, II, pp.108, 202, 204. H. de Vries,
   Afstammings- en Mutatieleer, p.36.

   [221] Garvie, art. "Revelation," in Hasting's Dictionary of the Bible.

   [222] Comp. the author's address: Christelijke Wetenschap, 1904, pp. 73
   ff. Bertholet, Religion und Geisteskultur, II, pp.1 ff.

   [223] Flournoy, Les Principes de la Psychologie religieuse. Genève,
   1903, pp.8, 9. James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, pp.26, 27.

   [224] Comp. the author's Psychologie der Religie, Versl. en Meded. der
   Kon. Ak. v. Wet., Afd. Lett., 1907, pp. 1-32.

   [225] Troeltsch, op. cit., p.481.

   [226] Tiele, Inleiding, I, p.61; II, pp.66, 110, 214, 215.

   [227] Dilthey, Einl. in die Geisteswiss., pp. 167 ff.

   [228] Tiele, Inleiding, II, pp.64 ff.

   [229] Ibid., p. 65.

   [230] Ibid.

   [231] Pierson, Gods Wondermacht en ons Geestelijk Leven, 1867, p. 42.
   W. Sanday, The Life of Christ in Recent Research, Oxford, 1907, pp. 204
   ff. The Nature of Prayer, by the Rev. Lyman Abbott, Moncure D. Conway,
   the Rev. Dr. W. R. Huntingdon, North American Review, Nov., 1907,
   pp.337-348.

   [232] Ch. de la Saussaye, Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte, I, 1905,
   p.6.

   [233] Bethe, Mythus, Sage, Märchen,&lt;.I&gt; Leipzig, 1905, pp.43, 44.

   [234] R. C. Boer, Heldensage en Mythologie, Gids, Jan., 1907, p. 84.
   Comp. also Steinthal, Zu Bibel und Religionsphilos., pp.127, 150.
   Dilthey, Einl., pp.169, 171, 174 ff., 178. Wundt, Vö1kerpsych., II,
   pp.551 ff. De historische achtergrond der Europeesche sprookjeswereld,
   Wet. Bladen, July, 1908, pp.1-16, after an article by A. S. Herbert, in
   The Nineteenth Century, Febr., 1908.

   [235] J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough. Comp. Ladd, I, pp.144 ff.

   [236] Preuss, Der Ursprung der Religion und Kunst, Globus Bd, 86, 87,
   p. 249.

   [237] Tiele, Inl., II, 120. Ladd, I, pp.103, 144. Gwatkin, The
   Knowledge of God, I, pp.249, 252, 263.

   [238] Jeremias, Die Panbabylonisten, Leipzig, 1907, p. 17.

   [239] Bethe, op. cit., p.40.

   [240] Dilthey, Einl., pp.178 ff.
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 7 - Revelation and Christianity


   The arguments for the reality of revelation, derived from the nature of
   thought, the essence of nature, the character of history, and the
   conception of religion, are finally strengthened by the course of
   development through which mankind has passed, and which has led it from
   paradise to the cross and will guide it from the cross to glory.

   We cannot reach the origin of the human race or form an idea of its
   primitive condition by the aid of animal, child, and savage; neither do
   biology, geology and palaeontology give us any certainty with regard to
   its first abode or concerning the unity of the race. If there are no
   other sources and resources from which to draw our knowledge, we
   continually move in guesses and conjectures, and form for ourselves the
   image of an incomprehensible and impossible primitive man at the
   beginning of history.

   Tradition, the testimony which mankind itself bears to its origin in
   tradition and history, points out a safer way to acquire knowledge
   regarding the oldest condition of the human race. In former times this
   was the method by which people sought to penetrate into the past. The
   Church Fathers derived all the wisdom they found among the heathen from
   the theology of the eternal Logos. [241] Augustine speaks of a
   Christianity which has existed since the beginning of the human race,
   and was of the opinion that the doctrine of God as the creator of all
   The arguments for the reality of revelation, derived from the nature of
   thought, the essence of nature, the character of history, and the
   conception of religion, are finally strengthened by the course of
   development through which mankind has passed, and which has led it from
   paradise to the cross and will guide it from the cross to glory.

   Augustine speaks of a Christianity which has existed since the
   beginning of the human race, and was of the opinion that the doctrine
   of God as the creator of all things and the light of all knowledge and
   action had been known to all the wise men and philosophers of all
   peoples. [242] Lactantius rejoiced in this unity of all peoples, and
   beheld in it a prelude of the great alleluiah which in the days to come
   will be sung by all mankind, although he complains that the traditions
   have been corrupted by poetical license and the truth often perverted
   into a delusion. [243] Both in earlier and later times in the Christian
   Church the truth and wisdom found among the heathen have been generally
   derived from a primitive revelation, from the continuous illumination
   by the Logos, from acquaintance with the literature of the Old
   Testament, or from the operation of God's common grace. [244]

   No doubt the rationalism of the eighteenth century threw all these
   theories overboard, because it believed that it possessed in reason the
   only and sufficient source of all truth. But it was cast down from this
   exalted pedestal by the philosophy of Kant, by the theology of
   Schleiermacher, and with more prevailing power by the rise of the
   romantic school. When towards the end of that century Persian, Indian,
   and Egyptian antiquity gradually disclosed its treasures, the idea of
   an original revelation, a common tradition, a primitive monotheism,
   revived in wide circles. A host of men-- Schelling, Creuzer, Chr. G.
   Heyne, F. G. Welcker, O. Müller, Fr. Schlegel, Ad. Müller, and
   others--proceeded from this hypothesis and, often rather one-sidedly,
   elevated India or Egypt or Persia to the cradle of the human race and
   the source of all wisdom. [245] Traditionalists, such as de Maistre and
   de Bonald, carried this tendency to an extreme, maintaining that
   language, and with it all knowledge of the truth, had been communicated
   to man by God in the primitive revelation, and that this knowledge was
   now propagated by tradition and had to be received on authority. [246]
   Antagonism to the autonomy asserted by the Revolution led these men to
   ignore entirely the activity of reason and to deny all personal
   independence. By these extravagancies the romantic school digged its
   own grave; empirical science raised its voice against it, called men
   back to reality, and at first imagined that all the advance of culture
   as well as the origin of man himself could be explained by means of
   minute variations, occurring through an endless series of years. But
   deeper study and continued investigation, not only of the culture but
   also of the history of the most ancient peoples, has in this case too
   led to the acknowledgment of the just claims that lay at the foundation
   of the old view.

   In the first place, we have to consider the primitive history of
   culture, which is best known to us through many important and exact
   researches concerning the oldest inhabitants of Europe. The prehistoric
   men who lived there no longer speak to us, and have left nothing behind
   them in writing; hence our knowledge of their condition always remains
   in the highest degree imperfect; we cannot even directly prove that
   they possessed language and religion, morality and laws; there is here
   a large domain for the play of the imagination. Nevertheless they are
   known to us in part by means of the fossils of their bones and skulls,
   by means of the relics of their arms and tools, of their dwellings and
   graves, their food and clothing, their furniture and ornaments. And
   these teach us that the original inhabitants of Europe stood on a much
   lower level in culture, science, art, technic, etc., than the
   culture-peoples of the present time; but in intellect, talents,
   capabilities, in bodily and mental qualities, they were men of like
   passions with us. In elements of culture they did not stand on a lower
   plane than many nature- peoples of our day as, for instance, the

   Patagonians and Bushmen, whom we nevertheless reckon among men, and who
   have in common with other men the same mind and the same bodily
   structure. In fact the study of the arms and tools which have been
   preserved proceeds on the assumption that those who made them were men;
   for we consider objects arms and tools only when they manifest
   intellect and reflection, thought and purpose, and hence are an
   evidence of the activity of the human mind. Schurtz is right in saying
   that "all material culture is a creation of the mind, and always serves
   to strengthen the body or to free it of burdens; the staff lengthens
   the arm, the stone strengthens the fist, the dress protects the body,
   the dwelling shelters the family." [247] The original inhabitants of
   Europe, having left behind objects such as never have been conceived or
   made by any animal,-- these bear incontestable witness to their mental
   gifts and their human nature. When we consider, indeed, that they stood
   at the beginning of culture and had to invent many things which we,
   aided by their labor, simply need to modify and develop, we stand
   amazed at their inventiveness, and especially their artistic skill,
   which accomplished so much with such defective means and under such
   unfavorable conditions.

   But there is still something further in ancient culture which draws our
   attention. Notwithstanding all the differences caused by character and
   talents, wants and environment, soil and climate, there exists a
   striking likeness between the oldest culture which is met with in
   Europe and that which is found in other parts of the world and among
   other peoples. For example dolmens, that is family graves, composed of
   five large blocks of granite, are found in all parts of the earth, with
   the exception of Australia, and are ascribed on this account by some
   writers on the history of civilization to a single race which had
   spread through various lands. [248] Axes, which mark the boundary
   between the palaeolithic and the neolithic conditions show great
   similarity to one another in the whole of Europe and in Egypt; and the
   pottery which is found in the latter country vividly reminds us of the
   forms which are scattered through Europe. [249] It is remarkable in
   this respect, that numerous axes have been found in Southern- and
   Central-Europe, made of kinds of stone which are not indigenous to
   Europe, but are common in Central-Asia. [250] The ornamentation by
   which the pottery especially is decorated is the same which from time
   immemorial was used in Egypt. [251] The same species of cereals, wheat,
   barley, and millet found in Egypt and Asia were later raised in Europe.
   [252] All the principal elements of culture in Europe--tools,
   decorations, agriculture, cattle-breeding, dwellings, and graves--point
   back to the East, to Egypt and Asia. On this account Sophus Müller says
   that not only has the more recent culture been influenced by the East,
   but the oldest culture also did not grow up independently in Europe,
   but was introduced from the East. [253] In point of fact, scientific
   research increases the probability of the hypothesis that man did not
   originate in Europe, but came across from Asia and Africa into Italy
   and Spain. Even such an enthusiastic adherent of the doctrine of
   evolution as Ludwig Reinhart testifies that, as Europe is only an
   appendix of the vast continent of Asia, so also the principal gifts of
   culture were for the most part not acquired in Europe, but brought over
   from the ancient civilized countries of Western-Asia. [254]

   The remarkable excavations which have been undertaken in recent years
   in several parts of Greece and especially in Crete, have confirmed this
   result of the history of civilization. They make it clear that Greece,
   long before the Hellenic culture proper, that is to say, more than a
   thousand years before Christ, passed through an extremely interesting
   period of culture, which is designated the pre-Mycenic and the Mycenic
   ages, the latter of which is intimately connected with the Egyptian
   civilization. [255] Some, it is true, such as Karl Penka, have been of
   the opinion that civilization really began in Northern-Europe and
   spread thence towards the South; others, like Solomon Reinach, have
   expressed the judgment that the civilization of Europe had an origin of
   its own, independent of Asia. But the arguments in favor of the
   contrary are so numerous and strong that the great majority of the
   experts are persuaded of the Egyptian origin of the Mycenic
   civilization. Just as in later days the art of writing, the brick-kiln,
   the coining of money, Christianity, etc., have been brought over from
   the south to northern Europe, so it happened with the other
   constituents of civilization. The south was the real source of
   civilization for Europe, although it is true that the north has greatly
   modified and developed the elements received, as, for example, the
   stone axe. [256] And Southern-Europe in its turn stood under the
   influence of Africa and Asia. The knowledge of metals penetrated from
   the East into southern Europe. Bronze objects found in the lowest
   strata of Troy, pottery and objects of worship in Crete, graves in
   large numbers, especially on the islands of the Archipelago, but also
   in Greece ancl Asia Minor, daggers and axes of bronze in the graves,
   ornaments wrought on the pottery in the form of spirals, lines, and
   female figures,--all these point to the civilization of ancient Egypt.
   [257]

   The study of Greek philosophy points in the same direction. Zeller,
   Ueberweg and others succeeded in introducing into wide circles the idea
   that the philosophy of Thales and his fellow spirits was the result of
   opposition to religion, or at least of the emancipation of the mind
   from religion, and that philosophy had taken an antithetical position
   to belief in any form. But further research has brought to light the
   incorrectness of this explanation. As a rule, the philosophers were
   opposed to the superstition of the people and the superficiality of the
   masses, but we have no right whatever to represent them on this account
   as infidel and irreligious. On the contrary, religion and philosophy
   were still in their case one; they were not one-sided, materialistic,
   nature-philosophers, but on the contrary propounded a positive view
   about man and God. They investigated not only the essence of nature,
   but also the essence of man, his soul and its immortality. Moreover,
   the philosophy of Thales did not fall abruptly from the skies; a long
   time of preparation preceded it. According to the testimony of
   Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, the theologians and lawgivers were the
   precursors of the philosophers. The age before Homer was by no means
   one of rude barbarism, without history and without letters; but the
   Pelasgians brought over from Asia a treasure of religious conceptions,
   manners and customs. When the several tribes in Greece intermingled,
   there was born from their intercourse a new cult, the cult of the
   Muses, who formed the court retinue of the Doric god Apollo. Orpheus
   was in this period the great figure; singers and poets in their nomoi
   regulated the worship of Apollo; the siege of Troy and the founding of
   the colonies in Asia Minor furnished new material for thought and hymn;
   Homer and Hosiod did not invent, but systematized the religious ideas
   and customs. Next to these poets and singers appeared the politicians
   and the law-givers, the wise men and the moralists, the theologians and
   the mystics. Along with them appeared very soon on the scene the real,
   afterwards so-called, philosophers. They were men of like passions with
   the others, and stood not outside the rich, full life of their time,
   but, as Heinrich Gomperz has described them, as men of flesh and blood,
   in the midst of it

   The rich tradition which existed in poetry and aphorisms, in theology
   and legislation, forms the background of their philosophy, and is
   itself intimately connected with Oriental wisdom. The greatest thinkers
   of Greece--Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and later Plutarch and
   Plotinus--derived their wisdom, especially the knowledge of the ideas,
   from ancient tradition, and further on from divine revelation. [258] Of
   course this tradition was, to a large extent, corrupted, especially
   through the imagination of the poets, and was more purely preserved in
   the Orphic school than in the works of Homer and Hesiod. But it was
   nevertheless the source from which philosophy drew its most elevated
   ideas. Just as poetry and art, so philosophy enriched itself from the
   precious treasure which was preserved in tradition. The first problems
   on which thinking tried its strength were brought to the thinkers by
   life itself. Philosophy arose out of religion, and the question which
   presents itself to us is, not how philosophy later on assumed a
   religious character in Pythagoras and Plato, but, on the contrary, how
   philosophy was born of religion and theology. [259] The marvellous
   discoveries which have been made in recent years in the land of Babylon
   and Assyria enable us now to trace further back this broad stream of
   tradition which culture and history both indicate to us. A new world
   has here risen out of the ground. New peoples have appeared on the
   scene whose names were scarcely known to us. As natural science has
   expanded our horizon above, beneath, and around us, so historical
   science has extended it into an almost infinite past. They who
   recognized the historical value of the book of Genesis of course knew
   better; but for many there lay behind the time of Moses nothing but a
   world of rude barbarism. All this has now been changed. Penetrating
   into the past [260] under the guidance, not of imagination, but of
   history, we encounter in ancient Asia not half-bestial men and savage
   hordes, but highly civilized peoples and a richly developed culture.

   Not only do we find a land, the fertility of which in that dry climate
   was increased by numerous canals and channels of irrigation, under the
   superintendence of a large multitude of officials, whose activity was
   carefully regulated. Legislation and jurisprudence also had reached a
   high degree of development. The code of Hammurabi contains decrees
   about marriage, about the relations between parents and children and
   between freemen and slaves, about the protection of honor and life,
   about rents and leases, about feudal tenure, mortgage, inheritance, and
   penal justice. Trade and art rejoiced in a rich measure of prosperity;
   architecture and sculpture, metallurgy, the arts of the goldsmith,
   potter, and stone-cutter produced works which excite even now our
   admiration, and had at their disposal even then a great wealth of
   forms. Commerce flourished and moved along excellent roads of
   communication which led from Babylonia to Western-Asia. Science also
   found its students, especially astronomy, in harmony with the astral
   character of the religion, but also arithmetic, geometry, chronology
   and geography, hieroglyphics and history. Not a few even maintain that
   the civilization of Babylonia, like that of Egypt, does not, so far as
   it is known to us, exhibit a picture of advance and bloom, but rather
   of retrogression and decadence. The oldest works of art in both lands
   are, in their opinion, far in advance of later productions in talent
   and in freedom, and truth of conception. Otto Weber expresses this view
   thus. "The dogma of a gradual development from a lower to a higher
   level is not sustained by the history of the Oriental peoples. What
   history gives us leaves upon us, on the contrary, the impression of
   decadence rather than of an advancing civilization, which tries to find
   fixed forms; everywhere in art, science, and religion, this is
   confirmed." [261]

   It has happened with the excavations in Babylon and Assyria very much
   as it happens with all discoveries. At first they were greatly
   overestimated and their importance exaggerated. Just as in former ages
   all the wisdom of the peoples was derived from the books of the Old
   Testament, and in the days of romanticism from India, Egypt, or Persia,
   so also there has arisen in sequence to the important discoveries in
   the land of Sumer and Accad a Panbabylonian school, which imagines it
   has discovered in Babel's astral religion a key to the religion and
   worldview of all the peoples. Certain similar features in the
   narratives of creation and the deluge, for example, so astonished men
   that borrowing or community in origin was at once assumed, the
   differences ignored, and even the precipitate conclusion formed that
   probably affinity and agreement existed in everything else too. Just as
   the points of resemblance between man and beast have been the occasion
   of a rash inference of common descent, so also the Panbabylonists,
   through the mouth of Winckler, Zimmern, Jeremias, Mücke, Stucken, Hans
   Schmidt, and especially Jensen in his Gilgamesh-Epos, have made a
   fearful abuse of the argument from analogy. The Babel formula seemed to
   furnish the explanation of the entire history of the world. But this
   exaggeration need not cause much solicitude; all exaggerations hasten
   by and are succeeded in a short time by a calmer and more sober view.
   [262] And the result will be the recognition of the significant fact
   that the land of Babel was the cradle of the descendants of Noah and
   the starting-point of all civilization.

   This fact receives strong confirmation from another side also. Not only
   the Babylonists and the Assyriologists, but also the ethnologists in a
   wider sense, supply us with strong grounds for the suggestion that the
   cradle of the human race stood in Central-Asia. We meet with striking
   points of agreement, in conceptions, manners, customs, institutions,
   between the most widely separated peoples. The state of society of the
   Greeks as described by Homer, for instance, shows remarkable
   resemblances to the condition of the ancient Irish, Welsh, Scottish
   Highlanders, and further to that of the ancient Norsemen, Araucanians,
   Massai, Turcomans, and the Kirgish. All the institutions, all the
   characteristics of the ancient ancestors of the Romanic, Germanic,
   Slavonic, and Semitic, peoples, find their parallels in the primitive
   races which still exist or have recently become extinct. The similarity
   between the Semites and the American Indians is so great that some old
   ethnologists imagined that they had discovered in the aborigines of
   America the lost ten tribes of Israel. [263] Richthofen found
   astronomical conceptions in China which distinctly pointed back to
   Babylon. This led him to remark: "We stand here before one of the most
   remarkable problems which prehistoric times offer us in reference to
   the inter-communication of peoples." [264] In a word, the study of
   history and civilization makes it more and more clear that Babylon was
   in ancient times the ancestral country of the human race and the source
   of civilization. The peoples in Western-Asia stood in active
   communication with one another; there was no "spiritual isolation"
   (geistige Sonderexistenz) of the peoples, no Chinese wall which
   separated them from one another; a common tradition in the widest sense
   bound together all lands and peoples,--Babylonia, Arabia, Canaan,
   Phoenicia, and Egypt. Whether the tribes and generations after the
   building of the tower of Babel took many elements of culture away with
   them from their original home, or whether these were in various ways
   conveyed to them or were developed through later communication, it is a
   fact that the hypothesis gains progressively in strength, that the same
   tradition and the same culture lie at the foundation of the conceptions
   and customs of all peoples. [265] Probably more light will be shed on
   all this as excavations are continued, the texts translated, and the
   researches of palaeontologists and ethnologists further prosecuted.

   But we are at least warranted in saying, even at present, that the
   so-called Völkeridee of Adolph Bastian has received a heavy blow. The
   ethnologists have always been struck by the many and strong analogies
   which exist between even widely sundered peoples in all sorts of
   conceptions and institutions, manners and customs. The celebrated and
   widely travelled Bastian thought this explicable on the hypothesis that
   human nature is everywhere the same, and that the several peoples have
   given birth wholly independently of one another to the same conceptions
   and customs; and this theory for a long time met with much favor. Dogs
   bark everywhere alike, the cuckoo utters everywhere the same note, and
   in the same way man everywhere forms the same ideas and performs the
   same actions. [266] Of course it cannot be denied that next to heredity
   variability, next to dependence independence, plays an important ro1e,
   and it is well-nigh impossible to draw the boundary line where the one
   ends and the other begins. A frivolous game has often been played with
   formal agreement, affinity, descent, not only in the science of
   religion, but also in the science of philology. [267] But on the other
   side it must not be forgotten that the unity of human nature, on which
   Bastian based his argument, includes more than is actually derived from
   it.

   It is, of course, easy to imagine that the animal-man stands behind the
   culture-man whom we meet with even in the primitive races, and that the
   interval between man and beast was bridged over in earlier times by
   many transition--forms which are now extinct and lost. This, however,
   is pure fancy, which has no rooting in reality. The facts are, that
   everywhere and always, so far as investigation can carry us, an
   essential difference exists between man and beast. Human nature is sui
   generis; it has its own character and attributes. If this be true, then
   the common origin of all men is necessarily given with it, without
   needing further proof; and in point of fact this hypothesis is accepted
   theoretically by many adherents of the doctrine of descent, and
   practically by almost all. This monogeny, however, again implies that
   the first human pair was either created by God or arose all of a
   sudden, by means of an enormous leap of mutation, to the height of
   human nature, and still further, that the oldest men dwelt together for
   a long time as one family. But there is involved in this not only the
   possibility but also the necessity of a common tradition. Human nature
   is not an empty notion, no purely abstract conception, but a reality, a
   particular manner of being, which includes distinctive habits,
   inclinations, and attributes. And this tradition was undoubtedly
   supported and strengthened for a long time by the intercommunication
   which the families and tribes kept up even after they had separated.
   Some tribes no doubt wandered so far away that they became isolated and
   impoverished in culture; others, however, remained in close proximity
   and came often in contact with one another. Commerce,
   intercommunication, intercourse, are, according to the latest
   researches, much older and more widely extended than is usually
   represented. There is nothing, therefore, that can be urged in itself
   as an argument against the existence of a common tradition.

   Even Wundt acknowledges "that the historical testimonies do not of
   themselves exclude the hypothesis that all myths and religions have
   proceeded in prehistoric time from one single centre of origin, if only
   the possibility of such an hypothesis could be psychologically
   conceded." [268] Why this should be impossible is not easy to
   understand. For since human nature is one, the possibility is certainly
   implied in this, that conceptions may be taken over and further
   developed; and it is assuredly more readily explicable that peoples
   should have interchanged conceptions and customs than that they should
   have produced them all independently, and yet in close agreement.
   Moreover, however much a general tradition, the common property of all,
   may be denied, the same thing is acknowledged by all in a narrower
   circle. Wundt, for example, thinks it possible that in America,
   Oceania, South-Africa, and India "a flood of legends may have deluged
   vast territories." [269] Every household, every family, every town,
   every people, in its turn is a centre around which spread out, in
   narrower or wider circles, conceptions and views, manners and customs.
   And the human race is similarly one large family, which in all its
   movements and in all its tendencies is dependent on its common origin
   and its original equipment. It is, as G. F. Wright correctly observes,
   a wise and holy arrangement of Divine Providence that succeeding
   generations are in a high degree dependent on preceding ones, and that
   the better-favored parts of the human race, to whom much is given, are
   made responsible for the communication of these gifts to the less
   favored. [270]

   Through what channels this communication has been made it is often
   impossible to trace. This gap in our knowledge, however, cannot be
   adduced, as Wundt [271] supposes, as an objection to the fact itself.
   For in a number of cases we can say that such channels must have
   existed, although we possess no detailed knowledge of them. [272] Since
   the human race has been made of one blood, then certainly men at first
   dwelt together, and when they went forth to fill the whole earth they
   must also have carried with them conceptions and customs from the
   parental home to all parts of the world. The unity of the human race,
   which forms the basis of the unity of human nature, necessarily
   includes in it an original common tradition.

   Of course a large measure of wisdom and circumspection is needed for
   distinguishing among the traditions and manners of the peoples between
   what has been brought from the original abode and what has been the
   result of later modification and mutilation, extension and
   augmentation, by the different peoples. Apologeties has sometimes taken
   its task here too easily, for general phrases do not suffice here;
   every element of the civilization of mankind needs to be investigated
   carefully and comprehensively before we are ready to draw conclusions.
   And even after the deepest and most extended research it will be found
   that we have very often to be satisfied with a conjecture or a
   probability.

   Nevertheless there are phenomena which point back with great
   probability to a common origin. Among these we find, for example, the
   knowledge of a single supreme Being, which is found among various
   peoples. We have no historical testimony to the development of
   polytheism into pure monotheism; when polytheism comes no longer to
   satisfy the intellectual circles, it is remodelled into pantheism,
   which has in common with polytheism the "nature-character" of the
   godhead, and dissolves the multitude of nature-gods into one
   nature-godhead. On the other hand, we have many historical examples of
   monotheism not developing, indeed, but gradually degenerating into
   polytheism and polydemonism. There are Christian churches in the past,
   and in the present also, which furnish proof of this statement; and
   even among the most cultured people there are some who, in our own day,
   turn not only to Mohammedanism and Buddhism, but also to the crudest
   forms of superstition and sorcery. Sometimes even theologians and
   philosophers prefer polytheism to monotheism. Goethe, himself once said
   that he was not satisfied with one system, but was by turns monotheist,
   polytheist, and pantheist. [273] We may also see with our own eyes the
   theoretical profession of faith in one God accompanied in practice by
   the adoration of many angels and saints. The same phenomenon appears
   among many peoples.

   When some speak of "monotheistic currents" in the Babylonian religion,
   very serious objections may certainly be advanced. But it cannot be
   denied, and is indeed recognized on all hands, that many nature-peoples
   in Africa, America, Australia, Mongolia, Tartary, and the Indian
   Archipelago, alongside of a practical religion full of superstition and
   sorcery, believe in a supreme good God, who is often called the great
   Spirit, the supreme Being, the Father, our Father. It may be that this
   belief in such a supreme Being has often been too much idealized, as,
   for example, by Andrew Lang; it is, no doubt, seldom worshipped, and
   even sometimes not conceived in a pure monotheistic form; it remains,
   nevertheless, in the religions of the nature-peoples a most remarkable
   phenomenon, which cannot be explained from Christian or Mohammedan
   influences, and as little from animism or ancestor-worship. And if now
   we do not forget that the religious worship of natural phenomena and
   spirits always already presupposes the idea of God, and that religion,
   according to many students of the philosophy of religion, is rooted in
   human nature as such, the hypothesis lies close at hand that we are
   confronted in this belief in the great Spirit with an original
   monotheism which preceded all polytheistic religions and is still at
   work in them. [274]

   But not to insist upon this or other agreement in details, so much at
   least remains undoubtedly assured that human nature, both in body and
   soul, points back to the common origin of all men. In the fundamental
   ideas and fundamental elements of religion, morality, law, science,
   art, technic,--in short, in all the foundations of culture,--a unity
   exists which, from the viewpoint of the doctrine of descent, must be
   considered a miracle. According to the nominalistic point of view,
   represented, for example, by Professor William James, all men must be
   considered as not originally one, but as gradually becoming one. This
   view forgets that whatever can become one already is one in its deepest
   foundation, and it ignores, moreover, the actual unity which has
   through all the ages existed among men notwithstanding all differences.
   According to James, it is pure accident that our ancestors have
   followed precisely the line of thought along which we still travel,
   just as, according to Darwin, we owe it to pure chance that our women
   have not been trained like bees, and on this account refrain from
   killing their daughters. This, however, does not remove the fact that
   the methods of thinking and acting, which have been gradually invented
   by men and transmitted by heredity from generation to generation, have
   become inextirpably tenacious. Yea, according to James' own
   expressions, "these fundamental ways of thinking" have continually
   grown firmer and remain practically useful and indispensable. [275] We
   may therefore quietly set aside the hypothesis that these modes of
   thinking and acting, like men themselves, have come gradually into
   being; in reality, they form the immutable foundation on which all our
   civilization is built.

   Thus it is in every respect. The human race is everywhere and always
   bound to its nature, to its origin, to its past. There are a multitude
   of ideas, a whole complex of views regarding the chief concerns of life
   which men have in common. They concern the idea of God as the almighty
   and all-wise source of all things, the world as established by wisdom,
   order and the reign of law, the unity and harmony of creation, the
   symbolical meaning of all things, the distinction between a world of
   things seen and unseen, the opposition of truth and falsehood, the
   struggle between good and evil, the memory of a golden age and a
   subsequent decay, the wrath of the gods and the hope of reconciliation,
   the divine origin and destination of man, the immortality of the soul
   and the expectation of a judgment, reward and punishment in the
   hereafter. [276] All these fundamental ideas form the beginning and the
   foundation of history, the principle and starting-point of all
   religion, morality, and law, the bond of all social relations, the germ
   and the root of all science and art, the harmony of thinking and being,
   of being and becoming, of becoming and acting, the unity of logic,
   physics, and ethics, of the true, the good, and the beautiful All these
   fundamentals are given from the beginning in human nature; they are
   transmitted from generation to generation, and are at the same time
   grounded in the very nature of man, so that dependence and independence
   work together here. And they all point back to a divine origin: "all
   knowledge is," at least so far as principles and foundations are
   concerned, "of divine origin." [277] Knowledge in this sense flows from
   revelation.

   To this original revelation is joined on that revelation which
   according to the Old Testament was bestowed upon Israel. The latter is
   built upon the former and rests upon it, and is at the same time the
   continuation, the development and completion of it. The distinction
   between what has come to be called general and special revelation does
   not begin until the call of Abraham; before that the two intermingle,
   and so far have become the property of all peoples and nations. Special
   revelation certainly is set antithetically over against all the
   corruption which gradually entered into the life of the peoples, but it
   takes up, confirms, and completes all that had been from the beginning
   put into human nature by revelation and had been preserved and
   increased subsequently in the human race. The earlier view, which
   exclusively emphasized the antithesis, no less than that now prevalent
   which has an eye only for the agreement and affinity, suffers from
   one-sidedness. The latter, however, is giving way gradually to another
   and better view. For a time the notion was prevalent that the history
   and the religion of Israel could be thoroughly explained if the books
   of the Old Testament were subjected to free criticism and redating like
   other literature. But when this historical criticism had analyzed and
   rearranged the books of the Bible, consciously or unconsciously under
   the influence of the doctrine of evolution,--after all this
   source-criticism, the problem of the religion of Israel remained still
   unsolved. Historico-critical investigation had not succeeded in
   destroying the peculiar and special character of this religion. And yet
   this was the motive which had given the impulse to this research.

   What profit was there in the analysis of the sources if Israel itself
   with its religion remained in the midst of the peoples unexplained? It
   is therefore that Panbabylonism has drawn away the attention of
   scholars and supplanted the historico-critical period by a
   religio-historical one. It has been right in suggesting that there may
   be a great difference and a long interval between the origin of ideas
   and institutions and their literary description; it has restored to
   honor the living tradition, and has shown that there are many other
   ways besides the literary one of exercising and receiving influence.
   For the field of religion especially these observations have been of
   great importance. For a religion is not invented by this or that
   thinker, and is not imposed upon a people from without, but is always a
   doctrine, a worship, a sum total of conceptions, rules, ordinances, and
   institutions which are linked to the past, live in the hearts of the
   people, and are transmitted from generation to generation. And
   religious and moral conceptions do not develop themselves after a
   logical method, as a result of apriori thought, but are often of older
   origin, exist side by side with each other, and develop themselves
   together in mutual connection. The simple and rectilinear theory of
   evolution comes in conflict with the complicated reality.

   Thus the religio-historical method was right in reverting from literary
   criticism to the study of religion, and therewith from theory to life,
   from a system of abstract conceptions to the folk-soul, to the totality
   of reality. Its purpose, however, is to derive this totality, this
   complex of conceptions and prescriptions, not from Moses and the
   patriarchs, but from Babylonia. There, in its opinion, is to be found
   the source of the religion and worship of Israel, and even of the whole
   of Christianity. "Babel and Bible," says Otto Weber, "are products of
   one and the same world-view." [278] Continued research will result,
   however, here, as in geology and anthropology, in a reaction from
   one-sidedness, and soon in the agreement the unlikeness and the
   difference will also be noticed. In the meantime, however, this gain
   has been registered, that it is no longer possible to consider Israel
   as an island, separated by a wide ocean from the rest of the world.
   Israel stands as a people and in its entire religious life in relation
   with its environment, and also with the past. No sudden breach was made
   by the prophets of the eighth century before Christ between the past
   and the future. The narrative of creation and the deluge, monotheism
   and the worship of Jehovah, the laws and ceremonies of the cultus, the
   reminiscences of paradise and the expectations of the future, the idea
   of the Messiah and the Servant of Jehovah, and all the eschatological
   conceptions, are much older than the literary documents wherein they
   are mentioned. Babel does not lie behind the Bible, but behind the
   Scriptures lies the revelation which begins with the origin of the
   human race, continues in the tribes of the Sethites and Semites, and
   then flows on in the channel of the Israelitish covenant towards the
   fulness of time. For although Abraham left Babylonia and was sent to
   dwell apart in a strange land, the God who manifested himself to him,
   and later to Moses and to Israel, is no new, strange God, but the God
   of old, the creator of heaven and earth, the Lord of all things, who
   had been originally known to all men, and had still preserved the
   knowledge and worship of himself in many, in more or less pure form.
   [279] The segregation and the election of Israel served the sole
   purpose of maintaining, unmixed and unadulterated, continuing and
   perfecting, the, original revelation, which more and more threatened to
   be lost, [280] so that it might again in the fulness of time be made
   the property of the whole of mankind. The promise became temporarily
   particular, in order that thus it might later become universal. Israel
   belongs to the human race, remains in relation to all peoples, and is
   chosen not at the cost, but for the benefit of the whole human race.

   Hence the peculiarity of the religion of Israel does not consist
   exclusively or primarily in its ethical monotheism. There are a number
   of elements in the history and religion of Israel which occur nowhere
   else, so far as is now known to us, and not even a parallel to which is
   found among other peoples. Among these are the name of Jehovah, the
   cosmogony free from all theogony, the idea of the unity of the human
   race, the narrative of the fall, the week of seven days and the
   Sabbath, circumcision of all male children on the eighth day,
   prophetism which accompanies Israel through its entire history, the
   plan of salvation embracing all nations, ethical monotheism, the
   invisibility of God and the impossibility of representing him, etc.
   [281] And there are many more elements in the Old and New Testaments
   still whose explanation is sought by the Panbabylonists in the astral
   religion of Babel, but in such a manner that the far-fetched character
   and the artificiality of the derivation are manifest to all. [282]
   Nevertheless all these elements do not yet form the essence of the
   religion of Israel. They stand, indeed, in very close connection with
   it, and form with it an integral whole; but the substance of the
   revelation which came to Israel, and the core of the religion which
   corresponded with it in Israel, consist in something else.

   In order to find this, we must go back to the prophets and psalmists,
   to Jesus and the apostles, and they all teach us unanimously and
   clearly that the content of the divine revelation does not consist
   primarily in the unity of God, in the moral law, in circumcision, in
   the Sabbath, in short, in the law, but appears primarily and
   principally in the promise, in the covenant of grace, and in the
   gospel. Not law, but gospel, is in the Old and the New Testament alike
   the core of the divine revelation, the essence of religion, the sum
   total of the Holy Scriptures. Every other view fails to do justice to
   special revelation, effaces its difference from general revelation,
   degrades the Old Testament, rends apart the two economies of the same
   covenant of grace, and even gradually changes the gospel of the New
   Covenant into a law, and makes of Christ a second Moses. Paul, however,
   declares that the promise is older than the law, that Abraham already
   received the righteousness of faith, not by the law, which was in his
   days not yet in existence, but by the promise which was granted him by
   grace. The law was thus originally not joined to the promise, but was
   added to it later, that transgressions might abound, and accordingly
   the necessity and indispensableness of the promise might be ever more
   clearly revealed, and its contents ever more fully developed and at
   last completed. The law thus is temporal, transitory, a means in the
   service of the promise, but the promise is eternal; it had its
   beginning in paradise, was preserved and developed by revelation in the
   days of the Old Covenant, received its fulfilment in Christ, and is now
   extended to the whole human race and all the peoples. [283]

   In this promise, given to the patriarchs and to Israel, there are three
   things included. In the first place, there is the free, electing love
   of God, who seeks, calls, and adopts as his own Abraham and his seed,
   by pure grace, without any desert or merit of their own. The new
   element, which enters in with Abraham and later with Israel, consists
   in this, that God, the knowledge and service of whom were gradually
   passing away, at a given point of time places himself in a most special
   relation to a particular person and people. This relation is not
   grounded in nature; it is not a matter of course; it does not exist by
   virtue of creation; it is not instituted on the part of man, by his
   conscience or reason, by his feeling of dependence or need. But it is
   an historical product; the initiative came from God; he so reveals
   himself as, by the act of revelation, to receive a particular person
   and people into communion with himself. The calling of Abraham, the
   deliverance from Egypt, the institution of the covenant on Sinai, are
   accordingly the main pillars upon which the religion of Israel rests.
   [284] It is the sovereign and gracious will of God which calls this
   federal relation into life. By this will, which injects itself into
   history and establishes a new relation between God and his people, God
   is once for all in Israel made free from nature and raised above it.
   God is no nature-power, as is the case among the nations. He is an
   independent person, has his own nature and will, and a law and worship
   of his own which, in the most stringent way, prohibit all idolatry and
   image-worship. The human race owes a great deal to Babylon, many good
   things of civilization and culture. But let us not forget that there
   have also come forth from Babylon all superstition and magic. It was
   Babylon which made all peoples drunk with the wine of her fornication
   and sorcery. [285] And it was Israel alone which, by the revelation of
   God, was delivered from these bonds, and in this respect Israel stood
   alone in the midst of all peoples.

   Because to-day we evaporate religion into frames of mind, detach it
   from every object, and retain scarcely any sympathy with the knowledge
   and worship of God, we no longer feel the importance of this entirely
   unique position of Israel. The prophets and apostles, however, thought
   of it very differently. The true religion consisted for them first of
   all in the knowledge and worship of the true God, according to his will
   and in consonance with his command. They still knew the difference
   between faith and superstition, between religion and magic, between
   theology and mythology. Well, now, Israel is the people chosen by God,
   which never had a mythology, and has rescued the human races from the
   bonds of superstition and sorcery. The Bible did not come forth from
   Babylon, but in its fundamental thought is in diametrical opposition to
   Babylon, and has made an end to Babylon's spiritual dominion over the
   peoples. Granted that the chaos-myth, as Gunkel supposes, has had an
   influence upon Israel, that Rahab and Leviathan, Tiamat and Nachash,
   were originally mythological conceptions; they have on Israel's soil,
   in the sphere of special revelation, totally cast aside this character.
   The poetical personification of natural phenomena is in Israel as
   strong as among other peoples; the thunder is God's voice, the light
   his garment, the lightning his fiery arrow, the storm his breath, the
   clouds are his chariot, and the like. But nowhere is this poetry
   presented as a description of objective reality, and never are these
   poetical conceptions combined and elaborated into a mythological
   narrative. Israel has no mythical feeling; by special revelation, by
   the intervention of God in history, by miracles, it has been profoundly
   convinced of the distinction between God and the world; the knowledge
   of God has expelled all myths. God no doubt works in nature and in
   history, but he transcends them as the free and almighty One; he has a
   character and will of his own. However personal and poetic the
   description of the phenomena of nature may be--though it may be said
   that the mountains clap their hands, that Tabor and Hermon rejoice,
   that the cedars gambol like calves, and that the whole creation listens
   and keeps silence, declares the honor of God and proclaims his
   glory--they are never represented as real, independent powers with
   which God has to struggle. The narratives also of the creation and the
   fall, of the deluge and the building of the tower of Babel, of the
   patriarchs and judges, are for the Israelite no myths, but history.
   Israel's God is far exalted above nature, but by special revelation he
   brings about in the world a peculiar history. [286]

   In the second place, God's pardoning grace is contained in the promise
   which was given to Israel. Although Tiamat and Nachash, Rahab and
   Leviathan, are no longer real, inimical nature-powers, yet certainly
   the Old Testament knows a power which opposes God. But this power must
   not be looked for in the abyss or the stars, nor in the sea or the
   mountains; on the contrary, it appears in history, in the world of men.
   It is sin, sin alone, which opposes God and with which he fights. It
   admits of no doubt that sin and sickness (misfortune, disaster,
   demoniacal possession), guilt and misery, forgiveness and deliverance,
   were in Israel's consciousness more intimately connected and much more
   closely interrelated than in ours. All the pious of Israel wrestled
   with the problem of the relation between them. But this very wrestling
   presupposes that there is, after all, a distinction between them; it
   can arise only when the just, convinced of his innocence, maintains
   himself in his religio-moral consciousness in the face of the suffering
   of the world. Therefore we owe to special revelation in Israel the
   purely ethical conception of the nature of sin, with respect both to
   its origin and to its essence and punishment. Sin is no disease,
   although disease is often the result and proof of it; it is not
   involved in existence itself, for every creature, as it comes forth
   from the hand of God, is very good; it consists in transgression of
   God's commandment. As God is distinct from nature, so also is his moral
   will distinct from the law of nature, the ethical from the physical,
   the "what ought to be" from "what is." The third chapter of Genesis,
   therefore, tells us just about the origin of sin; it cannot be
   explained except as a narration of how sin has entered into the world,
   and consists in transgression of God's command. The following chapters
   sketch for us the progress of sin, which is an imagination, a product
   of the heart of man from his youth. And when again after the deluge the
   stream of unrighteousness flows on its course, God chooses Abraham and
   his seed for a people of his own, that they may walk in holiness before
   his face.

   But the electing love of God is at the same time a forgiving love. God
   not only elects and calls, but gives himself to his people; he joins
   himself to them, so intimately and tenderly, that he charges their
   guilt and transfers it, as it were, to himself. I am thy shield and
   exceeding great reward; I am the Lord thy God, who has led thee out of
   Egypt. The covenant with Abraham and his seed is built in a certain
   sense upon redemption and remission, and the walk before God's face to
   which the patriarchs and Israel were called is the duty of gratitude.
   The law which God gave his people, entered in after the promise, is
   built on the promise and is placed in the service of the promise. It
   was not a law of the covenant of works, but a law of the covenant of
   grace, a law of the covenant, a law of gratitude. It served the purpose
   not of acquiring righteousness and life, but of confirming these gifts
   to our consciousness, and of bringing them out in our walk before God's
   face. Nor was the ceremonial law a means to bring about reconciliation,
   but to maintain the reconciliation which already existed in the
   covenant relation. Prophecy revived from time to time the consciousness
   of this: it did not usher in a higher law, it did not establish a new
   religion, it was not the promulgator of ethical monotheism, but it had
   the covenant of God with his people for its presupposition and was
   built upon the regulation of their reciprocal relation in the law.
   Never did it call upon the people to make themselves God's people by
   keeping the law; it always started from the supposition that Israel had
   become God's people by election, and laid upon them the demand that
   therefore they must as God's people walk in his ways. Morality was in
   Israel grounded in religion. God forgives sins for his name's, for his
   covenant's, for his glory's sake.

   That God forgives sin by grace, for his name's sake the knowledge of
   this mystery we owe wholly to the special revelation which God granted
   unto Israel. We would value this more highly if we had a deeper
   consciousness of guilt. For the forgiving love of God is not a matter
   of course; it is not known to us from nature, or from history, or from
   our own intellect and conscience. On the contrary, appearances are
   against it,--we do not perceive it by sight or by touch; it is a matter
   of faith. Nay, more than this: if God forgives sin for his own sake,
   then he must himself provide the atonement. For without atonement,
   without the shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins. In the
   ceremonial legislation God himself gave his people instruction In this
   matter; it pointed to the way in which God himself would bring about
   reconciliation. Man can as little make propitiation for his sin as he
   can forgive it himself. But God can do both, atone and forgive; he can
   do the one just because he can do the other. The tension, however,
   which existed between them in the days of the Old Testament, the time
   of the paresis is reflected in the consciousness of the Israelites, as
   a disharmony between righteousness and suffering, holiness and
   blessedness, virtue and happiness, but in this way contributes to
   prepare the wav for its own solution. For so in Israel's prophecy,
   psalmody and chokhma, the profound thought is gradually formed of a
   suffering which is endured on account of and for others; thus there
   gradually reveals itself the divine mystery of an innocent and atoning
   suffering, which is illustrated in Isaiah by the Servant of Jehovah,
   who is wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, but
   upon whom was the chastisement of our peace, and with whose stripes we
   are healed.

   In the third place the gospel in the Old Testament includes also the
   promise of God's unchangeable faithfulness. The more Israel's apostasy
   and unfaithfulness increased, making it ever more apparent how little
   reliance could be placed on man, the louder the prophets announced that
   God will not break his covenant and will not annul his promise.
   Mountains may depart and hills may be removed, but his loving-kindness
   shall not depart from his people, and the covenant of his peace shall
   not be removed forever. The prophets narrate the past of Israel, they
   explain the present; but they likewise foresee the future not as
   fortune-tellers and soothsayers, but as seers and watchmen upon the
   walls of Zion, as searchers according to the description of Peter, and
   as inquirers under the guidance of the Spirit into the salvation which
   in the future was to be obtained and given by the Messiah. Thus they
   see what others do not see; persevere in believing where others doubt;
   cling to the promise in hope against hope, and expect that God himself
   will in his own time realize and extend his dominion to all peoples
   through his Anointed One. As he is to complete his revelation through
   the Prophet like unto Moses and to procure the atonement through the
   Servant of Jehovah, so also is he to establish his kingdom on the earth
   through the Anointed King. Theology leads through soteriology to
   eschatology. The love of election passes over through the grace of
   forgiveness into the full communion of God with his people. In the
   future God will make a new covenant, wherein the old promise, I will be
   your God and you shall be my people, will be fully realized.

   These are the contents of the gospel, which was preached and intrusted
   to Israel. No criticism of the books of the Bible can destroy this
   content. Election, gracious forgiveness and true, perfect communion,
   are the great thoughts and the spiritual gifts which Israel has
   received from God and in the fulness of time has communicated to
   humanity. For in the Person of Christ, who is the Son of God and also
   the Son of Man, who is at the same time the highest prophet, the only
   priest and the eternal king, all the promises have been fulfilled. He
   indeed is the object of the conflict of the ages, at present fiercer
   and more serious than ever before. Judged from the present position of
   scientific investigation, it would seem as if everything concerning his
   person and work is uncertain and even unknowable. All kinds of
   hypotheses have been erected and numerous attempts made to explain the
   origin and essence of Christianity. Judaism and Heathenism, apocryphal
   and Talmudic literature, political and social conditions, the
   mythologies of Egypt and Persia, of Babylonia and India, are called
   upon to help us derive not only the world and man, religion and
   morality, but also the Christian religion, from weak beggarly elements
   and the poorest possible beginnings. These investigations have an
   important value and contain a rich promise. Through them the Christian
   religion will become better known in its close connection with the
   world and history, and the words and facts of the New Testament will be
   better understood in their universal significance and bearing. But more
   than this, all these investigations, provided they are not broken off
   half-way but carried on to the end, will throw into ever clearer and
   clearer light the uniqueness of the Christian religion.

   For Christ, the mediator of creation, the life and the light of men,
   the promise to the fathers, the desire of the nations, the saviour of
   the world, and the judge of the quick and the dead, is akin to all and
   to everything, and at the same time distinguished from all and exalted
   above all. Whatever may be adduced to elucidate and explain his person
   and work, he appears now as ever on the pages of the gospel before us
   and the whole world in his unique superiority. The central facts of the
   incarnation, satisfaction, and resurrection are the fulfilment of the
   three great thoughts of the Old Covenant, the content of the New
   Testament, the kerygma of the Apostles, the foundation of the Christian
   Church, the marrow of its history of dogma and the centre of the
   history of the world. Without these facts history breaks into
   fragments. Through them there is brought into it unity and variety,
   thought and plan, progress and development. From the protevangel to the
   consummation of all things one thread runs through the history of
   mankind, namely, the operation of the sovereign, merciful, and almighty
   will of God, to save and to glorify the world notwithstanding its
   subjection to corruption.

   This will of God forms the heart of pure religion and at the same time
   the soul of all true theology. For according to the counsel of this
   will we are chosen, conformably to this will we are regenerated,
   through this will we are sanctified. In virtue of the good pleasure of
   this will both that which is in heaven and on earth will be gathered in
   one in the dispensation of the fulness of time under Christ as Head.
   And in the whole course of revelation this will of God unfolds itself
   ever more clearly as the love of God, the grace of the Son, and the
   communion of the Holy Ghost.





     __________________________________________________________________

   [241] Clemens Alex., Stromata, I, 5; VI, 8. Clemens Alex., Stromata, I,
   5; VI, 8.

   [242] Augustinus, de Civ., VIII, 9-12; de Doctr. Chr., II, p. 40.
   Retract., I, 3.

   [243] Lactantius, Inst., VII, 7, 22.

   [244] Willmann, Geschichte des Idealismus, I, 1894, pp. 14 ff.; II,. 23
   ff. Mausbach, Christentum und Weltmoral. Munster, 1905, pp. 9 ff.
   Willmann, Geschichte des Idealismus, I, 1894, pp. 14 ff.; II,. 23 ff.
   Mausbach, Christentum und Weltmoral. Munster, 1905, pp. 9 ff.

   [245] Willmann, Gesch. des Ideal., III, pp. 763 ff.

   [246] A. Stöckl, Lehrbuch der Philos. I, 1887, pp. 406 ff.

   [247] Schurtz, Urgeschichte der Kultur, pp. 298 fP. Ulrich Wendt, Die
   Technik als Kulturmacht. Berlin, 1906.

   [248] Schurtz, op. cit., p. 441. S. Müller, Urgeschichte Europas,
   Gruudzüge einer prähist. Archaeologie. Strassburg, 1905, p. 40. J.
   Guibert, Les origines. Paris, 1905, p. 348. C. W. Vollgraff, Over den
   oorsprong onzer Europeesche beschaving. Gids, Dec., 1905.

   [249] S. Müller, op. cit., p. 19.

   [250] Ibid., p. 21.

   [251] Ibid., p. 22.

   [252] Ibid., p. 24.

   [253] Ibid., p. 3. Comp. also pp. 25, 26, 28, 29.

   [254] L. Reinhardt, Der Mensch zur Eiszeit in Europa, 1906, p. 249.

   [255] Holworda, in Ch. de la Saussaye, Lehrbuch der
   Religionsgeschichte, II, p. 245.

   [256] S. Müller, op. cit,. pp. 49-52.

   [257] Ibid., pp. 30 ff.

   [258] Willmann. Gesch. des Ideal., I, pp. 2 ff.

   [259] Dilthey, Einl., pp. 184 ff. Karl Joël, Der Ursprung der
   Naturphilosophie aus dem Geiste der Mystik, Basel, 1903. Willmann,
   Gesch. des Ideal., I, pp. 1 ff., 33 ff., 142 ff. R..E. Woltjer, Het
   mystiekreligieuse Element in de Grieksche Philologie, Leiden, 1905.

   [260] D. Gath Whitley, What was the Primitive Condition of Man? The
   Prinecton Theol. Review, Oct., 1906, pp. 513-534.

   [261] O. Weber, Theologie und Assyriologie im Streite um Babel und
   Bibel, 1904, p. 17. Comp. Tiele, Inl., II, p. 220. Winckler,
   Religionsgesch. und gesch. Orient. Leipzig, 1906, p. 9. Id., Die
   Babylon. Geisteskultur. Leipzig, 1907, pp. 18 ff.

   [262] H. H. Kuyper, Evolutie of Revelatie, Amsterdam, 1903, and the
   literature there quoted. Felix Stähelin, Probleme der Israel.
   Geschichte, Basel, 1907.

   [263] Steinmetz, De Studie der Volkenkunde, pp. 36, 37, 39. Steinmetz,
   De Studie der Volkenkunde, pp. 36, 37, 39.

   [264] Richthofen, in Jeremias, Die Panbabylonisten. Leipzig, 1907, p.
   15.

   [265] Winkler, Religionsgesch. und gesch., orient., pp. 7, 8, 9, 17,
   33. Id., Die Weltanschauung des alten Orients, p. 4. Id., Die Babyl.
   Geisteskultur, pp. 6, 47, 48. Winkler, Religionsgesch. und gesch.,
   orient., pp. 7, 8, 9, 17, 33. Id., Die Weltanschauung des alten
   Orients, p. 4. Id., Die Babyl. Geisteskultur, pp. 6, 47, 48.

   [266] A. Bastian, Der Völkergedanke im Aufban einer Wissenschaft vom
   Menschen, Leipzig, 1881. Cf. Gumplovicz, Grundriss der Soziologie, pp.
   27 ff. A. Bastian, Der Völkergedanke im Aufban einer Wissenschaft vom
   Menschen, Leipzig, 1881. Cf. Gumplovicz, Grundriss der Soziologie, pp.
   27 ff.

   [267] As regards language comp., Fritz Mauthner, Die Sprache, Frankfurt
   a. M., pp. 45 ff.

   [268] Wundt, Vö1kerpsych., II, 1, p. 570.

   [269] Wundt, op. cit., II, pp. 343, 571.

   [270] G. P. Wright, Scientific Confirmations of Old Testament History,
   Oberlin, 1906.

   [271] Wundt, op. cit., pp. 342, 570.

   [272] Jeremias, Die Panbabylonisten., pp. 15, 16.

   [273] See note 44 of Lecture IV.

   [274] Andrew Lang, Magic and Religion, p. 224, in Ladd, I, p. 153.
   Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturöblker, 1860, 11, pp. 168 ff. C. von
   Orelli, Allg. Religionsgesch., pp. 39, 745, 775 ff. Id., Die Eigenart
   der bibl. Religion, 1906, pp. 11, 12. Schroeder, in Beitrage zur
   Weiterentw. der Chr. Rel. 1905, pp. 1 ff. Jeremias, Monoth. Strömungen
   innerhalb der Babylon. Religion., 1904. Baentsch, Monoth. Strömungeit
   und der Monoth. Israels., 1907. Gloatz, Die vermutlichen
   Religionsanfänge und der Monoth., Religion und Geisteskultur, 1906, pp.
   137-143. Söderblom, Die Allväter der Primitiven, ib., 1907, pp.
   315-322. Lehmann, in: Die Kultur der Gegenwart, I, III, p. 26.

   [275] James, Pragmatism, pp. 165, 169, 170, 171, 181 ff.

   [276] Willmann, Gesch. des Ideal., I., pp. 119 ff.

   [277] Jeremias, Monoth. Strömungen innerhalb der Babyl. Religion, 1904,
   p. 8.

   [278] O. Weber, Theol. und Assyriologie, 1904, p. 4.

   [279] Gen. 14:18-20, 20:3 ff., 21:22 ff., 23:6, 24:50, 26:19, 40:8,
   etc. Comp. also Dr M. Peisker, Die Beziehungen der Nicht-Israeliten zu
   Jahve, nach der Anschauung der altt. Quellen Giessen, 1907.

   [280] Joz. 24:2, 14, 15; Deut. 26:5, etc.

   [281] Ed. König, Schlaglichter auf dem Babel-Bibelstreit. Beweis des
   Glaubens, 1905, pp. 3-23.

   [282] Biesterveld, De jongste Methode voor de Verklaring van het Nieuwe
   Testament, 1905.

   [283] Willmann, Gesch. des Ideal., II., pp. 12 ff., 20 ff.

   [284] Giesebrecht. Die Geschichtlichkeit des Sinaibundes. Königsberg,
   1900. Lotz, Der Bund vom Sinai., Neue Kirchl. Zeits., 1901.

   [285] Jer. 51:7, Comp. Fr. Delizsch, Mehr Licht, 1907, p. 45.

   [286] Köberle, Oriental. Mythologie und Bibl. Religion, Neue Kirchl.
   Zeits., 1906, pp. 838-859. Ed. König, Altorient. Weltamschauung und
   Altes Test. Berlin, 1905.
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 8 - Revelation and Religious Experience


   If Christianity were at one with itself, and there were no other
   religions, the recognition of its truth would be easier. But it is
   endlessly divided and tornto pieces. The one church, which was the
   centre of village and city in the Middle Ages, is completely
   demolished; on every side a number of sects arise around her, each
   laying claim to be the purest expression of Christian truth, and
   continually subdividing and multiplying. Beyond that, the religions of
   the various nations are latterly becoming much better known to us than
   in former centuries, and the relation which Christianity bears to other
   religions has become a serious problem. Among those religions there are
   some which number millions of adherents, and numerically considered
   may, therefore, put in a more telling claim to the name of
   world-religions than Christianity. They provide examples of strong
   conviction of faith, earnest piety, and self-denying devotion which
   bear comparison with those of Christian confessions. All the elements
   of religion--doctrine and ethics, consciousness of sin and forgiveness,
   comfort and hope, contempt of death and certainty of salvation, prayer
   and praise, assemblies and public-service--appear in all. The claim to
   divine revelation is common to all religions. [287]

   This extension of the religious horizon would not have proved so
   undermining to faith in Christian truth had it not been accompanied by
   a keen criticism of the power and value of human reason. In accordance
   with Scripture, Christian theology has always taught that sin involves
   also error, and thus has not only corrupted the heart and will, but
   also blinded the understanding. This doctrine of Scripture was
   especially reasserted in the Reformation, in opposition to the Roman
   view that the natural gifts have remained to men and only the
   supernatural lost. Luther, above all, was not on friendly terms with
   reason; though the substance of this doctrine is merely that
   intelligence has been blinded by sin, but not extinguished, and by its
   nature remains able to understand unseen and divine things. The newer
   philosophy, however, emancipated itself entirely from this Christian
   conviction and placed its trust exclusively in the power of reason, and
   was soon called upon to pass through an unpleasant experience. Both
   Descartes and Bacon established a separation between faith and reason,
   leaving the domain of faith to theology and satisfying themselves with
   a position external to it. For a while they lived in the illusion that
   they could very well dispense with revelation and faith, and could
   throw sufficient light upon all that man needs for his religious and
   moral life by reason. When this new philosophy, however, had reached
   the highest point of its development, it was wrecked by its own
   continued inquiry. In criticising revelation it had forgotten one
   thing,--criticism of itself. Reason in this newer philosophy took its
   starting-point in childish naiveté from its own integrity and
   trustworthiness. But when it had completed its work of demolishing
   revelation and now came to itself and examined its own nature and
   content, it found itself quite dissatisfied with itself. Reason found
   in reason its keenest inquisitor, and received its sharpest criticism
   from itself. All that had appeared to stand firm began to waver and to
   fall. The secondary attributes, the law of causality, the objective
   world of sense, the ideas of substance, personality, and
   self-consciousness, the world of supernatural and divine things-- all
   appeared untenable and unknowable. Kant struck the balance of this
   critical process thus: the intelligence of man is confined to the world
   of phenomena, and does not know anything of what lies behind it. Reason
   is not merely blinded or weakened by sin; it is in its very nature
   blind and deaf and dumb in the presence of the spiritual world.

   Whatever value we may attach to this critical philosophy, there can be
   no doubt that it has roughly shaken confidence in human reason, and has
   given a deep wound to the faith and conviction, to the spiritual
   security and moral will-power of the modern man. As on the one side it
   has declared man autonomous, and set him free from all objective forms
   and external authority, on the other side it has opened the door for a
   wild anarchy of thought. If the knowledge of God and of spiritual
   things is excluded from the domain of science, then not only is science
   bereft of moral character and made atheistic, but religion and morality
   also are left to individual caprice. Both become matters of private
   judgment and individual taste; each one can do what he will. That is an
   incalculable injury, not only for the schools, but still more for life;
   agnosticism produces ethical and practical indifference.

   But naturally one cannot live on criticism and agnosticism. Although
   the agnostic view, that "scientific superstition," as Mr F. W. H. Myers
   calls it, is embraced to-day by many learned men, it has never been the
   creed, nor is it now the creed, of the human race. [288] Questions
   continually arise in the mind for which every one necessarily seeks an
   answer. There are some beliefs for which man cannot afford to wait.
   What must I do to be saved? is a question of an urgency of a totally
   different kind from the cause of the tides or the meaning of the marks
   on the moon. Men must settle roughly somehow or other what they have
   reason to hope or to fear from the unseen world. [289] Auguste Comte's
   positive philosophy grew into a sociolatry and a positive religion
   which made humanity and its heroes objects of worship. The whole of the
   nineteenth century is full of endeavors to recover the loss that had
   been suffered, to heal the gaping wound. Kant himself began it. In
   order to find a place for faith he confined science to the knowledge of
   sensible phenomena; what he demolished by theoretical reason, he tried
   to build up by practical reason. After him first one and then another
   arose, to make a similar effort to find a way to the unknown land.
   Speculative reason and intellectual contemplation, mysticism of feeling
   and the moral power of the will, the faith of the church and the
   religions of the nations, were all summoned in turn to aid in
   penetrating into the supernatural world, and building up the knowledge
   of God on a new scientific, unassailable foundation. However these
   efforts may differ, they all have in common that they no longer subject
   themselves to any so-called external authority, but try to find out God
   through man. Theology has, since Kant's time, become theology of
   consciousness and experience, and thus loses itself practically in
   religious anthropology.

   In this transformation of theology into the science of religion the new
   conception of science comes to light. Kant had already limited the
   power of the intelligence, because he was under the influence of the
   one-sided Newtonian explanation of nature and could recognize as
   scientific only a conception of the world which bore a strictly
   mechanical character. [290] This mechanism is in wide circles no longer
   looked upon as a sufficient explanation of the world, so that
   philosophy has acquired a new value; but nevertheless, the idea still
   exists that there is only one science, or at most two sciences, namely,
   the sciences of nature and of history, and that accordingly there are,
   only two scientific methods, the empirical and the historical. [291]
   Thus, if theology is to be a science, and the knowledge of unseen and
   divine things trustworthy, the same method must be applied in its
   domain as in those of nature and history. Theology must become an
   empirical science. [292]

   But in this way the word "experience" is made to play an ambiguous
   ro1e. When used in religion and theology, it has a wholly different
   significance from that which it bears in empirical science. In the
   latter what is meant is, that, by consistent application of the
   empirical method, personal interest in the inquiry is to be excluded as
   much as possible, and that the phenomena are observed and explained in
   their purity and impartially; empiricism even calls to its help the
   experimental proof. But when men speak of experience in religion, they
   mean it to be understood, on the other hand, that religion is, or at
   any rate must become, a personal matter through and through. Religion
   is, according to this interpretation, no doctrine, no precept, no
   history, no worship, in a word, not a belief on authority, nor a
   consent to truth, but arises from within, when the heart is touched and
   a personal fellowship established between God and our soul. Now there
   is certainly such a religious experience; the devotional writings of
   all religions bear witness to it, and serve in their turn to feed and
   strengthen that religious life even more than Bible and catechism.
   [293] But the mistake is when men fancy they in this way make theology
   a science as exact as that of nature, and thus arrive at a scientific
   knowledge of unseen and eternal things. [294]

   For whatever meaning religious experience may have, it is not and
   cannot be an heuristic principle. Experience comes into being only
   when, first, there exists something to experience, and afterwards this
   something is really experienced ; it cannot otherwise exist. Religion
   is without doubt a matter of the heart; but it cannot be separated from
   all objective knowledge of God through his revelation in nature and
   history, in Scripture and conscience. A subjective religion is always
   preceded by an objective religion, whatever this may be. Just as
   language presupposes the capacity for speech in the child, but yet is
   learned from the mother, so also religious experience arises out of
   preceding revelation. Every child grows up in the religion of its
   parents, and thereby develops its own religious life; the pious
   teaching and example of the mother awaken piety in the heart of the
   child. No less than in sensation, science, and art, does this take
   place also in religion. Man is never self-sufficient and independent of
   the outside world; he needs the earth to feed and clothe him, light to
   see, sound to hear, the phenomena of nature or the facts of history to
   observe and to know, and in the same way revelation to awaken and
   strengthen his religious life. The heart cannot be separated from the
   head, nor faith as trust from faith as knowledge. Even those who look
   upon dogmatics as an exposition of pious feelings recognize that these
   feelings nevertheless are due to external influences, as, for example,
   from the person of Christ. [295] Experience does not come first, after
   which interpretation follows, but revelation precedes, and is
   experienced in faith. [296]

   If we reject the empirical order and proceed in an oppositive
   direction, we reach the so-called psychology of religion which has
   latterly aroused so much attention. There is no doubt that this young
   science, for which Pietism and Methodism prepared the way, and which is
   a direct fruit of the empirical psychology and theology, has a right to
   exist, and may be expected to yield important aid for the knowledge and
   guidance of religious life. It may be hoped also that the method which
   has been applied in this science by James, Starbuck, Coe, and others,
   will gradually meet the objections which to-day are properly urged
   against it. Finally, we may acknowledge that dogmatics, especially in
   the doctrine of the ordo salutis, must become more psychological, and
   must reckon more fully with religious experience. [297] But this does
   not alter the fact that the psychology of religion only inquires into
   the experiences of the soul and cannot form a judgment upon their right
   and value. It observes and describes the phenomena of religious
   consciousness, but it cannot pronounce upon their truth and purity. It
   regards religion, no doubt, as one of "the most important biological
   functions of mankind," [298] but it can never come to the question of
   its truth, it cannot elevate itself to a logos of religion, and
   therefore can never replace metaphysics or dogmaties. [299]

   We may reasonably question even the anticipation of Coe, that this
   psychology of religion will be able to regain many who in our days have
   turned away from all religion. [300] For without underestimating the
   new conclusions which present themselves, and the important suggestions
   which have been derived from this new study of religious life, the
   results to which it has led do not support the expectations which Coe
   formed for them. This is very clearly manifested in the fact of
   conversion, to which the greatest attention has been devoted. The
   psychology of religion not merely conceives conversion as a "natural
   and necessary process," [301] forming a part of man's biological
   development and connected intimately with puberty, [302] but its
   investigation gradually loses sight of what must be understood by
   conversion. In itself it has no standard by which to form a judgment of
   what conversion consists in; it inquires into and describes conversion
   only as a psychological phenomenon. But regarded from this point of
   view the treason of Judas is as important as the penitence of Peter,
   and conversion is nothing other than one of the many transformations of
   consciousness, or alterations of personality, which take place so
   frequently in human life. [303] If all these religious phenomena are
   studied only from a psychological standpoint, the result is that they
   lose their character and their content is sacrificed to their form.
   Conversion thus loses its special meaning; on the ground of certain
   analogies with other psychological phenomena it is confused and
   identified with them in the same manner as in the religio-historical
   method. All religions are first compared one with another, and then, on
   the ground of some points of agreement, are identified with one
   another. What conversion is and ought to be no psychology of religion
   can teach us; the Scriptures alone can tell us that; and if they do not
   tell it to us, nobody knows.

   This remark applies not to conversion only, but also to all special
   religious experiences, such as consciousness of sin, repentance, faith,
   hope, sense of forgiveness, prayer, fellowship with God; and it applies
   as well to religion in general. Religious psychology occupies a neutral
   standpoint outside and above all religions, and studies and compares
   the religious experiences of Romanist and Protestant, Christian,
   heathen, Jew and Mohammedan, and feels itself naturally attracted by
   those persons and groups whose religious life bears a more or less
   eccentric character; mystics, fanatics, enthusiasts of all sects and
   confessions, form for it interesting cases which it eagerly inquires
   into. [304] But again the qualitative discrimination disappears from
   view; or rather the psychology of religion does not perceive it, and
   attends only to the psychological form of these phenomena; it does not
   penetrate to their core and essence. So it treats them all alike.
   Religion is everywhere the same as to contents,--only the form
   differs,--and every religion, wherever it appears, is therefore true
   and good. Thus James, for example, says that religion is quite
   "private" and "individualistic"; [305] all do not need to have the same
   religion; each one has his own God. So long as a man has use for his
   God, he cares little about who he is; "God is not known; he is used."
   In the house of the Father are many mansions; "all ideals are matters
   of relation." [306] The question even arises whether polytheism does
   not better correspond to the variety of religious experience than
   monotheism, for what is required is not an absolute power, but only one
   higher than that of nature. [307]

   That this peculiar idea is not a private opinion of Professor James,
   but a necessary and general conclusion from the premises, is
   demonstrated by the fact that other men, though widely separated from
   one another, announce the same opinion. Some years ago, even, Schian
   declared that there is no such thing as an ideal type of faith and
   piety, but that each dogmatist presents his own type. If there is no
   infallible Scripture, "there can exist only a subjective and purely
   individual notion of what belongs to Christian faith." All ways are
   good, if they but lead to faith: not to what is contained in faith, for
   this differs endlessly, but to faith as trust in God as revealed in
   Christ. [308] Schian has received much support from others in this
   idea, [309] and Professor Herrmann too has given his adherence to it
   during the last few years. The strict Ritschlian distinction between
   religion and metaphysics, between judgments of value and judgments of
   being, has led him to supplant faith almost wholly by trust.
   Revelation, he says, is not an external thing, but "man receives the
   revelation, which is the ground of his religion, because the depths of
   his own being are opened to him." Religion is a new life, and rests
   upon an experience of the power of moral good, as Jesus has shown us.
   To trust in that power is to believe, to live, to be saved. And because
   religion is thus "the complete quickening of a man, there is no general
   religion, the same for every one, but there are only individuals in
   religion." [310] So we see that from the standpoint of religious
   psychology there is no longer a place for metaphysics, theology, or
   dogmatics, nor even for an "ethics of the religious personality." For
   every standard fails here; there is no single law or rule; the
   individual man is the measure of all things, also of religion; God does
   not say how he will be served, but man decides how he will serve him.

   Naturally such a consistent indifferentism does not please all, and in
   the long run cannot satisfy any one. Most of those who have followed
   Kant and Schleiermacher in taking their standpoint in the religious
   subject, try nevertheless to build up on that subject one or another
   view of the world. In truth, Kant himself set limits to knowledge in
   order to make a place for faith, and to find room, by reasoning on the
   nature and content of practical reason, for the reality of a moral
   government of the world. And Schleiermacher, though striving after the
   liberation of theology from philosophy, could act in this way according
   to his conviction only because he believed he possessed in the
   religious feeling of absolute dependence an immediate revelation of the
   Infinite. [311] The peculiarity of the whole mediating theology which
   spread over the world in the nineteenth century, and remains still
   to-day dominant in many circles, is its effort to attain a transcendent
   reality --which was only more or less a reflection of the old
   dogmatics--by means of speculative reasoning on the immanent
   requirements, needs, or experiences of the religious and ethical man.
   Ritschl, it is true, set himself in opposition to this, and brought
   about a separation between religion and metaphysics which Herrmann
   especially has carried forward. But a powerful reaction theologically
   and philosophically has arisen against this separation, even among
   Ritschl's own followers. We are witnesses in these days of a rebirth of
   philosophy, a fresh acknowledgment of the right of metaphysics; and in
   connection therewith of a fuller recognition of the spiritual life, of
   its norms and values of its religious and ethical nature. [312]

   This new philosophy, however, appears in many respects different from
   that of former times. The old problems always remain the same, but they
   return in quite another form. Whilst formerly the procedure was often
   aprioristic, and the world was constructed out of the idea, now the
   opposite direction is taken and an effort is made to raise the real
   world of sensation and experience to its idea. The natural and mental
   sciences have brought much that is new into the field. What has been
   said as to the source of mathematical axioms, the ideas of number,
   time, and space, matter and force, movement and law, the development of
   the whole organic life, in plants, animals, and humanity, the
   interpretation of history, of the origin and progress of state and
   society, presents so much that is important that nobody, and certainly
   no philosopher, can neglect it without great loss. [313] This applies
   also to psychology. Here above all continued study has shown that the
   so-called empirical psychology cannot suffice for the right
   understanding of the psychical life.

   Researches into uncommon phenomena, such as telepathy and teloesthesy,
   hypnotism and spiritualism, faith- and prayer-healing, the intuition of
   genius and prophetic or poetic inspiration have demonstrated one fact
   beyond all doubt,--that the psychical life of man is much richer than
   his conscious intelligence and action. One may disagree over the names;
   but whether we speak of waking and dreaming, clay and night,
   supraliminal and subliminal, intuitive and reflexive, consciousness, in
   any case there is a great difference between what happens beneath and
   what above the threshold of consciousness. It certainly does not
   commend itself when Max Dessoir speaks of two personalities in one man;
   [314] for there always remains a weaker or stronger consciousness that
   both dwell in one and the same breast, and belong to one person. [315]
   But still a man may be so divided against himself, and so many
   alterations may take place in his consciousness, that he leads as it
   were a double life. Sometimes he seems to live in two worlds, which
   have nothing to do with each other. In many pathological cases, and
   especially in the so-called demoniacal possession, the apparatus of
   consciousness appears to become an instrument of a foreign, mysterious
   power. Apart altogether from these extremes, however, in every man
   there is present a difference between his subliminal and supraliminal
   consciousness.

   Man tries to give direction to his life by his consciousness, but that
   life itself has its origin in the depth of his personality. It must not
   be forgotten, Coe says truly, that though reason is necessary to guide
   the ship of life, feeling is the stream that propels it. [316] Beneath
   consciousness there is a world of instincts and habits, notions and
   inclinations, abilities and capacities, which continually sets on fire
   the course of nature. Beneath the head lies the heart, out of which are
   the issues of life.

   For this reason empirical psychology will never be able fully to
   explain the psychical life. It may with the utmost closeness examine
   the phenomena of consciousness, the sensations, the feelings, the
   passions, and it may try to conceive their working mechanically ; it
   may even endeavor to explain the ego or the self-consciousness by
   association of ideas ; but naturally it cannot penetrate to what lies
   behind and beneath consciousness, and can kindle no light in the secret
   places of the heart. Herein the declaration may find its application
   that God alone proves the hearts and reins of man. Empirical psychology
   can inquire into the conditions of consciousness, can even investigate
   the self-consciousness which slowly arises in man and is subject to all
   kinds of changes. But the question whether a hidden ego or an
   independent soul lies behind it is beyond its reach. So soon as it
   occupies itself with this question it passes beyond itself into
   metaphysies. [317] Let us put it more strongly still,--in inquiring
   into the phenomena of consciousness, empirical psychology always takes
   its start from an abstraction; it separates man from his social
   environment, the psychical processes from their contact with life, and
   in those psychical processes it again isolates definite phenomena, such
   as sensations of time, space, color, wholly from the psychical life. No
   doubt there are gains to be registered by this method; but we must
   abandon the illusion that human psychical life can ever find its
   explanation in this manner. For if science cherishes this illusion it
   degenerates into psychologism, historism, and relativism, and the
   fulness and richness of life are curtailed. In reality all these
   phenomena of consciousness, so far from being isolated, exist only in
   intimate mutual relations, and ever spring out of the depths of
   personality. The whole cannot be explained in an atomistic manner by a
   combination of its parts; but on the contrary the parts must be
   conceived in an organic way by unfolding the totality. Behind the
   particular lies the general, and the whole precedes the parts. if, for
   example, we had to learn to see, we should be dead before the task was
   accomplished. [318] But just as the bird knows how to build its nest,
   so we bring with us from our birth all kinds of abilities and
   capacities. It is the instinctive, organic life which in sensations, in
   thoughts and actions, gives an impulse to us and shows us the way.
   Instinct and capacity, norm and law, precede the life of reflection.
   Man is not sent into the world unarmed, but is equipped in body and
   soul with rich gifts and powers; he receives the talents which he has
   only to invest and augment them in the acts of his earthly life.
   Empirical psychology may thus possess an important pedagogical
   significance, but it takes its origin from, and also leads back to,
   metaphysical psychology. And thus it becomes manifest that empirical
   life is rooted in an aprioristic datum, which does not come slowly into
   existence by mechanical development, but is a gift of God's grace, and
   a fruit and result of his revelations. [319]

   If psychology leads by serious reflection to a metaphysical reality,
   and this again to the idea of revelation, we are not far removed from
   the conviction that man, in the hidden places of his soul, yet belongs
   to another and a higher world than that of this earthly existence.
   Plato asserted that the human soul existed before its indwelling in the
   body, lived in the world of ideas, and preserved the memory of it in
   its earthly exile. [320] Others cherish the idea that man in the hidden
   side of his nature holds communion with the unseen world and can
   receive from it all kinds of manifestations and revelations. The
   Society for Psychical Research, established in 1882, aimed at inquiring
   into all the phenomena which belong to the domain of spiritualism,
   [321] and one of its members, namely, F. W. H. Myers, who died in 1901,
   arrived with others at the conclusion that man in his subliminal life
   possesses faculties and powers whereby, without the help of the body,
   he can hold communication with souls and spirits. [322]

   Now there has always existed very great difference of opinion as to the
   nature and origin of hypnotic and spiritualistic phenomena,
   notwithstanding the exact research which has been devoted to them. On
   the one side an attempt is made to explain all these phenomena in a
   natural way, especially by suggestion, and this attempt is even
   extended to the miracles of Scripture; and on the other side, men feel
   forced by the facts to assume in some or in maiiy cases a supernatural
   interposition. It is unnecessary to examine here the correctness of
   these opinions; for it is not impossible, apriori, that such an
   intercourse with souls and spirits, without the help of the body, may
   exist. If the human soul indeed exists from the beginning as a whole,
   and is not slowly produced by steps and stages in the way of mechanical
   evolution, then it is in itself super-empirical, and has part in
   another world besides this visible one. It is then spiritual in its
   essence, and it is possible for it to hold communication with spirits
   or souls without the body. The body evidently is the organ of the soul;
   it is not the body, but the soul, which sees and hears, thinks and
   acts, through the body. Thus there is nothing absurd in the idea that
   the soul can exercise those activities in special cases without the
   organ of the body. It is also remarkable that humanity, every- where
   and in all ages, has acknowledged this possibility, that Scripture
   often presupposes it, and that it is included in the idea of
   revelation. For revelation always supposes that man is able to receive
   impressions or thoughts or inclinations from another than this
   phenomenal world, and in a way other than that usually employed.

   But when science undertakes to inquire into the phenomena which belong
   to such a spiritual intercourse, it exposes itself to serious dangers.
   For naturally those who devote their time and strength to this study
   will not be contented with the phenomena as such, but in order to
   obtain completely trustworthy material for their work will adopt the
   experimental method, and will endeavor to produce such experiences in
   themselves or in others by artificial means. The seriousness of
   scientific study compels them to seek such intercourse with the world
   of spirits themselves. Such an intercourse is not within the circle of
   their common experience; if it is possible, it can only be reached in
   artificial ways, that is, by the help of means, all of which, however
   diverse, have the tendency to throw into the background the conscious
   supraliminal life and to set the subliminal consciousness to work. If
   we do not lay stress on the injury which these artificially induced
   trance conditions may work to the bodily health, yet we must at least
   observe that it is silently supposed that subliminal life is the chief
   domain of the spirit. Just as the philosophy of the unconscious so
   spiritism and hypnotism inculcate the idea that consciousness is only a
   temporary and defective form of knowledge, and that true being lies in
   the unconscious; and the best way to come into contact with this being,
   and to obtain knowledge about it, is in the dream, the ecstasy, the
   trance. Nevertheless, whosoever intentionally robs himself of
   self-consciousness, reason, and will, extinguishes the light which God
   has given to man, annihilates his human freedom and independence, and
   degrades himself to an instrument for an alien and unknown power. [323]

   For--and this is a second danger which threatens--nobody knows to what
   influences he abandons himself in such states of trance. It is easy to
   say, on the one side, that all is suggestion or hallucination, or, on
   the other side, that a real intercourse with spirits takes place; but
   nothing is really certain. By intentionally suppressing reason and
   will, and by going back from this world of revelation to a land of
   darkness, we lose all guidance and make all control impossible. The
   reality of the phenomena and revelations which take place in the
   ecstatic state remains uncertain; uncertain it remains also whether the
   spirits who appear are really what they represent themselves to be;
   and, again, whether the revelations which they give contain truth or
   lies, must be followed or rejected. [324] Let it be supposed that real
   intercourse is held with the spirits, still the alternative is ever
   before us whether we shall give ourselves unconditionally up to the
   phenomena and revelations thus received, in which case, just as in
   common human intercourse, we should become dupes of misleading and
   seduction ; or whether we shall later on control the revelations
   received by the standards which conscience has given to us, in which
   case we should interpret them according to the view of the world and
   life, which is ours in conscious existence.

   The history of occultism, whether in earlier or later times,
   demonstrates this. The complaint is common that the revelations which
   spiritualism and hypnotism impart to us are characterized by banality
   and are not worth the attention which is bestowed upon them; also that
   they contain nothing more than fragments of the world-view which the
   receiver already adheres to. Myers, for example, is of opinion that
   "psychical research" indicates the reality of the spiritual world, the
   immortality of the soul, and endless "spiritual evolution," and that it
   has established these beyond all doubt. In consequence of this he
   expects that religion in the future will no longer rest on authority
   and belief, but on observation and experiment, and in that way will in
   the long run bring about a "synthesis of religious belief." [325] But
   these ideas are so well known that there is really no need of
   revelation to make them known to us; they have been proclaimed at all
   times by pantheistic philosophy, and have only in later days received
   another, and, for our generation, more attractive form, through a
   peculiar combination of Darwinism and Buddhism, evolution and
   theosophy, Western intelligence and Eastern wisdom. It is so incredible
   that this pantheistic-theosophical world-view should be produced by the
   revelation of spirits that it could, on the contrary, be with more
   justice contended that the newer philosophy has in a high degree
   furthered occultism, and has strengthened the belief therein. And as to
   the expectation that religion will rest in the future on the results of
   psychical research, the remark may suffice that the religion which
   seeks its foundation in intercourse with and in the revelation of
   spirits denies the name and the essence of pure religion, and instead
   of this introduces pagan superstition. Belief in spirits leads among
   all peoples and at all times to spirit-worship. For if the spirits of
   demons or the deceased can be called up, hold communication with us,
   and reveal to us secret things, then naturally arises the notion that
   they are more, or less partakers of the divine attributes of
   omniscience and omnipresence, and can help or injure us, at least in a
   certain degree. This belief leads unintentionally and of itself to the
   practice of adoration and homage. Occultism issues on the one side in
   unbelief and indifference with regard to existing religions, and on the
   other in the most abounding superstition, spirit- worship, and magic.
   [326]

   There is only one religion which in principle condemns and prohibits
   all this superstition and magic, and that is Christianity. The Old
   Testament already contained the revelation that the Lord alone is
   Israel's God, and therefore he only must be worshipped and served;
   soothsaying and magic,, inquiry of spirits and demons, are throughout
   forbidden. In the New Testament this worship of the one only true God
   is emancipated from all national limits, and is thus raised to its true
   condition as a worship in spirit and in truth. True there are prophets
   and apostles who act as organs of revelation, but they are still men,
   and enjoy no other honor than that which belongs to their office and
   vocation; even Mary, the blessed among women, is an ordinary member of
   the church. There is also, according to the Scripture, a realm of
   spirits; but the angels, notwithstanding the great power which is given
   to them, and the important task which is intrusted to them, are never
   objects of religious worship; while the attitude which is required to
   be taken toward the devils is so far from one of abject slavery that
   the only duty which we are commanded to fulfil toward them is to hate
   and resist them.

   Christianity is the absolutely spiritual religion, because it is the
   only religion which sets religion in relation to God alone; therefore
   it is nothing else but religion; the idea of religion is completely
   fulfilled in it. For if religion is a reality, then necessarily it must
   consist in this,--that man, avoiding all idolatry, shall rightly
   acknowledge the one true God, trust only in him, subject himself to him
   alone in all humility and patience, expect all good things from him,
   love, fear, and honor him with the whole heart, so that he would rather
   renounce every created thing than do anything in the least against the
   will of God. Now, this is completely fulfilled in Christianity. It is
   purely a service of God alone, with exclusion of all creatures. God is
   the content and the subject, the beginning and the ending, the alpha
   and the omega, of religion, and nothing of the creature enters into it.
   On the other side the whole man is taken into fellowship with that one
   true God; not only his feelings, but also his mind and will, his heart
   and all his affections, his soul and his body. Christianity is religion
   alone, and therefore the pure religion, the full and complete,
   indissoluble and eternal, fellowship of God and man.

   Christian theology, which investigates this religion, is on this
   account alone an independent and genuine science. As soon as the
   Christian religion is no longer acknowledged to be the pure, complete
   religion, but is thrown into a heap with all religions, theology ceases
   to be an independent science. There may still remain the study of the
   religious man (religious anthropology), and also psychological and
   historical inquiry into the religions of different peoples, perhaps
   also an endeavor to frame a philosophy of religion and a metaphysics,
   but there is no longer a theology, no longer an inquiry into the
   knowledge of God, and thus no standard for the judgment of religious
   phenomena. There only remains positivism, psychologism, relativism.
   Revelation, religion, and theology stand or fall together.

   But if theology possesses a reason for and a right to existence, it
   brings with it, as an independent science, its own method also. At the
   present time most people hold another opinion. Because they have
   abandoned the self-sufficiency of the Christian religion, they cannot
   hold to a theology with a method of its own. They suppose that there
   are only one or two scientific methods, namely. the physical and the
   historical. And thus, if theology is to maintain itself as a science in
   the university, it must accept one of these two methods, and apply it
   logically to the whole domain of inquiry; in other words, it must
   become natural or historical science. In this way it would lose its
   right to form an independent faculty in the circle of science, and
   would require, therefore, to be brought into the domain of the
   philosophical faculty. [327]

   Whether one accepts this consequence or not, the principle on which the
   standpoint is founded violates science, and denies its richness and
   diversity. True, if monism were the right world-view, and if all
   phenomena were purely modifications of one, substance, then there would
   be only one science and also only one method. It would be to deny its
   principle, to give an independent place to historical science by the
   side of natural science, and to defend the right of the historical
   method. But the world is richer than materialistic or pantheistic
   evolution wishes it to appear. A single factor never suffices for the
   explanation of phenomena in any domain. Everywhere there is a richness
   of life and a fulness of being. There are different kinds of creatures
   and phenomena, each of which requires a special method according to its
   nature, that we may know and understand it. Religion and virtue, art
   and science, beauty and justice, cannot be handled and measured like
   bodies; yet they exist, and occupy a dominating place in existence.
   Reality does not arrange itself to fit our system, but our system must
   form itself in accordance with reality.

   Life itself receives much greater injury from monistic doctrinairism
   than science. If the empirical and historical methods are the only
   paths to knowledge, then that wisdom which by nature is proper to every
   man, and is augmented and extended in the practice of life, loses all
   its value, and there arises between the schools and society a
   continually greater divergence and ever increasing opposition. For
   however science, with her inquiries and results, may serve, lead, and
   promote life, this life always and everywhere precedes science; it did
   not originate in science, and cannot wait for it. Family and society,
   work and vocation, agriculture and cattle-rearing, trade and industry,
   morality, justice, and art, have all an independent source and sustain
   their own character. The whole complete life, which reveals itself in
   all these domains and activities, can gratefully make use of the light
   which science kindles, but it flows from its own proper source and
   streams onward in its own channel. For both life and science it is,
   therefore, of the highest importance that the empirical knowledge,
   which is obtained in life, and the scientific knowledge, which is
   striven after in the schools, should support and strengthen one
   another; the wisdom of life is the starting-point and the foundation of
   all science, and the researches of the learned should not aim at
   extinguishing this knowledge of practical experience, but at purifying
   and augmenting it. [328]

   This applies especially to religion. If theology acknowledges no other
   method than that which is usually taken in the sciences of nature and
   history, the religious man is not only totally dependent on the
   clericalism of science, but religion itself is robbed of its
   independence and freedom. This is recognized by all, so far as under
   the influence of Schleiermacher they strive to set religion free from
   all knowledge and assent, and conceive it as only trust in the heart.
   But this endeavor is a fruitless one. For religion does not spring up
   in every individual spontaneously, without outside influence, but
   always comes to development by connecting itself with the religious
   representations which are, recognized in a definite circle as truth.
   The word "faith," which in Christendom expresses subjective
   religiousness, includes, along with the original religious habit which
   dwells in the heart of man, also the adjustment to representations
   which exist in this religion about God, world, man, etc.; it is at the
   same time knowledge and trust, and expresses the peculiarity of the
   Christian religion so well because this religion desires a knowledge of
   God which is at the same time trust, love, piety. Just because religion
   always includes knowledge, it comes into collision with science, and
   vice versa. This collision has existed through all ages and in all
   religions; the cause does not lie in arbitrary or occasional abuses of
   power, as would be the case if faith were nothing more than a matter of
   feeling; but the cause is that both, according to their several
   natures, move in the same domain and pronounce themselves on the same
   objects and phenomena. [329] And knowledge belongs so intimately to the
   essence of religion that religion, if freed from all religious
   representations and limited purely to feeling, would immediately lose
   its own character. For feeling has in itself no content and no quality;
   religious, ethical, and aesthetic feelings do not exist independently
   of each other, but are distinguished by the various representations by
   which feeling is awakened. Monism, therefore, always promotes the
   confusion of religious and wsthetic feeling, and thereby weakens
   religion; to limit religion to feelings does not maintain its
   independence, but undermines its existence.

   After the criticism of "the pure reason," which Kant has worked out
   from the standpoint of a mathematical-mechanic science, and after the
   criticism of "the historical reason," which has recently been developed
   by men like Dilthey, Windelband, Rickert, over against the
   one-sidedness of the science of nature, a "criticism of the religious
   reason" is still necessary. Theology is occupying itself with this task
   in all lands; the formal part of dogmatics is drawing thought to itself
   much more than the material part. Yet it cannot proceed here by mere
   speculation. Each science must borrow its form from the object which it
   investigates, for method is determined by the object. Now, if the
   object of theology is no other than the true and pure religion, which
   appears to us in Christianity as the fruit of revelation, then the
   inquiry after method results in this one and very important question:
   How does the Christian religion itself represent that a man comes to
   her, acknowledges her truth, and by her becomes a true religious man,--
   that is, a Christian, a child of God? Theology may afterwards reflect
   upon the answer which the Christian religion gives, as she does also
   upon other elements of truth; she has even the right, the duty, and the
   vocation to do this. But she can never produce any other method than
   that which is given by her own object. The plan of salvation in the
   Christian religion determines the method of Christian theology.

   If we institute an inquiry into that plan of salvation, we are met by
   the fact that the Christian religion does not bring us merely into
   relation with persons and events of the past, but by means of
   revelations in history seeks to bring us into fellowship with that God
   who manifests his truth in that he is always the same, in the past and
   in the present. The Christian religion is an historical, but also a
   present, religion. [330] Whoever seeks fellowship with God, excluding
   all history, and revelation in nature and history,--that is to say,
   without Christ,--experiences a religious feeling which misses the
   objective reality, which feeds only on itself, and therefore also
   digests itself. He who frees himself from all connection with what is
   before and around him ruins himself by his autonomy. On the other hand,
   whosoever considers the Christian religion simply and alone as
   historical religion, and does not make it a religion of the present,
   wipes out in principle the distinction between Christianity and the
   other religions, and reduces it to a phenomenon which belongs only to
   the past, and loses its significance for to-day and the future.

   The peculiarity of the Christian religion, then, as has been so often
   shown, and acknowledged even by opponents, [331] lies in the person of
   Christ. All other religions are independent, to a certain degree, of
   their founders, because those founders were nothing more than their
   fust confessors. But Jesus was not the first Christian; he was and is
   the Christ. He is not the subject, but the object, of religion.
   Christianity is not the religion of Jesus, still less Jesus-worship,
   [332] but Christ-religion. Christianity is now as dependent on him,
   from moment to moment, as when he trod this earth. For he is not a
   person who lived and worked only in the past, but he lives and works
   still, is still Prophet, Priest, and King, and himself upholds the
   church, which he established, from age to age, and assures to her the
   victory. Christianity, according to its own confession, does not exist
   through the strength and fidelity of its confessors, but through the
   life and will of its Mediator. The stages of the application of
   salvation are as much, and in the same sense, his interest as the
   impetration of salvation. His will and his work is to make men truly
   religious, to bring them into fellowship with God, and that is also the
   will and the work of God himself. For the will of God to save the world
   was not only an annunciation of God's inclination in the past, but is
   an action, a deed, a work of God, which goes on from day to day. God is
   love; but that love is no quiescent attribute, but an eternal,
   omnipresent energy which realizes itself in the hearts of men. God is
   Father; but that Fatherhood is no mere title of honor, but an almighty,
   energetic power which regenerates men as his children and heirs. [333]
   Christianity is no mere revelation of God in the past, but it is, in
   connection with the past, a work in the midst of this and every time.
   The Father of Jesus works always hitherto, and he himself works also.
   All other religions try to obtain salvation by the works of men, but
   Christianity makes a strong protest against this; it is not autosoteric
   but heterosoteric; it does not preach self-redemption, but glories in
   redemption by Christ alone. Man does not save himself, and does not
   save God, but God alone saves man, the whole man, man for eternity. It
   is a religion, not of works, but of faith; not of merits, but of grace.
   Christianity proves itself in the plan of salvation to be the
   absolutely spiritual and pure religion. Man can add nothing to
   it,--salvation is God's work alone; of him, and through him, and to
   him, are all things.

   But this almighty and always active will of God is not realized without
   man, as antinomians of all kinds imagine, but in man, and through man.
   It is realized, according to the witness of the whole Scripture, in
   regeneration and faith, in conversion and forgiveness of sin, in
   sanctification and perseverance. In other words, if we, ask of the
   prophets, of Christ and his apostles, how man comes to a knowledge of
   the truth, and to a new life in God's fellowship, then they give the
   answer unanimously,--not by knowledge or action, nor yet by science or
   art, nor yet again by good works or civilization, but by faith and
   conversion. Scripture has a richness of names for this plan of
   salvation; it never gives a dry, dogmatic description, nor an abstract
   scheme of conceptions, but shows it to us in life, and gives us thereby
   a psychology of religion such as no scientific investigation, and no
   questionaire method can bring to light. For all the steps in the way of
   salvation are God's work, the effect and fulffiment of his will; but
   because they take place in man, and are realized in his consciousness
   and will, they may all be considered and described also from an
   anthropological point of view. The distinct individuality and
   experience of the prophets and apostles themselves appear in the
   different names by which the process of salvation is indicated. But
   from whatever point of view this plan of salvation is considered, this
   is always the result, --that man, in order to become a child of God,
   does not need to be a cultured being or a citizen of standing, a man of
   science or of art, a civilized or a developed man. These are all good,
   but not one indicates the way to divine fellowship. In order person
   must be converted. Conversion is the sole and the absolutely peculiar
   way to heaven.

   In speaking in this way the Christian religion gains at once the
   consciences of all men. For there can be no doubt that, if there is
   really a redemption, this must consist before all things in redemption
   from sin. All men have a notion of good and evil, a conscience which
   accuses or excuses thein, a consciousness of guilt and impurity, a fear
   of punishment, and a desire for redemption. But they often err as
   deeply about the character of sin as about the way of redemption. On
   the one side, sin is minified to an accidental and arbitrary act, from
   which man can eventually deliver himself by knowledge or act; on the
   other side, sin is considered as such an ineradicable evil that it is
   identified with being and nature itself. Confucius holds here the
   opposite view from Buddha, Mohammed from Mani, Socrates from Plato. And
   within the Christian church the same ideas and contrasts appear now and
   then. In our days some preach the doctrine that one must not take sin
   too seriously, because it is no habit, no condition, no bad inclination
   of the heart, but exclusively an arbitrary act of the will, which very
   easily arises from the conflict between the individual and society,
   between nature and culture, but for that reason also can easily be
   given up and conquered. [334] On the other hand, sin is represented as
   a mass of egoistic instincts and passions, which have been carried over
   by man from his former animal condition, which still hold supremacy
   over the altruistic inclinations in the savage and in the child, and
   anachronistically and atavistically exercise their influence in the
   criminal type. [335] The two views approach one another in this way,
   that the innate egoistic inclinations, namely, the animality and
   sensuality, are of themselves no sin, that they also in later life, if
   they are yielded to in conflict with the interests of society, cause no
   guilt and no stain, but only betray a weakness and disease, which need
   cure. What the wound is to the body, that is the criminal in society.
   [336] In so-called "Christian Science" sin consequently is put into the
   same category as illness, and both are represented as an illusion, as
   an error in thought, which can only be cured by thought. [337] The
   fundamental error of heathenism thus returns, because the holiness of
   God is lost, and the gods are identified with the powers of nature; and
   therefore the distinction between sin and misery, and accordingly
   between redemption from sin and relief from misery, is lost. Modern
   superstition and the increasing quackery rest upon each other. If the
   power on which man depends loses the character of personal holiness,
   man feels himself no longer a guilty sinner, but a powerless, helpless,
   miserable creature, and desires not an ethical redemption, but physical
   cure and bodily welfare. And if one cannot find these among the
   physicians, they are sought for amongst the charlatans and quacksalvers
   through superstitious and magic means.

   The Christian religion alone maintains, in opposition to all these
   tendencies, the purely ethical character of sin. It does this by
   distinguishing between creation and fall. In all systems which identify
   sin with the substance of things, creation is changed into a fall, and
   the fall which Scripture relates is represented as the symbol of a
   remarkable progress in the life of humanity, as the rise from animal
   innocence into the state of human consciousness. [338] In reality, the
   whole order of things is thereby reversed; God becomes the author of
   sin, and the serpent the author of human progress. The Ophites acted,
   therefore, logically when they represented God as an unhappy demiurge,
   and the serpent as a blessed deity. In truth, in the
   voluntaristic-pantheistic philosophy of recent times it is uot God who
   saves man, but man who saves God. Scripture restores the original order
   by distinguishing and separating creation and fall, but maintains
   thereby also the possibility of redemption. For if sin is identified
   with animality and sensuality, and has its origin in the descent and
   nature of man, then there is no redemption possible except by
   annihilation. Heaven is then no uppermost expansion of true life, but
   the extinction of all consciousness, will, and personality, the abyss
   of nothing, the sinking into everlasting death. On the contrary, if sin
   bears an ethical character, then redemption is possible, and conversion
   is in principle the conquest of sin, the death of the old and the
   resurrection of the new man. [339]

   But in that case conversion is a necessary and moral duty for every
   man. If the Christian religion maintains the absolute necessity of
   conversion, it. joins to itself again the witness of all consciences,
   the doctrine and life of the whole of humanity. Every man has the deep
   and ineradicable conviction that he is not what he ought to be; there
   is a schism between his duty and his inclination which he cannot deny
   and cannot do away with. Man is broken; his unity, his harmony has
   gone. And the strangest thing in this strange phenomenon is that he is
   not two men who struggle with one another, but he is in both cases the
   same man. It is our conceptions, ideas, inclinations and desires which
   are striving together and seeking to obtain the mastery; it is the same
   subject which excuses and accuses itself, which gives way willingly to
   sinful desire, and is afterwards torn by repentance and grief, which
   alternately springs up in joy and languishes in sorrow. [340] From the
   whole history of man resounds a heartbreaking complaint over the
   disruption of life; it finds its finest expression in the songs of the
   poets, but each man knows it by experience; all religion is animated by
   it, every eflort toward reform proceeds from it, all ethics assume the
   imperative tone after the descriptive one, and every philosophy strives
   to set the heart at ease as well as to satisfy the intelligence. Men
   may differ as to the nature and the reach of conversion, but its
   necessity is established beyond all doubt; the whole of humanity
   proclaims the truth of the fall.

   There is no doubt much diversity in the manner in which conversion
   takes place. Scripture makes it clear that by conversion is meant a
   religious and moral change in man, by which he deserts his sinful ways
   and learns to know, love, and serve with his whole heart the true God,
   who has revealed himself in Christ; but it at the same time allows a
   wide application of this idea, and discriminates the process itself
   from the manner in which it is brought about. It speaks of the
   conversion of Israel and of the heathen, of individuals and of towns
   and of peoples, and it exhibits ir. the examples of Nathanael and
   Nicodemus, Zaccheus and Mary Magdalene, Paul and Timothy, different
   modes in which conversion may be realized. [341] In early times, when
   Christianity was conquering a place for itself in the world through the
   preaching of the apostles, conversion coalesced with the resolution to
   abandon idolatry and to serve the only living God. The New Testament
   describes to us the transition of Christianity from Judaism to the
   Greco-Roman world, and is, in the first place, the book of the mission
   which was fulfilled by the work of the apostles. [342]

   When later the church obtained a firm foothold in the world, and grew
   not so much through missions among the heathen as by means of
   catechizing her own children, conversion assumed another form, while
   remaining the same in essence. In infant baptism it was confessed that
   conversion and regeneration differ, and conversion is ordinarily a
   coming to consciousness of that new life which has long before been
   planted in the heart. An illustration of this is supplied also by
   revivals, which do not occur among heathen, but only within the limits
   of the Christian church. The psychology of religion also suggests that
   the sudden conversions which occur in revival-meetings need not be so
   sudden as they appear, but may he a revivification of impressions and
   emotions received sometimes years previously, and have sunk into the
   heart beneath the threshold of consciousness, and by the force of
   peculiar circumstances spring again into new life. [343] It is a good
   work to awaken the sleeping churches, and to stir up the unconscious
   life into conscious action, but it is a fault if the organic existence
   of the church is insufficiently recognized, involving as this does a
   misunderstanding of the covenant of grace and too close an
   identification of conversion with one definite form of conversion,
   which is therefore prescribed as necessary to all and produced
   artificially. As soon as this happens, human agency is confused with
   the work of the Spirit, the essence is sacrificed to the form, and
   sometimes even to very strange forms, and the earnestness and richness
   of Scripture is lost.

   It may be remarked throughout Scripture that the essence and the
   seriousness of conversion are never obseured, and yet the rich variety
   of its manifestation is continually exhibited. Mary and Martha were
   very different in religious disposition, but Jesus loved them both. The
   apostles differed in endowments and character, but they were all
   disciples of the Lord. In the Christian church, Augustine and Francis
   of Assisi, Luther and Calvin, Wesley and Zinzendorf, walked in various
   pathways, but still they were all children of the same Father's house,
   with its many mansions. So far as it is intended merely to give
   expression to the rich diversity of spiritual life, the distinction
   between "healthy-minded" and "morbid-minded souls" need not be
   condemned. [344] All have not the same experience of guilt and grace;
   the deeper knowledge of sin, and the richer comfort of forgiveness, are
   not the root, but the fruit of Christian faith. [345] The Gospel is so
   rich, and the salvation purchased by Christ contains so many and
   diverse benefits, that the most varied needs of men are satisfied by
   it, and the richest powers of human nature are brought to development.
   There are times in which the Gospel especially attracts, because it
   promises forgiveness of all guilt of sin; and there are other times in
   which it charms most, because it stills the thirst for a new, holy
   life. [346] The Gospel of the Synoptics, of John, and Paul, and Peter,
   and James, have awakened various sympathies in the different churches
   and among different peoples in different times and places. In every
   nation is accepted with God he who fears him and works righteousness.

   Nevertheless conversion must remain conversion. What it is no science
   or philosophy can tell us, but we learn from Holy Scripture alone. If
   this does not tell us, or is not to be trusted in what it tells us, we
   are in despair as to the redemption of the world and the salvation of
   mankind. Philosophy may teach us through the lips of Kant and
   Schopenhauer--though even this always under the influence of
   Christianity--that if sin is to be really eliminated from human nature,
   a sort of regeneration is necessary. But it can never proclaim the glad
   tidings that such a conversion exists, nor can it show the way to
   obtain it. The psychology of religion may bring into view the phenomena
   which are connected with conversion from the anthropological side, and
   illustrate thein by analogies from other regions, but it does not
   penetrate, as it itself acknowledges, [347] to the core and the cause
   of these phenomena. It even incurs the danger--if it abandons the
   guidance of Scripture and presents these phenomena exclusively from an
   anthropological standpoint--of sacrificing the essence to the form and
   the kernel to the husk. Viewed psychologically, all alterations of
   personality are alike: the fall is as much a transformation of
   consciousness as redemption and regeneration; the change of a virtuous
   man into a drunkard or a voluptuary, a thief or a murderer, is as much
   a "conversion" as the coming to himself of the prodigal son and his
   return to his father's house. [348] If certain phenomena which are
   often connected with conversion are wanting, some rashly conclude that
   conversion itself has not really taken place, or was not wholly
   necessary. By the side of the "twice-born" is ranged, then, the
   category of the "once-born men," or righteous men who have no need of
   conversion. [349] The diversity of religious phenomena leads men rashly
   to the conclusion that conversion has no reality, that all
   "conversions" are in themselves equally real, and that each man can be
   saved in his own way. [350] Thus under the psychological treatment the
   essence of conversion is lost, just as life perishes vivisection.
   Pragmatism, which only takes into account empirical phenomena, is
   nominalistic in principle, and becomes relativistic in result.

   Scripture and experience are both in opposition to this levelling of
   all essential distinctions; for both testify that conversion is not one
   of those many transformations of consciousness which often take place
   in human life, but that it bears a specific character. Conversion can
   be said to be genuine only when a man is changed in his entire being in
   such a way that he experiences a hearty repentance and an inner horror
   of sin, succeeded by a lively joy in God and a sincere desire for the
   fulfilment of his will. True conversion consists only in the dying of
   the old sinful man, and in the resurrection of the new, holy man. [351]
   "All holy persons are twice-born persons," [352] for by nature man does
   not possess that holiness and that deep and hearty love to God and
   desire for the fulfilment of his commandments. When Kant and
   Schopenhauer, and many others speak so much of the radical evil in
   human nature, they thereby bear witness to the truth. Stanley Hall
   rightly asks, "Who that is honest and has true self-knowledge will not
   confess to recognizing in his own soul the germs and possibilities of
   about every crime, vice, insanity, superstition, and folly in conduct
   he ever heard of? [353] And James acknowledges in the same way that
   "healthy-mindedness is inadequate as a philosophical doctrine because
   the evil facts which it refuses positively to account for are a genuine
   portion of reality." [354]

   Now there may be differences of opinion as to the possibility and
   reality of a conversion such as Scripture and the Christian religion
   teach. But if it exists, there can be no doubt that it has another
   source and another cause than the purely psychological operation of
   human representations and powers. The psychology of religion rightly
   says that it neither will nor can pronounce a decision. [355] James
   goes even further, and says that reality itself is revealed in the
   unconscious, that hidden powers and ideas work there, and that God's
   mercy is working through the "subliminal door"; and so he calls himself
   a supernaturalist, though in a modified form. [356] It causes no wonder
   that this supernaturalism is acknowledged in religious experience, for,
   if revelation in history, especially in the person and work of Christ,
   is denied, the truth and the right of religion can only be maintained
   by accepting a revelation in the religious subject. If religion is,
   really communion with God, it includes his indwelling and inworking in
   the human soul. Scripture and theology, therefore, have always taught
   and maintained such a fellowship of God and man in their doctrine of
   the mystical union. But if this revelation in the subject is isolated
   from all objective revelation in nature and Scripture, in history and
   the church, it opens the door for all kinds of error. Finally, such a
   subjective revelation results in nothing beyond a "more," which works
   in the "subliminal consciousness" of man, and is interpreted by each
   one according to his nature and environment. [357] Pragmatism leads
   here also to indifferentism regarding all religions.

   Such a religious indifferentism is, however, in conflict with all
   experience, and is in the strongest way contradicted by the Christian
   religion. For the conversion which brings us into fellowship with God
   never happens unmediatedly, but is always connected with
   representations and impressions which we have received at some time,
   shorter or longer, previously. [358] It always takes place in
   connection with historical Christianity, which in one or another form
   exists before and without us, and now enters into harmony with our own
   soul. It does not arise spontaneously out of and by ourselves, but
   causes us to live with fuller conviction in the religious circle
   wherein we were born and brought up, or into which in later life we
   have been introduced. The religious representations are thus no
   subjective interpretations of our personal emotions; we formulate them
   as little as the child, who, though it brings with it the faculty of
   speech, does not produce speech itself, but receives the whole treasure
   of words from the lips of its mother. Man does not produce truth by
   thought in any domain, and certainly not in religion, but by inquiry
   and study he learns to know the truth, which exists independently of
   and before him. Therefore religious experience is neither the source
   nor the foundation of religious truth; [359] it only brings us into
   union with the existing truth, and makes us recognize as truth what
   formerly was for us only an empty sound, or even was denied and opposed
   by us. Conversion is not the source of truth, but the source of
   certainty as to the truth. It bears witness in our heart as to the
   religious representations which existed outside of and before us.

   So we have on the one side to maintain the dependence of religious
   experience on historical Christianity, and on the other side equally to
   recognize its independence and liberty. Many know no other dilemma than
   either external authority, blind belief, intellectual consent to alien
   and hard dogma, or else free piety and individual formulation of
   religious life. [360] But reality teaches us quite differently. Just as
   we with open eyes do not create the reality of the world, but only
   recognize it,--just as we by thought do not produce the truth, but seek
   and find it,--so also the religious man receives the reality of
   spiritual things which are presented to him by God perfectly freely and
   spontaneously. He now sees them, where he was formerly blind; he
   understands now what he earlier as a natural man could not conceive; by
   re-birth he enters into the kingdom of heaven; by loving the will of
   God he knows that Jesus speaks, not of himself, but of the Father; he
   hears and understands Jesus' voice now because he can endure his word.
   So one can understand that conversion produces and generates an
   unwavering certainty as to the things which the Christian religion
   teaches us. If it were nothing more than a matter of feeling or
   sentiment, and were confined entirely to the mysticism of the heart, it
   would not be able to awaken such a personal interest in the objective
   words and events of Christianity. But experience teaches otherwise.
   Conversion takes place in connection with the Christian religion;
   faith, which forms its positive side, is the substance of things hoped
   for, the evidence of things not seen, because it is at the same time
   cognitio and fiducia, a trustful knowledge and a knowing trust. It is
   accompanied from its first existence by a group of representations, is
   born in our heart in connection with them, and binds us to them
   irrevocably. Conversion, which is equally repentance and faith, sorrow
   and joy, death and resurrection, changes the whole man in principle as
   to his being and consciousness, incorporates him into another world of
   representations than that in which he formerly lived. Those
   representations also depend mutually on each other. Both
   psychologically and logically the representations which we receive in
   our conversion associate themselves with those which Christianity
   includes within the circle to which we belonged from birth or were
   later adopted into. It is not the least merit of Christianity that it
   includes such an harmonious whole of representations, which reconcile
   subject and object, man and world, nature and revelation. [361]

   This whole process of conversion, which begins with the awakening of
   the consciousness of guilt and misery and develops itself into a hearty
   joy in God through Christ, is from the beginning to the end
   psychologically mediated. We do not here see God face to face, even if
   we descend into the depths of our own soul. Unconsciousness, ecstasy,
   hallucination, dreaming, and contemplation do not bring us nearer to
   him than the conscious life, as the mysticism of all centuries has
   fancied, for we walk by faith and not by sight. And not only so, but
   there arise in our own heart, in the world around us, and in the
   revelation of Scripture itself, all kinds of difficulties which we
   cannot resolve. But if we are convinced in our deepest soul that God
   will save us personally, and in its beginnings has saved us, then it is
   an unavoidable postulate of faith that this will also reveals itself
   outside of us in history, and that the world and humanity will not be
   led to an eternal death and a dark night and an unfathomable abyss, but
   to a never-ending day of light and glory. Above the power of nature and
   above the power of sin raises and maintains itself the almighty will of
   the Heavenly Father, who subdues wind and sea and all things.

   Conversion and faith in our own heart are the operation and fruit of
   that will. Though they occur thus in a psychological way, which takes
   into account each man's character and environment, yet they are a
   revelation of that will which works in us both to will and to do
   according to his good pleasure. In and by our own testimony we bear the
   testimony of the Holy Spirit, which, in its turn is added to the
   witness of Holy Scripture and of the church of all centuries. In this
   witness the souls of all God's children are secure; through the
   breakers of doubt it brings them into the haven of God's love.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [287] Comp., e.g., Otto Pautz, Mohammeds Lehre von der Offenbarung.
   Leipzig, 1898.

   [288] Frederic W. H. Myers, Human Personality and its Survival of
   Bodily Death. Ed. and abridged by his son, L. H. Myers, 1907, p. 2.

   [289] Ibid., p. 3.

   [290] Kant gave to his Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des
   Himmels, 1755, the sub-title of Versuch von der Verfassung und dem
   mechanischen Ursprung des ganzen Weltgebäudes nach Newtonschen
   Grundsätzen abgehandelt.

   [291] Troeltsch, Die Absolutheit des Christ. und die Religionsgesch.,
   1902. Bernoulli, Die wissenschaftliche und die kirchliche Methode in
   der Theologie. Freiburg, 1897. Gross, Glaube, Theologie und Kirche,
   Tübingen, 1902. Rade, Zeits. fur Theol. und Kirche, 1900, pp. 80 fl.;
   1901, pp. 429 ff.

   [292] G. Berguer, L'Application de la Methode scientifique à la
   Théologie. Genève, 1908.

   [293] Ritschl, Rechtf. und Versöhnung, II, p. 12.

   [294] Bachmann, Zur Würdigung des religiö:sen Erlebens, Neue Kirchl.
   Zeits. Dec.; 1907, pp. 907-931.

   [295] Schleiermacher, Ritschl, Herrmann, Harnack, Schian, one and all,
   connect Christian experience in some way or other with the Person of
   Christ and the revelation given us by God in him.

   [296] Bachmann, loc. cit.

   [297] Mulert, Zeits. f. Theol. und Kirche., Jan., 1907, pp. 63, 436.

   [298] James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, p. 506.

   [299] Troeltsch, Psychologie und Erkenntnisstheorie in der
   Religionswissenschaft. Tübingen, 1905. Scheel, Zeits. f. Theol. u. K.,
   1907, pp. 149-150, 305-307. Id., Die moderne Religionspsych., ib. 1908,
   pp. 1-38.

   [300] G. A. Coe, The Spiritual Life, 1903, pp. 23-27.

   [301] E. D. Starbuck, The Psychology of Religion, 1901, pp. 143-153.

   [302] Starbuck, pp. 28 ff. Coe, pp. 29, 40 ff. Stanley Hall,
   Adolescence, I, pp. 411 ff.; II, pp. 95 ff.; 288 ff.

   [303] James, Varieties, pp. 178 ff., 195, 196, 201 ff. Starbuck, op.
   cit., pp. 101-117. Alfred Binet, Les A1térations de la Personalité.
   Paris, 1902.

   [304] James, Varieties, pp. 3, 6, 29, 30, 486. Flournoy, Les principes
   de la psych. relig. 1903, pp. 16, 17. Murisier, Les maladies du
   sentiment religieux. Paris, 1903, préface, p. viii.

   [305] James, op. cit., pp. 135, 163, 325, 430.

   [306] James, op. cit., pp. 333, 374, 487, 506, 507.

   [307] James, op. cit., pp. 122, 131-133, 525, 526 Comp. Lecture IV,
   note 44.

   [308] Schian, Der Einfluss der Individiialität auf Glaubensgesinnung
   und Glaubensgestaltung, Zeits. Für Theol. und Kirche, 1897, pp. 513 ff.
   Id., Glaube und Individualität, id. 1898, pp. 170-194. Schian, Der
   Einfluss der Individiialität auf Glaubensgesinnung und
   Glaubensgestaltung, Zeits. Für Theol. und Kirche, 1897, pp. 513 ff.
   Id., Glaube und Individualität, id. 1898, pp. 170-194.

   [309] Pfister, Das Elend unserer wissensch. Glanbenslehre, Schweizer.
   theol. Zeits., 1905, pp. 209 ff. Häberlin, Ist die Theologie eine
   Wissenschaft? ib. 1906, pp. 17 ff. Pfister, Das Elend unserer
   wissensch. Glanbenslehre, Schweizer. theol. Zeits., 1905, pp. 209 ff.
   Häberlin, Ist die Theologie eine Wissenschaft? ib. 1906, pp. 17 ff.

   [310] Herrmann, Christ. Protest. Dogmatik, pp. 583-632 of Die Christl.
   Religion, in Die Kultur der Gegenwart. Id., Die Lage und Aufgabe der
   evang. Dogm. in der Gegenwart, Zeits. Für Theol. und Kirche, 1907, pp.
   315, 351. Id., Die Altorthodoxie und unser Verständuiss der Religion,
   ib. Jan., 1903, pp. 74-77. Comp. C. Wistar Hodge, The Idea of Dogmatic
   Theology, The Princeton Theol. Review, Jan., 1908.

   [311] Comp. Walther, Eine neue Theorie über das Wesen der Religion,
   Religion und Geisteskultur, 1907, 3, pp. 201-217. Bruining, Over de
   Methode van onze Dogmatiek, Teylers Theol. Tijdschr., 1902, 2, pp. 175
   ff.

   [312] By way of example we name: F. J. Schmidt, Zur Wiedergeburt des
   Idealismus. Leipzig, 1908. Dorner, Die Bedeutung der spekulativen
   Theologle für die Gegenwart, Die Studierstube, 1907, pp. 193-207.
   McTaggart, Some Dogmas of Religion, pp. 1-12.

   [313] C. Stumpf, Die Wiedergeburt der Philosophie. Leipzig, 1908,
   especially pp. 23 ff.

   [314] Max Dessoir, Das Doppel-Ich. Leipzig, 1896, p. 80.

   [315] Höffer, Grundlehren der Psychologie. Wien, 1905, p. 108.

   [316] Coe, The Spiritual Life, p. 93.

   [317] Max Dessoir, op. cit., p. 77.

   [318] Möbius; Die Hoffnungslosigkeit aller Psychologie. Halle, 1907, p.
   56.

   [319] Schmidt, Zur Wiedergeburt des Idealismus, p. 96.

   [320] Comp. the pre-existenceism of McTaggart, Some Dogmas of Religion,
   pp. 112 ff. Myers, Human Personality, p. 26.

   [321] Bennett, La société Anglo-américaine pour les recherches
   psychiques. Trad. de M. Sage. Paris, 1904.

   [322] Myers, Human Personality, p. 16.

   [323] As to the dangers for body and soul comp. Zeehandelaar, Het
   spiritistisch Gevaar, Gids, Aug., 1907. Traub, in Kalb, Kirchen und
   Sekten der Gegenwart. Stuttgart, 1905, pp. 437 ff., 448, 460. Coe, The
   Spiritual Life, pp. 169 ff. Joseph Hamilton, The Spirit World, 1906, p.
   264.

   [324] Traub in Kalb, op. cit., p. 449 ff.

   [325] Myers, Human Personality, pp. 1 ff., 8, 24, 340 ff.

   [326] Traub, loc. cit. p. 449 ff.

   [327] Harnack, Die Aufgabe der theol. Fakultäten und die allgemeine
   Religionsgesch., 1901.

   [328] J. Kaftan, Die Wahrheit der christl. Religion. Basel, 1888, pp.
   266 ff., 318, 319.

   [329] Troeltsch, Der Begriff des Glaubens, Religion und Geisteskultur,
   1907, 3, pp. 191-221.

   [330] G. Vos, Christian Faith and the Truthfulness of Bible History,
   The Princeton Theol. Review, July, 1906, pp. 289- 305. Troeltsch,
   Glaube und Geschichte, Religion und Geisteskultur, 1908, pp. 29-39. R.
   Eucken, Hauptprobleme der Religionsphilos. der Gegenwart. Berlin, 1907,
   p. 38: Religion und Geschichte.

   [331] E.g. Ed. von Hartmann, Die Krisis des Christenthums in der
   modernen Theologie. Berlin, 1880, pp. 1 ff.

   [332] W. von Schnehen, Der moderne Jesuskultus. Frankfort a. M., 1906.
   O. Pfleiderer, Der moderne Jesuskultus, Protest. Monatshefte, 1906, No.
   5.

   [333] Henry W. Clark, The Philosophy of Christian Experience.
   Edinburgh, 1905, pp. 75 ff.

   [334] Comp. the well-known saying of Emerson: "The less we have to do
   with our sins the better," and further, Ph. Vivian, The Churches and
   Modern Thought, 1907, pp. 208 ff. ; F. R. Tennant, The Origin and
   Propagation of Sin, Cambridge, 1906. W. R. Inge, Personal Idealism and
   Mysticism, 1907, p. 171. Lodge, The Substance of Faith, pp. 46 ff.
   Comp. John M. Edwards, The Vanishing Sense of Sin, Presb. and Ref.
   Review, Oct., 1899, pp. 606-616.

   [335] Thus Lubbock, Lombroso, Bagehot. Comp. Wynaendts Francken,
   Sociale Vertoogen. Haarlem, 1907, pp. 245 ff.

   [336] Corre in R. P. Mees, Wetenschappelijke Karakterkennis. s
   Gravenh., 1907, p. 63.

   [337] In James, Varieties, p. 63.

   [338] Stanley Hall, Adol., II, p. 72.

   [339] Henry Scott Holland, Vital Values, pp. 107-110.

   [340] Höfler, Grundlehren der Psychologie. 1905, p. 108.

   [341] Joh. Herzog, Der Begriff der Bekehrung. Giessen, 1903, pp. 21 ff.
   Jacques de la Combe, Les nouveau nés de l'Esprit. Paris, 1905, pp. 133
   ff.

   [342] John W. Diggle, Short Studies in Holiness. London, 1900, pp. 47
   ff.

   [343] Starbuck, Psychol. of Religion, pp. 85,108, 158.

   [344] James, Varieties, pp. 78-126, 127-165.

   [345] Joh. Herzog, op. cit., p. 103.

   [346] Ibid., pp. 99 ff.

   [347] James, Varieties, pp. 196 ff., 242-270. Coe, The Spiritual Life,
   p. 144.

   [348] James, op. cit., pp. 178 ff., 201, 203.

   [349] James, op. cit., pp. 78 ff.

   [350] James, op. cit. pp. 162, 374,347, 487.

   [351] Heidelberg Catechism, questions 88-90. Comp. Gennrich, Die Lehre
   von der Wiedergeburt, die Christl. Zentrallehre in dogmengesch. u.
   religionsgeseh. Belenchtang. Leipzig, 1907.

   [352] John W. Diggle, op. cit., pp. 25 ff.

   [353] Stanley Hall, Adolescence, II, p. 86.

   [354] James, Varieties, p. 163.

   [355] See above, note 61.

   [356] James, Varieties, pp. 230 ff., 270, 501, 520 ff

   [357] James, op. cit., pp. 433, 513-525.

   [358] The operation of a supernatural factor in the subliminal
   consciousness is denied by Peirce, Jastrow, Stanley Hall (Adol., I,
   preface, II, p. 43), over against Myers and James.

   [359] Forsyth, The Distinctive Thing in Christian Experience, Hibbert
   Journal, April, 1908, pp. 481 ff.

   [360] Sabatier, Les Religions d'Autorité et la Religion de l'Esprit.
   Paris, 1904.

   [361] Seeberg, Grundwahrheiten der Chr. Religion. Leipzig, 1903, pp.
   11-37.
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 9 - Revelation and Culture


   The well-known preacher, J. Chr. Blumhardt, once said that man must be
   twice converted, first from the natural to the spiritual life, and then
   from the spiritual to the natural. [362] He thus declared, in somewhat
   paradoxical language, a truth which is confirmed by the religious
   experience of every Christian and by the history of Christian piety in
   all ages. The spiritual life, which is from above, strives again after
   what is above; it expresses itself in the sigh of the psalmist,--Whom
   have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire
   beside thee; and it knows no higher desire than to depart and be with
   Christ, which is far better. It was under the influence of this
   inclination of the spiritual life that in the early days of
   Christianity ascetic life arose, and it is for that reason also that it
   has maintained itself till the present day in various pious circles.
   Other causes and considerations have, however, certainly added to that
   influence, which in primitive times gave origin and strength to this
   tendency of spiritual life.

   When Christianity entered into the world, it was immediately called on
   to face a difficult problem. Christianity, which is based on
   revelation, appeared in a world which had long existed and led its own
   life. A society had been formed which was full of intricate interests.
   A state was in existence the citizens of which lived in safety and
   peace. Arts and sciences were practised and had been brought to great
   perfection. Morals and habits had assumed a fixed form. Conquests had
   created a powerful kingdom, and had brought in enormous capital. In a
   word, the Gospel of Christ found a rich natural life, a highly
   developed culture. And thus the question was inevitably raised how the
   relations between the two should be adjusted.

   The different forms in which this question may be put show its
   importance and extent. For the problem always remains the same, whether
   one speaks of the relation between the preaching of the apostles and
   the Greco-Roman world, or between re-creation and creation, the work of
   the Son and the work of the Father, the kingdom of heaven and the
   kingdoms of the earth, sabbath- and week-days, Christianity and
   humanism, church and state, faith and science, theology and philosophy,
   authority and reason, the religious and empirical world-view, heaven
   and earth, divine gifts and human labor, revelation and culture. The
   problem which is present in all these forms of expression belongs not
   to a single period, but has been in order all through the ages, and
   will remain so till the return of Christ. And it does not belong to
   scientific thought alone, but forces itself upon every man in his every
   day life. All tendencies which present themselves in life and thought
   can be described and estimated from the standpoint they take respecting
   this principial question. Even systems which have broken with all
   religion and Christianity are compelled, by the force of reality, to
   take it into account. For though thousands exert themselves to set our
   present-day culture free from all the past, and to establish it on a
   new scientific foundation, in reality all our institutions of family
   and society and state are still resting on Christian principles, and
   all our morals and habits are still pervaded by the Christian spirit.

   Therefore it is not to be wondered at that the first Christians did not
   solve this world-historical problem satisfactorily, and did not attain
   unanimity in the position which they adopted. There were those who
   looked so kindly upon culture that they failed to do justice to the
   rights and requirements of the Christian confession. There were others
   who turned their backs on the entire culture of the time, and sought
   their strength in renouncing it. The early Christians were nevertheless
   not essentially ascetics. They firmly believed that the earth is the
   Lord's, and the fulness thereof ; and they considered themselves the
   new humanity, in which Jew and Greek found their unity and destination.
   [363] But the then existing culture was so intimately connected with
   all kinds of heathen practices that Christians could take little part
   in it without denying their faith, and needed to content themselves
   with practising the more passive virtues of Christian morality. In a
   world such as Paul describes in the first chapter of his epistle to the
   Romans there was, for a small, weak body of believers, no other than a
   negative position possible.

   But this negative position nevertheless brought serious dangers in the
   long run. When in the second century dualistic and ascetic Gnosticism
   spread in its varied forms over the Roman empire, it did not fail of
   influence over many Christians also. The ascetic inclination which thus
   appeared was in the third and fourth centuries increased by the
   worldliness of the church, and strengthened by the infiltration of
   Stoic and Neoplatonic elements of thought. [364] From that time onward
   many sought solitude in order to pass their life in penitence, or to
   devote it to works of mercy. This anchorite life in the West underwent
   later an important modification, and was made use of by the church for
   all kinds of moral ends,--land-development and agriculture, science and
   art, the spreading of the gospel and the expansion of the church. But
   the church also felt the influence of this recognition of the monastic
   life, and developed a double way to the attainment of the ideal of
   Christian perfection by introducing the distinction between precepts
   and counsels. Perfection, to be sure, is the goal for every Christian,
   as much for the laity as for the clergy and the monk. But the vow of
   poverty, chastity and obedience is nevertheless the shorter and safer
   way to that goal. Ascetic, life is a specially meritorious striving
   after perfection; monastic life sets apart a special class of men, and
   is a praiseworthy form of Christian life; marriage, family, social
   vocation, service of the state, property, and riches are not in
   themselves sinful but place many obstacles in the way of the religious
   life; he who abstains from them acts better, and becomes the religious
   man par excellence. [365]

   Though this asceticism is intimately associated with the doctrine and
   the life of the Roman Church, it has nevertheless, from the Reformation
   to the present day, exercised also a strong attractive power over many
   churches and sects in Protestantism. Anabaptism certainly cannot be
   fully explained from the monastic orders and sects of the Middle Ages;
   for whence came then its schism with the Roman Church, and its strong
   opposition to its hierarchy and forms of worship? But it adopted the
   old ascetic ideal, and tried to realize it by a radical reformation in
   the circle of believers. This reformation ended in separation,--
   separation, namely, between church and world, Christian and civil life,
   re-creation and creation, Spirit and Word, New and Old Testament; in a
   word, between the heavenly substance, which Christ brought with him and
   communicates to his believers in regeneration, and the earthly
   substance, which we receive from Adam in the natural birth. The same
   dualism has in a modified form since continued to work in many devout
   circles, and has even received more lately strong support from all
   those persons and schools which ascribe to original Christianity an
   ascetic ideal of life. These, however, are themselves divided again
   into two parties.

   The first group is formed by those who, by inclination or education, by
   their own experience or through exterior influences, have learned to
   know the value of the ascetic life, and therefore look with more or
   less of grief and ofeence on present-day culture. There are not a few
   who, in comparing the life of our time with that of Jesus, discover no
   connection or congruity, but only contrast and opposition. If, they
   say, Jesus, who condemns the powerful and rich, despises earthly
   treasures, feels compassion for the sick and poor, and seeks out the
   publican and sinner, is right, then present-day society, with its
   mammonism and capitalism, with its self-conceit and deification of
   power, is quite wrong. They demand of Christians, If you confess Jesus
   as the Son of God, and accept his word as divine truth, why do you not
   follow his example and walk in his footsteps? Why do you live in
   magnificent homes, clothed in purple and fine linen, and fare
   sumptuously every day, and gather treasures which are corrupted by moth
   and rust? And why do you not give your possessions away, feed the
   hungry, relieve the thirsty, shelter the homeless, clothe the naked,
   visit the sick and in prison, proclaim the gospel to the poor? They
   explain to us and figure out how Jesus if he lived now would behave,
   and what would be his conduct towards the press and politics, towards
   the market and exchange, towards the factory and parliament. [366] And
   some have taken the matter so seriously to heart that they have sought
   to put this moral ideal into actual practice. Tolstoi, for example,
   constructed a wholly passive ethics, from the commandment in the sermon
   on the mount, to resist not evil. The source of all misery is found,
   they declare, in society, with its lies and pretences; in the church,
   with her absurd dogmas; in the state, with its law and war; in the
   whole civil life of our time, with its marriage, castes, conventional
   forms, corrupt atmosphere, tobacco and alcohol. And escape from these
   miseries, we are told, is possible only if we turn our backs on all
   these institutions, return to nature, abandon altogether all force and
   justice, all wrath and punishment, and live again like children, simply
   and uprightly. Then the broken harmony between need and satisfaction
   will be restored, and happiness and peace return. [367]

   On the other side are those who agree, no doubt, that original
   Christianity bore an ascetic character, but draw therefrom just the
   opposite conclusion, namely, that Christianity has had its day, and can
   no longer live with our present-day culture. In the estimate of the
   person of Jesus an important change has slowly taken place. After
   Rationalism had rejected the church doctrine concerning the person of
   Christ, men such as Strauss and Renan, Schenkel and Keim and Holtzmann
   took indeed a humanitarian view of the life of Jesus. But in their view
   Jesus, though not the Son of God, was still the true, ideal man, who
   established the pure religion by his word and deed, free from all
   sacerdotalism and ceremonial worship, who purified morals from all
   legalism, who as a human man shared in all the pleasures of life, and
   presented a moral ideal which deserves our admiration and imitation
   to-day. [368]

   But in these last days, especially since the investigations of
   Baldensperger and Johannes Weiss, [369] an entirely new conception has
   in the case of many taken the place of this humanitarian idea.
   Humanitarian traits are not indeed entirely lacking from the figure of
   Jesus; yet according to the description given of him by the Synoptic
   Gospels he was a totally different kind of man. He was not a quiet,
   pious man, and not a philosophic teacher of virtue. but a prophet, an
   enthusiast, a fanatic, who lived under the impression of the speedy
   advent of the kingdom of God, and therefore exhorted his contemporaries
   to faith and conversion. As a man he was not nearly so great as the
   liberal theology has represented him. Although he was characterized by
   a praiseworthy willingness to help all misery, he was nevertheless a
   limited and superstitious man, believed in evil spirits and eternal
   punishment, was subject to visions and hallucinations, showed traits
   even of an hereditary epilepsy, paranoia, and finally attempted, when
   his preaching received no acceptance, to gain the victory by an act of
   force. His doctrine contained nothing new, but joined itself to the
   ideas and expectations of his time; his notion of the kingdom of God
   was not that of a moral community,but bore an exclusively
   eschatological character; and his ethics acquired, under Essenic, or
   even under Buddhistic, influences, an ascetic color. Perhaps he was
   originally an Aryan, or perhaps even he never existed, and his figure
   is the creation of one or another of the sects produced by the
   commotions of the age. [370] In any case his view of the world and life
   is not suitable for our time and circumstances. When he pronounces his
   woe on the rich, esteems occupation with earthly affairs an obstacle to
   the heavenly vocation, recommends the unmarried condition, and takes no
   thought at all of political and social life, he can be no example for
   us, and his ethics can supply us with no standard. [371] Nor does this
   opposition to Christian ethics concern subordinate points, but their
   kernel and essence. Christian ethics have laid to their charge legalism
   and heteronomy, seeking for reward and transcendent eudaemonism,
   withdrawal from the world and contempt of all culture, and especially
   of the senses and marriage. Nietzsche has endeavored, therefore, to
   reverse all its values. Instead of the morals of slaves which Jews and
   Christians have introduced, he wished to restore to honor the original
   morals of free men; his system may be called a logical aristocratic
   anarchism. [372]

   If we are to speak of the relation which Christianity bears to culture,
   we must first of all give a clear account of what we understand by
   culture, and of precisely the kind of culture Christianity is to form a
   contrast to. The word "culture," which has come into use especially
   since the eighteenth century, along with other terms, such as
   civilization, enlightenment, development, education, indicates
   generally cultivation, improvement, and always presupposes an object
   which must be improved. This object may be indicated generally by the
   name of nature, for it always consists of something not made by man,
   but ofiered to him by creation. Culture in the broadest sense thus
   includes all the labor which human power expends on nature. But this
   nature is twofold; it includes not only the whole visible world of
   phenomena which is outside man, but also, in a wider sense, man himself
   ; not his body alone, but his soul also. The faculties and powers which
   man possesses have not been acquired by him, but are given to him by
   God; they are a gift of nature, and these gifts are a means for
   cultivating the external world, as well as an object which must be
   cultivated. Thus there are two great circles of culture. To the first
   belong all those activities of man for the production and distribution
   of material goods, such m agriculture, cattle-rearing, industry, and
   trade. And the second circle includes all that labor whereby man
   realizes objectively his ideals of the true, the good, and the
   beautiful, by means of literature and science, justice and statecraft,
   works of beauty and art, and at the same time works out his own
   development and civilization. [373]

   Such a culture has existed at all times, from the moment when man
   appeared on the earth and sought satisfaction of his manifold needs by
   labor. And from its first origin this culture has been closely
   connected with religion; in all ages and among all peoples these two
   are found together, and go forward hand in hand. It was not till the
   eighteenth century that culture was raised to a power which emancipated
   itself from the Christian religion and the whole ancient world-view,
   and sought to become an absolutely new, modern culture. Nobody,
   therefore, can declare that culture as such stands in contrast with
   religion, for all the preceding centuries raise a sharp protest against
   such an assertion. It can, at the most, be contended that our
   specifically present-day culture is in conflict with religion and
   Christianity.

   But before this can be proved an exact definition should first be given
   of what is meant by modern culture. Immense difficulties present
   themselves when this is attempted, and the hope of attaining a clear
   and generally accepted conception seems illusive. In the first place,
   modern culture in some respects, and according to some estimates, forms
   an antithesis to that of former centuries. But this antithesis is not
   absolute. We are all, whether we will or not, standing on the shoulders
   of former generations. All our society, family, labor, vocation,
   state-craft, legislation, morals, habits, arts, sciences, are permeated
   still with the Christian spirit. The opponents of Christianity know
   this very well, and their antagonism against Christianity is so strong
   just because the Christian spirit shows itself all along the line,
   leavens everything, and exerts its influence even upon them
   notwithstanding themselves. Thought has often to a great extent
   emancipated itself from Christianity ; but life goes quietly on, and is
   continually led from the sources of the past. Modern culture would like
   to be absolutely modern, but it is not, and cannot be so; it is a
   product of, and thus also a moment in, history.

   But even if we do not take into account this alliance with the past,
   and wish to judge modern culture on its own merits, we do not obtain
   the unity and clearness which are necessary in order to form an exact
   conception of it. For modem culture is an abstract name for many
   phenomena, and forms no unity at all. Not only are there innumerable
   factors which ]have contributed to its development, but it is also in
   the highest degree divided in itself. Everywhere, and in all domains,
   in politics, social economy, art, science, morals, instruction,
   education, there are parties, tendencies, and schools which stand in
   opposition to one another; the realms of justice and culture, church
   and state, faith and science, capital and labor, nomism and antinomism,
   combat each other, and proceed on different principles. Monism no doubt
   seeks here also for an abstract unity; but it sacrifices the diversity
   and richness of life to a theory, and blinds itself to the sharp
   contrasts which reality exhibits. It is, therefore, an empty phrase to
   say that modern culture, is at strife with Christianity and religion;
   as to some phenomena it may be said with some appearance of right, but
   to others it is not in the least applicable.

   Finally, we should consider that modern culture in the sense of an
   extensive group of various phenomena is not a finished thing; it is not
   complete, and not objectively placed before us; it has existed but a
   short time in the past, and is still developing from day to day. We are
   thus in the middle of it, and live in a "transition period,"--an
   expression which says little of itself, because all time is a time of
   transition and change, but yet here embodies an old and well-known
   truth, in opposition to all who try to separate the present from the
   past and the future and make it absolute. Therefore nobody can say
   whither modern culture will lead us; one can surmise, guess, speculate,
   but there is no certainty at all. As to the phenomena which now already
   present themselves, and are included under the name of modern culture,
   the estimates of their value vary very much. There are some of them
   which are approved by nobody. Who, for example, defends the
   materialistic tone, the mammonism, the alcoholism, the prostitution so
   prevalentinthesedays? Who is blind to the defects which attach to our
   modern culture or to the dangers to which it exposes us? Each one is
   thus obliged, whatever religious or philosophical standpoint he may
   occupy, to apply a standard in his judgment of modern culture; he
   cannot accept it in its entirety; whether he will or not, he goes to
   work eclectically. and will approve some phenomena as in agreement with
   his own world-view, and dissent strongly from others in the name of
   that same world-view. And as to the future, the estimation of modern
   culture will depend upon the direction in which it moves, which nobody
   can foresee or foretell. Men are alternately panegyrists and grumblers,
   and the same man plays in turn the one or the other role according to
   what pleases or vexes him.

   The assertion that modern culture is in conflict with Christianity is
   thus a meaningless phrase. Who ventures to assert that marriage and
   family, state and society, art and science, trade and industry as such
   are condemned and opposed by Christianity? At the most such an
   assertion may be made as to the manner and the direction in which these
   institutions and activities at the present time are developing or are
   carried on. This is no doubt what is meant. There are phenomena upon
   which a very different estimate is placed by many of our contemporaries
   from that placed upon them by the gospel of Christ. But it is mere
   presumption for them to identifv their judgment with modern culture
   itself and to reject the whole of Christianity in her name. It may be
   explainable, for it makes an impression to say that culture, and
   science and state have antiquated Christianity; but it is not
   excusable, for it places the antithesis in a false light, brings
   confusion into the ideas, and is injurious to both Christianity and
   culture. If we search out what in modern culture is antithetically
   opposed to Christianity and then reduce this to a principle, we shall
   arrive at the same idea which was found above to be irreconcilable in
   it with Christian faith. The complaint which many make against
   Christianity, its doctrine of faith and life, is based on its so-called
   heteronomy and transcendence. There is in modern society a striving
   after independence and freedom, such as was unknown in earlier times,
   or at least not recognized in the same degree. We meet with this among
   all men, and in every position and circle of life ; science, art,
   industry, trade, labor, capital, all desire to govern themselves, and
   to be obedient only to the laws which are laid down for them by their
   own mode of life. This striving in itself is not illegitimate or
   unjustifiable, for men are not machines, but free-thinking and
   free-living rational and moral beings. But it undeniably often assumes
   a character which interdicts existence, and the right of existence, to
   all objective authority, to all external law, to every destiny of man
   which passes beyond this earthly life. The legitimate, struggle for
   independence and liberty is transformed into a theoretically proclaimed
   and practically applied autonomy and anarchy, and these naturally place
   themselves in opposition to Christianity. For Christianity comes into
   collision with such an autonomy, as does every religion. It asserts all
   possible freedom and independence for man, for it teaches his creation
   after the image and likeness of God ; but it maintains at the same time
   that man is a creature, and thus can never become or be absolutely
   independent; it joins him to God, and binds him to his word and will.
   When the apologists of modern culture accuse Christianity of legalism,
   heteronomy, transcendent eudaemonism, etc., these are words which
   intentionally represent the matter in an unjust way and rouse prejudice
   against Christianity; but the matter itself is beyond dispute. It is
   supernaturalism, which in point of fact forms the point of controversy
   between Christianity and many panegyrists of modern culture.

   The Christian religion cannot abandon this supernaturalism without
   annihilating itself. There is even no religion thinkable or possible
   without belief in a supernatural power. For all religion implies that
   God and the world are distinct, and that God can work in the world,
   enter into fellowship with man, and by that fellowship can raise him
   above, and maintain him against, the world. Because Christianity is the
   pure and true religion, it is not less, but more supernatural than all
   other religions. For these religions dissolve the godhead into all
   kinds of natural powers, see everywhere in the world only the
   influences of good or evil spirits, and cannot therefore bring man into
   a true fellowship with God. But according to the Christian confession
   the one, all-wise, all-good, and all-powerful will of God lies behind
   the phenomena of nature and the events of history, and this will breaks
   down all resistance in the world and humanity and leads them in the
   face of their opposition to salvation and glory. This is the idea which
   underlies the whole of Scripture; on it Moses and the prophets, Christ
   and the apostles take their stand; the Christian church is built on the
   great facts of creation, incarnation, and resurrection; the gospel as
   it is preached by Jesus himself in his earthly life embodies this same
   counsel and will of God.

   It is not open to doubt that it was not as a poet or philosopher, as a
   scholar or artist, as a politician or social reformer, that Jesus
   appeared among the people of Israel. What is new and peculiar in the
   person of Christ consists in this--that he was more than Solomon and
   Jonab, or one of the prophets; that he is the Messiah, the Son of God,
   sent by God to seek the lost, and save sinners, to proclaim the gospel
   to the poor, and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, to declare
   the Father, and to reveal his name. What he came to bring to earth is
   therefore a blessing of unspeakable value, namely, the kingdom of
   heaven, not as a community which could be founded by human endeavor,
   but as a heavenly, divine treasure, embracing righteousness, salvation
   from corruption, eternal life, and obtainable only through
   regeneration, faith, and conversion.

   We may differ on the question whether Jesus was right in this preaching
   of the gospel, and whether the knowledge of God and eternal life mean
   the highest good for man. There are many at least who deny and
   controvert this, and seek to set Christian morals aside in favor of the
   ethics of individualistic or social eudeamonism. Now Christianity
   leaves full room for the ethical culture of our own personality in the
   midst of society, but there is a notable contrast between the two
   systems of ethics, which cannot be disguised or obliterated. Christian
   morals lays stress upon sin and grace, the ethics of evolution
   proclaims the natural goodness of man; the former regards man as a lost
   being, who needs salvation, the latter sees in him the one creature who
   can reform and save the, world; the first speaks of reconciliation and
   regeneration, the second of development and education; for the one the
   new Jerusalem comes down from God out of heaven, for the other it comes
   slowly into being by human eflort; there divine action moves history,
   here evolution is the all-directing process. [374]

   But this is certain,--if the gospel is true, then it carries with it
   its own standard for the valuation of all culture. Jesus has shown this
   distinctly in the attitude which he adopted towards all earthly things
   and natural relations. He was no ascetic: he considered food and drink,
   covering and clothing, as good gifts of the Heavenly Father, and was
   present at wedding-feasts and dinners. And he was as little an
   epicurean, who thinks only of himself and cares only for himself ; he
   was continually moved with compassion for all kinds of misery. Neither
   shallow optimism nor weak pessimism finds in him an ally. But although
   he did not despise natural institutions and blessings, still he does
   not undertake to estimate them as such or to determine their inherent
   value. That was not the work which the Father had given him to do. He
   accepted the social and political conditions as they were, made no
   ondeavor to reform them, and confined himself exclusively to setting
   the value which they possessed for the kingdom of heaven. And in that
   connection he said, that nothing a man possesses in this world--food or
   drink, covering or clothing, marriage or family, vocation or position,
   riches or honor--can be compared with that pearl of great price which
   he alone can present. It must all be abandoned, if necessary, for the
   gospel's sake, and the treasures of earth are often a great obstacle to
   entrance into the kingdom of God. In a word, agriculture, industry,
   commerce, science, art, the family, society, the state, etc.,--the
   whole of culture--may be of great value in itself, but whenever it is
   thrown into the balance against the kingdom of heaven, it loses all its
   significance. The gaining of the whole world avails a man nothing if he
   loses his own soul; there is nothing in creation which he can give in
   exchange for his soul.

   The truth of this declaration can be denied only by the man who shuts
   his eyes to the awful seriousness of real life. Not only does Scripture
   teach that man has lost himself, and may lose himself more and more,
   but our own experience also testifies to this. Man is lost before God,
   for he does not give himself to God, and does not serve him in love,
   but flies from him, and hides himself from his presence. He is lost for
   his neighbor, for he abandons him in his need, and sacrifices him to
   his own interests in the struggle for existence. He is also lost for
   himself, for there is a cleft between his being and his consciousness,
   a dissension between his duty and his desire, between his conscience
   and his will. That is the. reason why we seek diversions in the world;
   instead of re-collecting our thoughts we scatter them, and in
   proportion as with our representations and imaginations, with our
   thoughts and desires, with our inclinations and passions, we move in
   various directions, we lose more and more the centre of our own life.
   Man is ever losing himself more and more. No treasures are able to
   compensate for the spiritual loss of our soul, for when the soul is
   lost all is lost. Nothing fills the emptiness, nothing replaces the
   loss, nothing covers the poverty. For this reason Christ brought the
   kingdom of heaven to earth; he implants it in the hearts of men, and
   thereby gives them back to God, and their neighbor, and also to
   themselves. Peace with God carries with it for man peace with himself
   also; the cleft between his conscience and his will is filled up; the
   discord between his being and consciousness is reconciled; his soul
   with all its powers is brought back to unity in the fear of God's name.
   His duty becomes his choice, and his choice his privilege. Conversion
   is a turning back to God, but at the same time a coming to one's self.
   [375]

   If this is the content of the gospel,--namely, that God maintains and
   renews the ethical ideal of man by his merciful and powerful will in
   the way of forgiveness and conversion,--then the reality of this
   content may indeed he denied, but it is inconceivable that such a
   gospel should be opposed to culture. Much rather is it, if we may so
   say, the most important element of all culture,--principle and goal of
   what all culture in the genuine sense of the word strives after, and
   must strive after. There are indeed many who think that the development
   and progress of the human race principally or exclusively consist in
   the improvement of material welfare. But this materialistic view of
   life is strongly contradicted by man's rational and moral nature. Heart
   and conscience witness to us all that man cannot live by bread alone;
   "life is not the highest good." It is not religion only, but
   philosophy, which has at all times proclaimed this. Its chief
   representatives have declared, without exception, that the destiny of
   man and humanity must bear an ethical character, and that that ethical
   character must take the first place; the good is the same as the
   divine, and is raised high above the sensual world; ethics goes further
   than Physics. So powerfully does this idea of the value of the good
   work in the heart of man that material culture, which began to flourish
   in the last century and for some time cast a certain glamour over
   materialism, soon gave way to a strong reaction in life, and by the
   disappointment which it brought caused the heart of man to thirst again
   after idealism and mysticism. Even Haeckel has felt this influence; he
   has continued, indeed, to call his world-view materialistic, but he has
   raised his monism to the rank of religion, and regards as its kernel
   the worshipping of the true, the good, and the beautiful. [376]

   Now as soon as culture wishes to be ethical culture, not in name, but
   in fact and in truth, it loses all ground for accusing the gospel of
   enmity against it, and it cannot do itself greater service than by
   honoring the gospel as the chief and highest power making for culture.
   It cannot bring a valid objection even against the supernatural
   elements which are included in the gospel, because as ethical culture
   it rests on metaphysics, and on deeper introspection proves to be based
   indeed on revelation. Thus, it is historically proved that culture has
   not had an independent origin and development, but from its first
   commencement is bound up with religion in the closest way. The higher
   elements of culture especially, such as science, art, and morality, are
   indebted to religion for their origin and growth. The oldest science of
   which we have knowledge, in Greece, Egypt, Babylon, and India, was
   theology; philosophy originated in religion, and only later brought
   forth various particular sciences. [377] Art among the people of old
   bore a specially religious character; [378] and among all men of
   ancient times we meet the tendency to regard moral laws as divine
   commandments. [379] Science, art, and morality are cognate in origin,
   essence, and meaning with religion, for they are all based on the
   belief in an ideal world, the reality of which is assured and
   guaranteed only by religion; that is, from God's side by revelation.
   [380]

   No doubt an endeavor has recently been made to make ethical culture
   independent of religion. [381] But this attempt is still new and
   limited to a small circle, and it probably will have little success. It
   is a dishonor for religion, to be sure, to serve as a police agent, or
   as a watchdog of morality. Religion and morality are not bound together
   in this external and mechanical way, but they are in alliance with each
   other organically, by reason of their inner nature. The love of God
   includes that of our neighbor, and the latter is reflected in the
   former. For good presents itself to us all from our earliest youth in
   the form of a commandment. Neither autonomic nor evolutionary ethics
   can make any change here. The child does not gradually create moral
   laws by instinct or reflection, but is brought up in a circle which has
   possessed those laws long before, and which imposes them on the child
   with authority. [382] As we look around us among the nations and
   examine the history of mankind, we are witnesses of much vacillation
   and variety, but a fund of moral laws is always and everywhere found.
   [383] Every man acknowledges that in morality a law is laid upon him
   which obliges him to obedience in his conscience. If this be so, then
   in this wonderf ul phenomenon we have to do either with an illusion, a
   dream, an imagination of mankind, or with a reality which is raised
   high above the empirical world and fills us with deepest reverence. For
   if the moral law or the ideal good indeed exists around and above us,
   then it must he grounded in the world-power and be one with the
   Godhead. God alone is the source, and thus also the guarantee of the
   reality of the moral law, of the objectivity of duty, the ethical
   vocation and destiny of man. In so far all ethics is also heteronomous.

   Philosophy, particularly since Kant, has strongly controverted this
   heteronomy, and it is right in its opposition if this heteronomy be
   thought of as a moral law, which comes to us from without, is forcibly
   imposed upon us from above, and finds no echo in our own spirit. Such a
   merely external law may be, perhaps, a natural law, but in no case can
   it he a moral law. Such a view of the heteronomy of law might be
   acceptable, accordingly, to those moralists who think that man was
   originally an animal, and has become man by external influences, either
   by the pressure of society or by the discipline of the state; but it
   has no attractions to, and is quite superfluous to, Christian ethics,
   which is based on Holy Scripture. For Scripture teaches that man was
   originally created after God's image, and bore the moral law in the
   inmost recesp,es of his heart; that even in the state of sin he is
   still bound to the ideal world by his reason and conscience; and that
   the dissension which now exists between duty and inclination, according
   to all experience, is, in principle, reconciled in regeneration and
   conversion. As Jesus said that it was his meat to do the will of his
   Heavenly Father, so Paul testified, that he delighted in the law of God
   after the inward man; and all sincere Christians humbly speak the same
   words.

   Autonomous morality and ethical culture cannot raise objection to this
   doctrine, for it is the ultimate fulfilment of what they themselves
   mean and wish. It is rightly said that good must be the inner
   inclination of man. Good does not in a social-eudeamonistic way borrow
   its standard and nature from the consequences of human actions, for
   these consequences are external, often accidental, and almost always
   incalculable. Man is not good by the operation and fruit of his
   actions, but the actions are good because, and in so far as, they are a
   revelation and expression of the good will of man. There is therefore,
   according to Kant, nothing in the world which can be considered as good
   without limitation except a good will. The philosopher therein simply
   repeated in other words what Jesus had said: A good tree alone can
   bring forth good fruit, and a man can only bring forth good things out
   of the good treasure of his heart. [384] This declaration of Scripture
   even avoids the one-sidedness of Kant, who makes it seem as if good can
   be achieved only if it is accomplished by the intellectual sense of
   duty alone without the co-operation of the heart. In place of this
   intellectual rigorism, which always produces by reaction emotional
   romanticism, Christian ethics maintains that the whole man must be good
   in intellect and will, heart and conscience. To do good is a duty and a
   desire, a task and a privilege, and thus the work of love. Love is
   therefore the fulfilling of the law.

   But again, if this is the kernel of Christian morality, with what right
   can the charge of enmity against culture be brought against it? For it
   is it alone which makee; true culture possible, and places it on a firm
   foundation. Ethical culture rightly declares that man must be good
   internally, in the roots of his being, in the core of his will; but it
   feels itself obliged, after honest consideration, to confess that such
   men do not exist, and that it cannot create them. All culture, whatever
   significance it may have, just as all education, civilization,
   development, is absolutely powerless to renew the inner man. For it
   always works externally, and does not penetrate into the heart of man.
   It may fashion, prune, restrain, bridle, form; it may force life to run
   in harness; it may cultivate legalism and even morality. But that is
   nevertheless not the good, the genuine, inner, spiritual good; it is no
   true Sittlichkeit. As long as ethical culture thinks itself sufficient,
   it is exposed to serious danger. For adhering firmly to its ideal, and
   esteeming itself able to realize it, it will hedge man about on all
   sides, and lay upon him command on command, rule upon rule; or it will,
   after many endeavors, convinced of its powerlessness, abandon the
   height of the moral ideal, give the leadership to the will, and permit
   every one to live himself out in accordance with his own character.
   Phariseeism and Sadduceeism are no uncommon phenomena on philosophical
   and practical ground. Thus the true, and the good, and the beautiful,
   which ethical culture means and seeks, can only come to perfection when
   the absolute good is at the same time the almighty, divine will, which
   not only prescribes the good in the moral law, but also works it
   effectually in man himself. The heteronomy of law and the autonomy of
   man are reconciled only by this theonomy.

   Ethical culture accordingly can neither in the source nor in the
   essence of morals be independent of the metaphysical foundation ; and
   finally much less can it clisponse with it in the definition of the
   goal of morality. [385] As long as it remains diesseitig, it cannot
   give to the question, What may be the goal of the moral action? any
   other answer than that this is to be found either in the individual man
   or in humanity. In the first instance, whether it wishes to do so or
   not, it sacrifices the community to the individual, and in the second
   it sacrifices the individual to the community. But nature itself
   distinctly proves that neither of these may be lowered to a mere means
   to the other; the individual and the community are not subordinate to
   one another, but coordinate with each other. If both are thus to
   maintain their independence and be brought into agreement, this can be
   accomplished only when men rise above both, and posit a goal for moral
   action outside of both. Another consideration enforces the necessity of

   Jenseitigkeit still more strongly. Neither humanity nor the individual
   can have the origin or the goal in itself. There was a time when they
   did not exist; they are transitory, and near their end. In the universe
   they occupy a temporary, transitory place; they are a means, and not an
   end, and certainly no final end, because they are not their own origin.

   But if neither the individual man nor humanity can be the final end,
   because they are creatures, then the question is unavoidable what this
   final end is. Ethical morality, which reflects, must go beyond this
   world of visible things; it cannot maintain its standpoint within
   humanity. But then there are only two paths open, --either humanity,
   with all its culture, is a means for the unconscious, unreasonable, and
   purposeless world-power, or it is a means for the glorifying of God.
   The first can, and will, and may never be believed by humanity, for it
   is tantamount to suicide. The second, that man and humanity exist for
   God's sake, from him, and through him, and to him, upholds their moral,
   spiritual value far above the whole inanimate universe, and brings
   indeed the true, the good, and the beautiful to eternal triumph. This
   alone gives peace to the understanding and rest to the heart. Ethical
   culture must be a philosophy of revelation or it cannot exist.

   Now the peculiarity of all revelation is, that while it posits
   principles and lays foundations, it charges men with the application of
   these principles and the building upon these foundations. Creation was
   the first revelation, the principle and foundation of all revelation ;
   but, on the other hand, every revelation is also a creation, a divine
   work, in order to accomplish something new, to make a new commencement,
   and to unlock the possibility of a new development. From nothing,
   nothing could begin; all evolution supposes a germ; all becoming
   proceeds from being. Thought and speech, life and history, science and
   art, have all had their commencement in principles which are laid down
   by God's creative power. The whole special revelation which has its
   centre in Christ has no other content and no other meaning than to lay
   this firm foundation whereon the new humanity can be built. Christ is
   the head, and the church is his body; Christ is the cornerstone, and
   believers are the living stones of the divine building. Nothing can be,
   changed in this foundation; it is laid, and remains for all time. But
   when it is laid both in deed and word, in nature and history, in the
   world of being and consciousness, then the independent work of the
   church begins with the development of doctrine and life, of
   organization and worship. Revelation from God's side always opens a way
   for "discovery" by man. [386]

   This is applicable also to culture. In the measure that it considers
   more deeply its own essence, it arrives at the discovery that it is
   rooted in metaphysics and founded on revelation. It rests on data which
   God himself established, and is certain of its rights and value only
   because God is creator, regenerator, and consummator of all things. The
   creation of the first man shows this; the subduing of the earth, that
   is, the whole of culture, is given to him, and can be given to him,
   only because he is created after God's image; man can be ruler of the
   earth only because and in so far m he is a servant, a son of God. But
   man has not continued to build on this foundation; the development of
   the human race has not been normal; there has always on a time of
   flourishing followed a time of decay and ruin for culture. Then God
   takes, as it were, the development into his own hands by raising up
   great men, by causing new races to appear, by creating events of a
   world-wide significance; he demolishes the sinful development and
   raises culture from its abasement, and opens out to it a new road. This
   is particularly manifest among the Israelites, in Abraham, Moses, the
   prophets, and finally in Christ. Culture, therefore, sinks into the
   background; man must first become again a son of God before he can be,
   in a genuine sense, a cultured being. Israel was not a people of art
   and science, but a people of religion; and Christ is exclusively a
   preacher of the gospel, the saviour of the world, and founder of the
   kingdom of heaven. With this kingdom nothing can be compared; he who
   will enter into it must renounce all things; the cross is the
   condemnation of the world and the destruction of all sinful culture.

   But it is wrong to educe from this pronouncement that the gospel must
   be at enmity with culture. For although the gospel limits itself to the
   proclaiming of the requirements and laws of the kingdom, it cannot be
   set free from the organic alliance in which it always appears in
   history and Scripture. For, in the first place, Christ does not stand
   at the commencement, but in the middle of history. He presupposes the
   work of the Father in creation and in providence, especially also in
   the guidance of Israel; yea, the gospel asserts that Christ is the same
   who as the Word made all things and was the life and the light of all
   men. As he was then in his earthly life neither a politician nor a
   social reformer, neither a man of science nor a man of art, but simply
   lived and worked aa the Son of God and Servant of the Lord, and thus
   has only been a preacher and founder of the kingdom of heaven, he
   cannot have come to annihilate the work of the Father, or his own work
   in creation and providence, but rather to save it from the destruction
   which has been brought about by sin. According to his own word, he came
   not to judge the world, but to save it.

   Secondly, for the same reason, the preaching of Jesus cannot be
   separated from what has followed after the cross. The gospel goes back
   in the past to creation, and even to eternity, and stretches forward to
   the farthest future. Christ, who as the Word created all things, and
   bore the cross as the Servant of the Lord, is the same who rose again
   and ascended into heaven, and will return as Judge of the quick and the
   dead. In his exaltation he regains what he denied himself in his
   humiliation; but now it is freed from guilt, purified from stain,
   reborn and renewed by the Spirit. The resurrection is the fundamental
   restoration of all culture. Christ himself took again the body in which
   he bore on the cross the sin of the world; he has received all power in
   heaven and earth, and is exalted by God himself to his right hand as
   Lord and Christ. The demand which has been made from many sides of
   late, as earlier by many sects and monastic orders, that we should
   return from the Pauline and Johannine Christ to the so-called
   historical Jesus, the gospel of the Synopties, the sermon on the mount,
   and the parables, is not only impracticable, because in the whole New
   Testament the same dead and risen Christ meets us, but mutilates the
   gospel, leads to asceticism, and creates an irreconcilable dissension
   between creation and re-creation, Old and New Testament, nature and
   grace, the Creator of the world and the Father of Christ.

   Such a dissension may be proper to Gnosticism and Manichaeism, and also
   to the Buddhism nowadays admired by so many, but it is in direct
   contradiction to Christianity. The truth and value of Christianity
   certainly do not depend on the fruits which it has borne for
   civilization and culture: it has its own independent value--it is the
   realization of the kingdom of God on earth; and it does not make its
   truth depend, after a utilitarian or pragmatical fashion, on what men
   here, have accomplished with the talents entrusted to them. The gospel
   of Christ promises righteousness and peace and joy, and has fulfilled
   its promise if it gives these things. Christ did not portray for his
   disciples a beautiful future in this world, but prepared them for
   oppression and persecution. But, nevertheless, the kingdom of heaven,
   while a pearl of great price, is also a leaven which permeates the
   whole, of the, meal; godliness is profitable unto all things, having
   the promise of the life which now is, and that which is to come. The
   gospel gives us a standard by which we can judge of phenoinena and
   events; it is an absolute measure which enables us to determine the
   value of the present life; it is a guide to show us the way in the
   labyrinth of the present world; it raises us above time, and teaches us
   to view all things from the standpoint of eternity. Where could we find
   such a standard and guide if the everlasting gospel did not supply it?
   But it is opposed to nothing that is pure and good and lovely. It
   condemns sin always and everywhere; but it cherishes marriage and the
   family, society and the state, nature and history, science and art. In
   spite of the many faults of its confessors, it has been in the course
   of the ages a rich benediction for all these institutions and
   accomplishments. The Christian nations are still the guardians of
   culture. And the word of Paul is still true that all is ours if we are
   Christ's. [387]

     __________________________________________________________________

   [362] In Joh. Herzog, Der Begriff der Bekehrung, p. 1 9.

   [363] Harnack, Mission und Ausbreitung des Christentums in den ersten
   drei Jahrhunderten, I, pp. 185-197. Sell, Katholiz. und Protest.
   Leipzig, 1908, pp. 24, 103 ff.

   [364] Harnack, Das Mönchtum, seine Ideale und seine Geschichte.
   Giessen, 1886. Zöckler, Askese und Mönchtum, Frankfurt a. M., 1897.

   [365] P. Höveler, Prof. A. Harnack und die katholische Askese.
   Düsseldorf, 1902.

   [366] E. g. The True History of Joshua Davidson, Communist. 1873 (2
   ed.. The Life of Joshua Davidson, by E. Lynn Linton, 1889). Sheldon, In
   his Steps: or "What Would Jesus Do?" Chicago, 1897, Rev. ed. 1899.
   Comp. also Hall Caine, The Christian, and Marie Corelli, The
   Master-Christian.

   [367] Tolstoi, Worin bestebt mein Glaube? 1885.

   [368] Weinel, Jesus im neunzehnten Jahrh. Tiibingen, 1903. Schweitzer,
   Von Reimarus zu Wrede. Tübingen, 1906. W. Sanday, The Life of Christ in
   Recent Research, Oxford, 1907.

   [369] W. Baldensperger, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu im Lichte der
   messian. Hoffnungen seiner Zeit I. Strassburg, 1903. J. Weiss, Die
   Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes. Göttingen, 1900.

   [370] The literature which deals with Jesus in this spirit is
   increasing daily; witness such works as the following: Kalthoff, Das
   Christusproblem, Grundlinien zu einer Sozialtheologie. Leipzig, 1903.
   Pfleiderer, Das Christusbild des urchristl. Glaubens in religionsgesch.
   Beleuchtung. Berlin, 1903. Paul Wernle, Die Anfänge unserer Religion,
   1904. W. B. Smith, Der vorchristl. Jesus nebst weiteren Vorstudien zur
   Entstehungsgesch. des Urchrist. Mit einem Vorwort vou P. W.
   Schmiedel.I&gt;Christus ein Inder? Stuttgart, 1907. Dr. de Loosten,
   Jesus Christus vom Standpunkte des Psychiaters. Bamberg, 1905. E.
   Rasmussen, Jesus, eine vergleichende psychopathol. Studie. Leipzig,
   1905. Binet-Sangle, La Folie de Jésus. Paris, 1908. Arthur Heulhard, Le
   mensonge Chrétien (Jésus-Christ n'a pas existé), I. Le Charpentier.
   Paris. 1908. Bolland, Het Leven en Sterven van Jezus Christus, 1907.

   [371] Thus among others Mill, On Liberty, chap. 2. Theob. Ziegler,
   Gesch. der christl. Ethik, I, pp. 62 ff. Paulson, System der Ethik, pp.
   50 ff. Strauss, Der alte und der neue Glaube. 1872, pp. 57 ff. Ed. von
   Hartmann, Das Christentum des N. Testam. 1905. Vorwort, etc.

   [372] Nitzsch, Die Weltanschauung Fr. Nietzsche's, Zeits. Für Theol.
   und Kirche. 1905, pp. 344 - 360.

   [373] Lexis, Das Wesen der Kultur, in Die Nultur der Gegenwart I.
   Eucken, Geistige Strömungen, 1904, pp. 226 ff.

   [374] Compare the contrasts drawn by Forsyth between the Reformation
   and the "Enlightenment," Hibbert Journal, April, 1908, pp. 482 ff.

   [375] Comp. the Pensées of Pascal.

   [376] Haeckel, Welträthsel, p. 439, and above, Lect. I.

   [377] Comp. Lectures - I, note 2; VI, note 7 ; VII, note 19.

   [378] Portig, Religion und Kunst in ihrem gegenseitigen Verhältniss.
   Iserlohn, 1879.

   [379] Eisler, Kritische Einführung in die Philosophie. Berlin, 1905, p.
   297.

   [380] Ernst Linde, Religion und Kunst. Tübingen, 1905.

   [381] Gutberlet, Ethik und Religion. Kneib, Die Jenseitsmoral, pp. 239
   ff.

   [382] Eisler, Krit. Einführung, p. 297.

   [383] Ibid. p. 302.

   [384] Ibid. p. 292. Stange, Der heteronome Character der christlichen
   Ethik, Neue Kirchl. Zeits. June, 1908, pp. 454-473.

   [385] Ibid. pp. 312 ff., 324, 330 ff., 334.

   [386] Comp. Lecture I, note 27; Lecture VI, note 60.

   [387] A. Ehrhard, Kathol. Christentum und moderne Kultur. Mainz, 1906.
   E. W. Mayer, Christentum und Kultur. Berlin, 1905.
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 10 - Revelation and the Future


   Although the Christian religion is not at enmity with culture in
   principle, still there is no gainsaying that it attributes only a
   subordinate value to all the possessions of this earthly life. The
   value of the whole world is not so great as that of the righteousness
   of the kingdom of heaven, the forgiveness of sins, and eternal life in
   fellowship with God. In this respect the Christian religion is in
   direct opposition to the view of the world taken by the modern man, and
   is neither prepared nor fitted for compromise with it. The question
   between them concerns no less than the highest good for man.

   Therefore not only is Christianity accused to-day of rather opposing
   than furthering culture in the past, and of adopting towards it at the
   present day a repellent and hostile attitude, but men go further and
   declare that it has had its time, and cannot be a factor in the
   development of the future. If modern culture is to advance, it must
   wholly reject the influence of Christianity, and break completely with
   the old world-view. There must be inaugurated a Kulturkampf, compared
   to which that of Bismarck against the Jesuits was child's play. For
   Christianity in its essence, and consequently in all the forms which it
   has adopted in its several confessions, is always occupied with such
   supernatural subjects as eternity, heaven, God, etc.; it gives a bill
   of exchange for the life hereafter, which perhaps will never be
   honored, and makes men indifferent to this life; it does not stimulate
   to activity, but recommends as the highest virtues, patience,
   forbearance, obedience, and contentment.

   The present century, on the contrary, is wholly diesseitig; it believes
   no longer in unseen things, but reckons only with those which are seen
   and temporal. After the disappointment caused by the French Revolution,
   a deep, general dejection reigned in Europe under the Napoleonic
   regime. But oppression occasioned a rebound. When the hour of liberty
   struck, humanity awoke to a new life and went to work with unimagined
   courage. Its energy was crowned, and at the same time increased, by the
   brilliant successes which were achieved in science and technic, in
   society and state. Discoveries and inventions, with their application
   to life, showed what man could accomplish by his skill and labor.
   Within half a century humanity was, as it were, reborn, and the surface
   of the earth was renewed. What the forefathers in former ages, what
   even the preceding generation had not dared to think or dream of, now
   came to pass in reality. Humanity stood amazed at its own creations.

   In the measure in which self-confidence grew, confidence in God, belief
   in miracles, consciousness of misery, the urgency of prayer, and
   longing for redemption decreased, at least in many circles. Kant had
   boldly spoken the word,--du sollst, also du kannst,--and the humanity
   which trod the stage of the nineteenth century adopted this motto. It
   perceived in itself a necessity, a will, a power, and an obligation to
   reform the world ; and with this pressure it felt its strength awaken,
   and an irresistible desire to set to work. The modern man no longer
   feels himself a miserable creature, who has fallen from his original
   destiny, and no longer regards the earth as a vale of tears, which has
   taken the place of the original paradise. He can conceive nothing more
   wonderful than this beautiful world, which has evolved itself from the,
   smallest beginnings and has reached its highest point of development in
   grand and mighty man. [388] He is in his own estimation no mere
   creature, but a creator and redeemer of himself and society. [389] More
   and more he becomes his own providence. [390] And he is so, and becomes
   so through his work, for labor is creation. By labor men are divine,
   and become continually more godlike. Labor must therefore be the
   foundation of religion and morality, and also of the entirety of modern
   society. [391] In earlier times, no doubt, both outside and within the
   bounds of Christianity, labor was estimated as of great moral value,
   but there was nevertheless no system of morals built upon it, either by
   the Greeks, who despised labor, or by the Christians, who considered
   this life as a special preparation for eternity, or yet by the new
   moralists, who deduce the moral law from the subject, that is, from the
   categorical imperative. But among such men as Ihering, Wundt, Höding,
   Paulsen, Spencer, and Sidgwick, we see ethics becoming more and more a
   section of sociology, which perceives in labor for himself and for
   others the calling and destiny of man. For labor reconciles the
   egoistic and social instincts and takes into captivity the whole human
   life. [392] Labor is "the meaning of our existence." [393]

   This awakening of human energy is reflected in the world-view which now
   receives the strongest sympathy. Till now the whole world was riveted
   to absolute conceptions, such as substance and essence, spirit and
   matter, soul and faculties, ideas and norms. But now everything is
   changed; there is nothing firm, unchangeable, steadfast; there is no
   status quo, but only an eternal movement. [394] Physics and chemistry
   dematerialize themselves, and seek their foundations in pure
   mathematical proportions; psychology has closed the account with
   substance and the faculties of the soul, and only reckons with
   psychical phenomena; logic, ethics, and aesthetics withdraw themselves
   from the government of fixed aprioristic norms, and seek to build
   themselves up on psychology and sociology; the atomistic world-view has
   given way in late years to the energetic, and the absolute is no longer
   considered as a being, but only as a becoming; "will is the real
   substance of the world." [395] If Descartes pronounced his cogito ergo
   sum as the principle of philosophy, the new world-view proclaims her
   moveo ergo fio; vivere is now no longer cogitare, but velle; in a word,
   modern wisdom can be summed up in this short epigram of Proudhon :
   Affirmation du progrè, négation de l'absolu. [396]

   As this world-view is a precipitate of modern life, so in its turn it
   influences that life and gives it direction and guidance. The century
   in which we live is distinguished from all preceding ones by its
   restless activity, by its exploitation of physical and psychical
   forces, but at the same time also by its endeavor to obtain the
   greatest possible results from the smallest possible expenditure of
   power. [397] The activities of men move in the most divergent
   directions, and cross each other every moment, so that nobody can
   obtain a clear view or give a complete account of them. And yet it
   seems as if all this manifold and many-sided labor accomplished to-day
   by men under the sun, is animated by one spirit, is directed by one
   aim, and is made serviceable to one end, namely, the improvement of the
   human race. Men live to-day in a land of abundance, but there still
   remains a longing for a richer and more durable happiness. This earthly
   life is confidently declared the sole home man; yet men seek even here
   below another and better dwelling. And therefore there are not wanting
   reformers who earnestly reflect on the miseries of this life, and
   recommend ways and means not only for the deliverance, but also for the
   perfecting of humanity.

   In the first place, there is being made an attempt, which should be
   remarked, to improve the racial qualities of mankind in an artificial
   way. Individuals follow one another like small, unsubstantial waves
   from an unlimited ocean of being, but are all nevertheless equipped
   with free and .active powers. They must therefore not be passive in the
   routine of nature, and must not lose heart from the thought that man
   remains eternally the same and is capable of no improvement or
   perfecting. The Christian religion may offer in its doctrine of the
   inheritance of sin such a comfortless view; but this dogma, that man is
   radically corrupt, must be saved by Christ, and can never become holy
   and happy by his own power, is the most demoralizing of all the
   articles of the Christian faith, and ought to be opposed and eradicated
   with determined strength. In its place must come the comforting
   conviction that man is still always becoming; he has already raised
   himself above the animal, and is moving in the direction of the
   Uebermensch. The evolutionary process, of which we have evidence all
   over the world, presses on not only forward, but also upward, to meet
   the light, the life, the spirit. [398] It is only necessary that man
   understand this process, and take an active part in it; he must feel
   his responsibility for the carrving of the process through by man, and
   for its advancing through him to a higher type of being. It seems as if
   the physical development of man has reached its end, at least so far as
   its basal structure is concerned; but all the more necessary now is the
   spiritual development, that is, the conscious, intentional, systematic
   work of man towards his own perfecting. And to this belongs in the
   first place the improvement and ennobling of the human race.

   But now we are faced by the fact that, as Karl Pearson expresses it,
   "the mentally better stock in the nation is not reproducing itself at
   the same rate as it did of old; the less able and less energetic are
   more fertile than the better stock." [399] And that is not all; but in
   all lands the law allows, apart from certain limitations of age and
   cousanguinity, complete freedom to marriage, so that it is possible for
   all kinds of weak, sick, incurable, and degenerate people to be united
   in marriage and to give birth to unfortunate children, and in this way
   to promote the steady deterioration of the human race. Nobody can deny
   that such a deterioration takes place. While hygiene does its best, on
   the one side, to prolong the life of the weak as much as possible, the
   number of these weak beings is continually increasing by the complete
   freedom of marriage. Weismann may assert that propensities which are
   acquired during life are not inherited, but the fact still remains that
   the physical and psychical condition of the parents influences that of
   the children. Insanity and crime, tuberculosis and alcoholism, and all
   kinds of venereal diseases are increasing among all nations; increasing
   numbers of inmates are sent to hospitals and prisons; and all this lays
   on the community a burden which in the long run it will not be able to
   bear. Therefore it is our duty to devote the greatest possible
   attention to marriage, and to the people between whom it is concluded.

   In the first place, it is necessary that the act of propagation be
   restored to honor. Ascetic Christianity has imprinted the stamp of
   impurity on it, and humanity therefore will never become better by
   returning to this mode of thought. But it will enter the path of
   self-perfecting when it turns its back on all asceticism and comes to
   understand the holiness of propagation. The act of generation is not
   impure, but a holy sacrament, and all conception is immaculate. True
   progress will come when humanity returns to the classic honoring of the
   strength and beauty of the body and regains the old respect for the
   divinity of propagation. [400]

   But with this restoration to honor of the propagation of the race
   earnest investigation must be combined. The science of "eugenics,"
   which was already inaugurated by Francis Galton in 1883, and for which
   he not long ago founded a research-fellowship at the University of
   London, must become a science which subjects to exact inquiry
   everything that bears upon propagation and heredity, and endeavors to
   discover the laws by which these are governed. Such an inquiry has not
   yet been prosecuted far enough to warrant the deduction of conclusions
   on which legislation might be founded. But public opinion can be
   instructed, and the way for new legislation respecting matrimony may be
   prepared, and the state can at any rate begin to make medical inquiry
   obligatory before marriage, forbid marriage in definite serious cases,
   and so prevent the birth of unfortunate children. Artificial selection
   shows how genera and species may be modified among plants and animals;
   if this selection is applied also to the human race, it will promote
   its well-being and improvement in the highest degree. [401]

   In close alliance with this attempt to ennoble the human race by
   artificial selection is the effort which is making for the perfecting
   of humanity by a radical reform in education. Many opinions exist as to
   the nature of such a new education. Some accept in principle the
   perfect equality of man and woman, defend free marriage and free love,
   and would withdraw education as early as possible from the family and
   delegate it to the community. Others, on the contrary, esteem the woman
   in every respect distinct from man, and wish to maintain and
   re-establish her in the ro1e of mother and educator of her children.
   According to these, biology and anthropology prove that woman, who, in
   her whole physical and psychical development is much more closely
   allied to the child than man, and lives by instinct, intuition, and
   feeling more than he, is on this very account a much better
   representative and supporter of the human race; she is more
   "reminiscent of the past," more "prophetic of the future," and
   therefore superior to man. In the new philosophy of sex, of which
   biological psychology already dreams, the woman and the mother will
   stand "at the heart of a new world," become the object "of a new
   religion, and almost of a new worship." The mothers are the most
   valuable portion of the people, and must therefore be liberated in the
   future from all other cares than those of motherhood, and be treated by
   state and society with the highest honor. [402]

   But whatever difference of opinion on this or similar points may exist
   among the reformers of pedagogy, all agree that education requires
   radical changes and must be built up anew on a scientific basis.
   Education is of far too great importance for the future of humanity to
   be abandoned to caprice or chance. Education is "man's chief problem,
   and the home, school, state, and church are valuable exactly in
   proportion as they serve it," yea, "the highest criterion of pure
   science is its educative value." [403] And the science which must be
   the principle and foundation of education is genetic psychology. This
   teaches us that man has slowly risen from the animal, and repeats in
   his development as embryo and suckling, as child and boy and youth, the
   different stages of phylogeny. The, soul of man is thus not complete,
   but as it has become, so is it still becoming; it does not stand alone,
   but is cognate with the souls of the animals and plants and all
   creatures; it strikes its roots deeply into the past, as the tree does
   into the ground, is the product of an immemorial heredity, and can and
   must be conceived and explained by the history of the human race. We
   shall never really know ourselves until we know the soul of the
   animals, and especially that of those which are in the line of our
   descent. [404]

   He who takes into account the lesson of evolution quickly comes to the
   conclusion that the present-day system of education is one great error.
   Up to now men have given almost exclusive attention to the soul of man,
   and to its hereafter. They have taken their start from ideas, fixed
   norms, unchangeable conceptions, and have placed before themselves as
   their chief aim to implant maxims and dognias, and to fill the head
   with representations and ideas which are in opposition to nature, and
   can therefore never be assimilated. This education has neglected the
   body, fatigued the brain, weakened the nerves, suppressed originality,
   slackened initiation, and the consequence is that the children on
   leaving school have possessed no independence, and have had no eye to
   see and no ear to hear. They have been completely estranged from life;
   and what is of more importance, the education which has alone been
   hitherto procurable has shown its incapacity, especially, in that
   during its continuance men have retained the same nature and the same
   defects; it has not eradicated a single sin or brought about any moral
   improvement whatever. [405]

   Instead of this a new system of education must be instituted which in
   the first place is to be characterized by an honoring of the child. The
   child has been hitherto governed peremptorily and from without, but in
   the future the child must be placed in the centre, must be considered
   in whatever peculiarity it may have, and must be developed according to
   its own individuality. It is now the era of the child. The child is
   born good, for there is no hereditary sin; every defect in the child is
   only a hard shell, which contains the germ of a virtue, which as such
   has the right not to be eradicated, but to be trained. There must be no
   question of punishment or breaking of the will; if the child is not
   good in later life, then it has been a victim of its parents and
   teachers, and upon them lies the guilt. They have to bow to the
   superiority of the child; a child is only another name for majesty.
   [406]

   Further, this great reformation must be wrought in education,-- it must
   return from school to life, from books to nature, from theology and
   philosophy to biology. In the life of the child sense, nature, and the
   body are, in the foreground. Before consciousness awakens, and
   intelligence and judgment are formed, the child is passion, desire,
   movement, will. Formerly men said that life was thought, but now we see
   that life is will. Will is the essence of the world, and the innermost
   nature of man; first life, then thought; first the natural, then the
   spiritual, The muscles make forty-three per cent of the weight of the
   human body, and are the organs of the will and the creators of all
   culture. Man is one-third intelligence and two-thirds will. The "age of
   art" must thus take the place of the "age of science." The body with
   its members and organs ought to be developed before all things; manual
   labor, gymnastics, sports, and all kinds of play ought to take up a
   large, yes, the principal part in education. For mere knowledge.
   produces a serious danger; better ignorance than knowledge which does
   not develop the strength of man; "muscle-culture" is at the same time
   "brain-building"; power must accompany knowledge. [407]

   As to the knowledge which must be communicated in the various schools
   of instruction, the natural sciences ought to take the place which was
   formerly given to the so-called spiritual sciences, literature,
   history, theology, and philosophy. The science of nature must form the
   groundwork of all teaching, and the common possession of all civilized
   people. For even the spiritual sciences can no longer be understood and
   practised with benefit, if they do not rest, on the basis of the
   science of nature. Without knowing man in his prehistoric life, they
   cannot attain their full development. If they have latterly advanced,
   and have reached assured results, they are indebted for this to the
   application of that method which is used in the sciences of nature.
   This, then, is the indispensable foundation for all other sciences and
   for all culture. Nobody ought to be nominated to any important office,
   therefore, or to be accepted as a member of parliament, or as a
   minister of the state, unless he has acquired a solid knowledge of
   nature. In a word, the old world-view must be replaced in all schools
   by the world-view of the doctrine of evolution. Then only will a great
   future stretch out before education, for knowledge of nature has not
   merely an intellectual, but also great practical, technical, and
   ethical value. [408]

   But a reformation which will usher in a new era for the human race
   cannot confine itself to a change in the system of education. If
   reformation must consist principally in replacing the old world-view by
   that of evolution, then educational reform is but a single step in a
   long road, and there remains a great deal to do. For the old
   world-view--that is, that conception of world and life which has been
   formed under the influence of Christianity--is so intimately interwoven
   with our whole being, with all our thoughts and actions, that to
   eradicate it would seem almost a hopeless task, and if it could be
   accomplished, would throw humanity into a violent crisis, the
   consequences of which no one can foresee. Church, and state, and
   society, religion, morality, and justice, marriage, family, and school,
   habits and laws, and our whole culture are, notwithstanding many
   foreign elements which have intruded from elsewhere, built on a
   Christian basis and animated by the Christian spirit. He who desires
   such a reform may, no doubt, make a beginning, but who knows what the
   end will be, and who can estimate the cost? None the less, if such a
   reformation is to be wrought, it cannot be satisfied with a mere change
   in the system of education; it must proceed to a total rebuilding of
   society.

   However, even if we do not reckon with the conscious will of man, there
   is already at work in present-day society a hidden force which affects
   it, as it were, in heart and reins, and distinguishes it from all
   earlier forms in a very remarkable way. We may approve or disapprove of
   this movement, but the trend of modern society is in the direction of
   freedom, autonomy, and democracy. All boundary lines which formerly
   separated men, and all bonds which encumbered their movements and
   activities, have been broken down one after another. All forms of
   servitude--slavery, bondage, feudalism, and subordination--are thought
   to be opposed to the independence and dignity of man; even service for
   wages appears to the modern man humiliating, and is accounted merely
   another form of slavery. All the relations which have grown up between
   men in the course of the centuries are more and more losing their
   organic, moral, and natural character, and are being replaced by
   voluntarily formed contracts. Liberty of religion and conscience has
   been succeeded by freedom of habitation and occupation, of trade and
   intercourse, of union and association, of writing and thinking; and
   thought has so much outstripped discipline that the most absurd ideas
   arouse the greatest admiration.

   Specialization and multiplication of occupations go hand in hand with
   this autonomy. The number of trades which were organized as guilds in
   Germany in the eighteenth century were counted by tens; they are now to
   be numbered by thousands, and continually increase, almost from day to
   day. Labor is endlessly differentiated and specialized. All activities
   which are auxiliary to the provision of the necessities of life have
   become independent occupations. The machine which has replaced the
   impleinent in the hand of the workman, and operates much more quickly,
   uniformly, cheaply, and powerfully than any human power, increases the
   division of labor, and makes the simplest article into a product which
   is accomplished by the cooperation of many hands. And this specializing
   of labor may be observed not only in material, but also in spiritual
   domains. There was a time when one could say of a person that he knew
   everything that was written in books, but such an encyclopaedic
   knowledge is not possible now, even for the greatest genius ; sciences
   are divided and multiplied, and are so far removed from the common
   centre that the investigator in one science is a complete stranger in
   the disciplines of the others, and does not even understand the terms
   employed in them.

   With this specialization of labor is combined, contrary to what would
   perhaps apriori be expected, an increase in social dependence. It is
   usually said that the French Revolution has made men free and equal,
   but to tell the whole truth one has to add that it has replaced
   personal by social dependence. We depend on each other now more than
   ever. Nobody, no man, no city, no village, no people, and no state is
   independent any longer. We have no food and no drink, no covering or
   clothing, no warmth or light, no furniture and no implements, which are
   not procured for usby the community from day to day. Each man has
   significance only as a part of the whole, as a "labor-unit of the
   social organism"; if he be left to himself, and excluded from the
   social body, he is powerless and loses his value. This life in
   community, which forms such a remarkable trait in the society of
   to-day, is indebted for its growth in a large degree to the decline of
   the value of personality.

   And this social dependence is continually increasing; the organization
   of society is progressing from day to day under our eyes. Society has
   already become a most artificial system of manifold and complicated
   relations, a gigantic organism, wherein all members are closely
   connected; but all agree that the socialization of society proceeds
   without intermission; we are carried steadily forward in the direction
   of what Lamprecht calls the "bound enterprises." The anarchy which
   reigns in the production of goods, the abuse of power of which the
   trusts are guilty, the law of parsimony in labor, the caprices of
   demand and supply, and the conflict of capital and proletariat,--all
   this leads to social organization and demands help from the
   all-embracing state. And the state has already traversed a good part of
   this way. Private enterprise has been replaced in many departments by
   the service of the community; one circle, of life after another loses
   its independence. Jurisprudence, army, navy, taxation, the postal
   system, telegraphy, trams and railways, instruction in all kinds of
   schools, the care of libraries and museums, of health and cleanliness,
   of poorhouses and asylums, the exploiting of water and heat supply, of
   gas and electricity, fire- and police-departments, roads and canals,
   parks and theatres, savings banks and insurance companies, and many
   other interests, are wholly or in part withdrawn from private
   enterprise and given into the hands of local or national authorities.

   Well, then, social reformers say to us, if these things are so, what
   can we do but help on and direct, promote and complete, this powerful
   movement which is already proceeding? We are working in the same
   direction if we break down finally the last barrier which separates
   men, and that is capital, private property. The Reformation has
   procured for us religious freedom; that is, the equality of all men
   before God. The Revolution of 1789 gave us political liberty,--the
   equality of all men before the law. A third reformation is now in
   order,--the establishment of freedom in society, and the equality of
   all men in respect to the possessions of culture. What good are
   religious and political freedom for men if social equality is withheld
   from them? What value has the declaration of the rights of man if the
   right to labor and food and pleasure remains unsecured? As
   Protestantism has prepared the way for liberalism, and liberalism for
   democracy, so now democracy ought to be fulfilled in socialism. The
   motto of liberty, equality, and fraternity will be completely realized
   only when the community, leaving the means of enjoyment and the ratio
   of consumption to the individual, possesses itself of all means of
   production, land, factories, and implements,--and, systematically
   regulating the whole production, divides the product among all
   citizens, according to their merits or necessities. In a word, the
   reformation of society will reach completion only in the socializing of
   all the possessions of culture. [409]

   Men cherish the boldest expectations on the faith of all these
   reformers. Marx, it is true, held the opinion that he had set socialism
   free from utopianism, and had established it on a firm, scientific
   basis. His effort was to conclude an alliance between the suffering and
   the thinking part of humanity and to make science serviceable for the
   proletariat. Therefore he made a study of presentday society, tried to
   learn the laws which govern its development, and endeavored to show
   that the old society could produce an entirely new one by way of
   evolution. He refused indeed to draw up a complete description of the
   future state, but he did not shrink from proclaiming his expectations
   concerning it, and thus he ceased to be a scientific inquirer, and came
   forward in the ro1e of a prophet. And when he further not only
   published the results of his inquiry, but also made it the basis of a
   programme which was to be adopted and realized by a definite party, he
   threw off the toga and put on the mantle of a preacher of repentance
   and a reformer. Even Marx thus could not escape from utopianisrn; and
   the socialism which operates under his name is, as a doctrine
   concerning a future society, no scientific school, but a political
   party. The society of the future naturally is no subject of experience
   and investigation, but an object of hope and expectation, of desire and
   endeavor. This is sufficiently proved by the fact that socialism, in
   consequence of the serious criticism which its anticipated future state
   has aroused, has finally abandoned all details and left to the future
   what the future shall bring forth. [410]

   Nevertheless it can never completely abstain from framing a description
   of the future state, either with respect to its own members or those
   who are outside; for after all each man wishes to know, to a certain
   extent, in what direction and to what end lie is led by such a radical
   change in society. If the ideal which men strive after cannot be
   described, or on being described betrays to all its impracticability,
   all confidence is lost and all obedience is at an end. Hope alone keeps
   socialism alive; "the vision of the future is for every present
   circumstance the strongest bearer of power." [411] Socialism,
   therefore, ever seeks its satisfaction in the forecast of Bebel, that
   the future state will bring a condition of happiness and peace for all
   men. The state with its ministers and parliaments, its army and police,
   will not be necessary in the new society, for all those relations of
   possession and power in the behalf of which they have been called into
   being will have passed out of existence. All men will receive equal
   positions in life and a suitable subsistence. Each will have to
   accomplish a definite work; but this work will require only a few hours
   a day, and for the remainder of his time each man way devote himself,
   according to his free choice, to spiritual occupations, to
   companionship, to pleasure. There will no longer exist distinctions
   between rich and poor, idle and industrious, learned and ignorant, the
   population of city and country, because there will no longer exist
   commerce, trade, money, or unequal division of pleasure and labor. Each
   one after the necessary labor will do what he pleases, so that
   according to his free option one will become a musician, another a
   painter, a third a sculptor, a fourth an actor. Even diseases will
   disappear more and more, and natural death, the slow dying of the
   powers of life, will become more and more the rule. [412]

   Socialism does not stand alone in these utopian expectations. It has
   had its predecessors in Plato and Thomas More, in Campanella and
   Morelly, St. Simon and Fourier, Proudhon and Comte, and in many other
   theologians and philosophers, in many religious sects and political
   parties. Humanity as a whole has always lived, and still lives, in
   hope, notwithstanding all empiricism and realism. Men paint the future
   state in very different colors; and according to the different
   conceptions each one has of the highest good, represent that future
   state as a kingdom of morality (Kant), or humanity (Herder), as a
   kingdom of liberty, in which spirit fully penetrates nature (Hegel), or
   as a Johannine church, which will at the end replace the church of
   Peter and Paul (Schelling); as a world in which ideal or material
   possessions are the chief enjoyment. But such a future is expected by
   every one; all religion, all philosophy, and all views of life and the
   world issue in an eschatology. And not only so, but all systems have in
   common that they finish the world's history with to-day, and hereaf ter
   expect only a world era wherein the hope and the dream of humanity will
   be realized; [413] all eschatology which lives in the heart includes
   the belief in a speedy parousia.

   This ineradicable hope of humanity is full of potent charm. And if
   to-day it springs up with new strength, shuns no exertion, esteems all
   opposition conquerable, and strives to introduce the new era for
   humanity by all kinds of reformation, it compels respect and stimulates
   to activity. When Ludwig Stein preaches a social optimism, which wages
   war on all Nirvana-philosophy and turns its back on all conservatives
   and pessimists; [414] when Metschnikoff proclaims in the name of
   science the coming day of the abolition of all sickness, the
   lengthening of human life to a good old age, and the reduction of death
   to a gentle, painless fading away; [415] when Stanley Hall tells us
   that the world is not old, but young, that the twilight in which we
   live is not that of the evening but of the morning, that the soul is
   still always becoming, and is capable of a much higher development;
   [416] when James declares that the world is, or becomes, that which we
   make it: [417] when all these men appeal to our responsibility, to our
   consciousness of duty, to our power and energy, then our hope is
   rekindled, our courage is raised, and we are stimulated to go forward
   immediately without further hesitation.

   Nevertheless it should be observed that while this optimistic activity
   seems to depend only on man, and to feel not the least need of divine
   help, yet on the other hand it breaks through the circle of immanent
   thought and action, mounts to transcendency, and seeks strength and
   security in metaphysics. The doctrine that man is corrupted by sin and
   cannot sanctify and save himself by his own strength is commonly
   accounted the most fearful of all errors; autonomy and autosotery
   reject all heterosotery. But at the same moment when all transcendency
   and metaphysics are denied, the human being is exalted above his usual
   state and is identified with the divine. The superhuman task of
   transforming present society into a state of peace and joy requires
   more than ordinary human power; if God himself does not work the
   change, hope can be cherished only when human power is divinized. This
   is in fact the intimate idea of that philosophical theory which Strauss
   has most clearly formulated, that the infinite is not realized in a
   single man, but only in humanity; humanity being the true unity of
   divine and human natures, the man becoming God, the infinite spirit
   descending to finiteness, the child of the visible mother nature, and
   of the invisible father spirit, the doer of miracles, the saviour of
   the world. What humanity confesses concerning Christ, and pronounces in
   its idea of divinity, is merely a symbol of what it finds in itself,
   and what it is. Theology is mainly anthropology; the worship of God is
   humanity adoring itself. Comte, therefore, was quite consistent when he
   substituted the worship of humanity for the worship of God. [418]

   This deification of man proves clearly that no eschatology is possible
   without metaphysics. But this is shown still more clearly by another
   fact. Culture, ethics, idealism, all striving after a goal, must always
   seek alliance with metaphysics. Kant reversed the relation between
   them, and tried to make morals entirely independent of science; but on
   those morals he again built up practical faith in a divine providence.
   In the same way, any ethical system which aspires to be true ethics and
   to bear a normative and teleological character, not failing into merely
   a description of habits and customs, is forced to seek the support of
   metaphysics. If man has to strive after an ideal, he can gain courage
   only by the faith that this ideal is the ideal of the world and is
   based on true reality. By banishing metaphysics, materialism has no
   longer an ethical system, knows no longer the distinction between good
   and evil, possesses no moral law, no duty, no virtue, and no highest
   good. And when the immanent humanistic philosophy of Natorp, Cohen, and
   others endeavors to base ethics exclusively on the categorical
   imperative, it loses all security that the "ought" will one day triumph
   over the "is," and the good over the bad. [419] Whatever one believes
   to be the highest good, this highest good is either an imagination, or
   it is and must be also the highest, true being, the essence of reality,
   the meaning and destiny of the world, and thus also the bond which
   holds all men and nations together in every part of the world and saves
   them from anarchy. [420] The Christian finds his assurance of the
   triumph of good in his confession of God's sovereign and almighty will,
   which, though distinct from the world and exalted above it, still
   accomplishes through it its holy purpose, and, in accordance with this
   purpose, leads humanity and the world to salvation. But he who rejects
   this confession does not therefore escape from metaphysics. It sounds
   well to call man the rebel in nature, who, when it says "Die!" answers,
   "I will live." [421] But with all his wisdom and strength man is
   powerless against that nature in the end, unless it be subject to a
   will which maintains man in his superiority above it. That is the
   reason why, even when theism is denied, the true reality, the
   world-will which is hidden behind phenomena and very imperfectly
   manifested, is nevertheless always thought of as analogous to that of
   man, and especally as an ethically good will. Notwithstanding all his
   self-confidence and self-glorification, man is, in every possible
   world-view, incorporated in a larger whole, and is explained and
   confirmed by that totality. Metaphysics, that is the belief in the
   absolute as a holy power, always forms the foundation of ethics. In our
   days evolution takes the place of such metaphysics.

   The modern man derives his faith and animation, his activity and his
   optimism, from the idea of evolution, which according to his belief
   governs the whole world. If he endeavors restlessly to establish a holy
   and happy kingdom of humanity on earth, and stands firm in his belief
   in its realization notwithstanding all diiticulties and
   disappointments, this can he explained only in one way,--that he feels
   himself borne on by the true reality, which is hidden behind the
   oftentimes very sad phenomena. Striving and laboring to attain his
   ideal, he believes himself in harmony with the innermost motive-power
   of the world, with the mysterious course of nature. To work, to
   endeavor, to strive, to become, is the deepest meaning of the world,
   the heart and the kernel of true reality. The doctrine of evolution
   thus takes the place of the old religion in the modern man. [422] It is
   no science; it does not rest on undeniable facts; it has often in the
   past and in the present been contradicted by the facts. But that does
   not matter; miracle is the dearest child of faith. All change in the
   world, as if it were nothing, is identified with development,
   development with progress, progress with material welfare or ethical
   culture, with liberty or morality. Although monism in its different
   forms denies that the absolute power which rules the world has
   personality, consciousness and will, yet it always speaks of this power
   as if it were a person. Consciousness, instinct, will, labor, endeavor,
   development, aim, and holiness are unintentionally ascribed to it; it
   is even identified with absolute divine love in a naive way, which is
   in direct antagonism to the scientific pretensions of the speakers. And
   love is then called "the original of all social forces, the creator and
   reconciler of all; the only true God is love." [423] Just as the pagan
   treats his idol, so modern man acts with the idea of evolution.

   The superstitious character, which is more and more taken on by this
   idea, is clearly seen in the contents of the optimistic expectations
   which are cherished concerning the future of the human race. . For
   these expectations involve nothing less than that human nature in the
   future, either slowly by gradual development, or suddenly by leaps of
   mutation, will undergo radical change. In the future state there will
   he no longer any sickness or crime, no envy or malice, no enmity or
   war, no courts of justice and no police, but contentment and peace will
   be the portion of all. Now it is possible to say that sin and crime are
   owing to circumstances alone, and thus will disappear with the
   reformation of the environment. But this is nevertheless such a
   superficial judgment that no refutation of it is necessary. Every man
   knows by experience that sin is rooted in his own heart. If there ever
   is to be a humanity without sin and crime, holy and blessed, then it
   must be preceded by a radical change in human nature. But such a change
   is not too great for the expectation of the optimists, for they are
   assured of it by evolution. Man has advanced so much in the past that
   we may cherish the best hope for the future. He was an animal, and
   became a man,--why should he not become an angel in the future? As by
   immanent forces alone life has proceeded from the lifeless,
   consciousness from the unconscious, intelligence from the association
   of representations, will from feeling, spirit from matter, good from
   evil, what should hinder man from conquering in course of time all sin,
   putting an end to all misery, and establishing "the kingdom of man" on
   earth once for all, the more because he himself by exertion can lead
   and promote the evolutionary process? Thus the idea of an Uebermensch
   is intimately connected with the idea of evolution. Darwin himself
   believed in it, and comforted himself for the suffering of this present
   time with the hope that man in the far future would become a much more
   perfect creature than he is now; [424] and the optimistic evolutionists
   join in this expectation: man is still in the making, he is still at
   the beginning of his development,--a rich, beautiful future lies before
   him. [425]

   But although this future may speedily appear, it is not in existence
   yet, and it is not likely that it will dawn in the days of the present
   generation. What profit all these expectations for the men who now
   live, and each day draw nearer to their end? Socialism scoffs at the
   Christian faith, which promises a bill of exchange on eternity; but
   eternity is after all more worthy of our trust than an insecure,
   doubtful, and distant future. So the doctrine of evolution has found
   itself suddenly confronted with the question, what significance the
   eschatological expectations have for the individual. In the
   materialistic period, which lies behind us, it had for this serious
   question only a contemptuous smile. But the belief in a future kingdom
   of humanity is always confronted by the problem of personal
   immortality. And the doctrine of evolution assumes now in its new
   idealistic form quite a different bearing towards this problem. [426]
   Why should it be impossible to introduce this immortality into its
   system? If man in the long process of his development has raised
   himself by his intelligence high above the animal, probably he can make
   himself immortal by continual development. Of course it is improbable
   that all men who have already lived and borne that name have reached
   such immortality, for the transition from animal to man has been very
   gradual; and it is also possible, as the adherents of conditional
   immortality assure us, that even now and in the future not all men will
   be able to advance so far, but only they who ethically work out their
   own self-perfecting. But in itself there is no reason why man by his
   own development should not become immortal.

   Death certainly cannot be thought of as a catastrophe, as a punishment
   of sin, as a judgment which is executed upon man. It is simply a normal
   phenomenon, a gradual transition, such as often takes place in the
   organic world. The egg becomes a chick, the caterpillar becomes a
   butterfly; and so man advances, as at birth so at death, into another
   form of existence; he changes his clothing,--he lays aside the coarse,
   material body, and continues his life in a finer, ethereal body. So
   Darwinism successively brings .us into company with Swedenborg and Jang
   Stilling, Davis and Kardec, Madame Blavatsky and Mrs. Annie Besant,
   Mrs. Eddy and Elijah Dowie, with all the theosophists and spiritualists
   of recent times. And it is not to be wondered at that many adherents of
   the evolutionary doctrine are at the same time advocates of
   spiritualism. [427] For all these tendencies are produced by the same
   root idea: they are all strongly opposed to the Christian doctrine of
   creation and fall, of hereditary sin and ethical impotence, of
   redemption by Christ and salvation by grace; and they declare instead
   that all is eternally becoming, that in an absolute sense there is no
   coming into existence and no dissolution, but only a change in the form
   of existence. This leads to the consequence that, as Haeckel has
   equipped substance, ether, and atoms with spirit, soul, conscience, and
   will, so men have truly existed eternally; and it is no wonder that
   pre-existenceism has again gained many adherents to-day. [428]

   But although there may be difference of opinion on this point, human
   development is a part of the great evolutionary process and is bound to
   fixed laws. Man is what he does, and perhaps already has done, in
   preceding states of existence; all that happens to a man upon earth,
   his external as well as his internal condition is a strict consequence
   of his behavior and actions. There is place only for merits, for the
   law of reward of man's works; there is no grace or forgiveness in the
   course of nature. The ethical law is the same as the natural law;
   everywhere karrna reigns,--the law of inevitable consequences.
   Therefore there exist also differences among men, not in origin and
   disposition, by divine ordinance, but by the use or misuse which they
   make of their gifts. Men do not run with equal ardor; they do not exert
   themselves with the same vigor. There are sarcical, psychical, and
   pneumatic men; and according to their work in their earthly existence
   they continue their life after death. Death is no death, but life,--a
   form of transition to a higher existence. The deceased do not even know
   that they have died; they keep a body, they see and hear, think and
   speak, consider and act, just as they did here upon earth. Perhaps they
   continue their intercourse for a shorter or longer time with men on
   earth, as spiritualism teaches; or they return in another body to the
   earth, as theosophy assumes; or they continue their purification in
   some other way. [429]

   But whatever evolution thinks about the future, it affords no rest for
   the mind and none for the heart, because it takes away from us the Lord
   of the world. If there is no being, but only becoming, then there is no
   final state, either on this side of death for humanity, or on the other
   side for the individual man. The doctrine of evolution is even mortally
   wounded by this eternal process, because the idea of a never-ending
   development means a process without aim, [430] and thus no longer a
   development. For every state exists only to make way for another; as
   soon as the kingdom of man came into existence it would pass away, and
   this the more because, according to the testimony of science, the
   present world and the present humanity cannot last eternally. [431] If
   there is no omnipotent and holy God who exists above the world, and is
   for it the goal and resting-place of its strife, then there is no final
   end, no completion of the process of the world, and no rest for the
   human heart. It is then an empty sound even to speak with Höfding and
   Münsterberg of the eternal preservation of values, [432] for all value
   disappears with personality; or to take refuge in a mysterious
   Buddhistic Nirvana, as is proposed by Schopenhauer and von Hartmann,
   wherein all life, consciousness, and will sink into an eternal,
   hypnotised condition. [433]

   From the standpoint of evolution there is place only for an eternal
   return, as was already assumed in Greek philosophy by Heraclitus and
   the Stoics, and in these later days has been advocated even by
   Nietzsche. Nietzsche was first a pessimist, pupil of Schopenhauer and
   Wagner; later he became a positivist, and, rejecting all metaphysics,
   took his standpoint in reality as the one true world; still later he
   combined with this the doctrine of the Wille zur Mackt; the real world
   became for him an ocean of powers, which is not, but eternally becomes,
   which has no origin and aim, but continually rises and falls, appears
   and disappears. Although he draws from this creative energy of the
   Wille zur Macht the belief in the appearance of the Uebermensch, and
   takes this as the aim of the process of the world, yet it is
   self-evident that this belief is in direct opposition to his
   positivism, as well as to his doctrine of the eternal return. The
   Uebermensch is not only a pure product of his imagination, but can only
   be a transition form in the process of the world. [434] An optimism
   which is exclusively built on evolution is always transmuted into
   pessimism if one ponders a little more deeply.

   This is apparent also in the so-called meliorism of James. If
   pragmatism is opposed to idealism, and takes its standpoint in the
   empirical world, it cannot attain to an eschatology. One may with Comte
   require from science that it give us the power to look forward and
   predict the future; [435] but Ostwald rightly says that our knowledge
   of the commencement and end of the world is null, [436] for the world
   is so enormously great, and human society so complicated, that nobody
   can calculate with any certainty how they will develop in the future.
   Every one who holds strictly to experience must protest against a
   metaphysics of evolution which speaks of an infallible and eternal
   progress. All this belongs to the province of faith, and is not able to
   withstand a logical and ethical criticism. On the ground of empirical
   reality we can only resign ourselves to ignorance; we know not what the
   future may bring, or how humanity will be developed. The only thing we
   have to do is to fulfil our duty. We cannot stop the process,but we may
   perhaps bend and guide it a little. Let us take the world as it is, and
   make the best of it. Perhaps the future will be better than we think.
   [437]

   This meliorism certainly does not bear witness to strong faith and
   great courage. It has to all intents abandoned the whole world to
   pessimism, and maintains itself only by holding fast to duty. But this
   isolation of the categorical imperative from the totality of life, in
   which it is presented to us in man and humanity, has in no small
   measure contributed to the appearance and spreading of a pessimistic
   feeling in the nineteenth century; [438] the system of Schopenhauer
   depends closely on Kant's criticism. If the essence of things is
   unknowable, the misery of man cannot be fathomed. For metaphysical need
   is born in all of us, and the thirst after the knowledge of the
   absolute cannot be uprooted from the heart. Our condition would be more
   tolerable if religion did not consist in fellowship with God, or if
   that fellowship could be realized and enjoyed without consciousness.
   But what we do not know, we have not, and we love not. The special
   needs of our time are therefore caused by agnosticism. Trust is
   undermined not only in science, but also and principally in ourselves,
   in the witness of our self-consciousness, in the value of our religious
   and ethical perceptions, in the power of our intelligence and reason.
   Doubt is awakened in all hearts, and the uncertainty causes our
   convictions to sway hither and thither; we are moved by every wind of
   doctrine, and weakened in our will by the yeas and nays which resound
   on all sides.

   Nobody can predict how the human race will overcome this disease.
   Philosophy, which has revived in late years, assuredly is not fitted
   for the task. For it is itself infected in a great measure by the
   disease; it is uncertain in its starting point, is in doubt concerning
   its own task and aim, and is divided into all kinds of schools and
   systems. There is no question of a steady progress in its history; it
   has, especially in the period of Kant, broken more down than it has
   built up, and its defenders not infrequently give utterance to the
   opinion that the advantage which it has produced consists solely in the
   enlightening of insight into the essence of human knowledge, and that
   aside from this it is mostly a history of instructive and important
   human errors. [439]

   The ethical autonomy also, which formed for Kant the basis of his
   metaphysics, offers in its isolation no sufficient security. For if the
   whole world is ascribed to the operation of a blind process, it cannot
   be understood how consciousness of duty could obtain a firm foothold in
   this stream of becoming. Evolution, which is everywhere else
   recognized, does not respect this apparent immutability, but penetrates
   into the essence of the moral man, analyzes his views, shows the
   sources from which his opinions are drawn, and shrugs its shoulders
   over the eternity of moral duty and moral laws. [440] But apart from
   this serious objection, moral autonomy may uplift and animate man for a
   short time; it may fill him with admiration, as does also the starry
   sky above his head; and in days of self-confidence it may stimulate him
   to restless eflort, but it can give him no comfort in hours of
   repentance and bitter agony. It is good for the Pharisee, who knows no
   other law than reward for service, but it is pitilessly hard for the
   publican and sinner, who need God's grace. And such poor sinners are we
   all, each in his turn. The strongest among men have times in which they
   feel miserable, and as desolate as the prodigal son. The
   "healthy-minded men" are not separated from "the morbid-minded" as a
   special aristocratic class, but often themselves pass over into their
   opposites; optimism and pessimism alternate in every man's life. [441]
   Fichte, the philosopher, affords us a striking illustration of this. In
   the first period of his philosophic thought he felt no need of God, and
   was content with the moral world-order: in the beginning of things
   there was not being, but doing; not the word, but the deed; the non-ego
   was nothing but the material of duty, and the fulfilment of this duty
   the highest blessedness. But later, when serious experiences had
   enriched his life and thought, he returned from doing to being, from
   duty to love, from striving to rest, from morality to religion. The
   more deeply we live, the more we feel in sympathy with Augustine, and
   the less with Pelagius. [442] Knowledge of law awakens the need for
   grace.

   Present-day culture ofiers still less security for a glad hope. There
   are still many who are enthusiastic about science, and anticipate from
   its technical applications the salvation of humanity. The cries of
   science, progress, and liberty are continually heard on the lips of
   free-thinkers. [443] But the hollowness of the sound reveals itself to
   any keenly listening ear. Culture brings with;it its blessings, but
   also its dark shadows and serious dangers; it develops attributes and
   powers in men which are highly valuable, but it does this almost always
   at the cost of other virtues which are not of less value; while it
   promotes reflection, sagacity, activity, and strenuous striving, it
   suppresses the unbiassed opinion, the childlike naivetè, the simplicity
   and the guilelessness, which often belong to the natural life. [444]
   Intellectual development is in itself no moral good, as rationalism has
   dreamed ever since Socrates' day, but may be used equally well for evil
   as for good; it can be serviceable to love, but it may also become a
   dangerous instrument in the hands of hate; not only the virtuous, but
   also the criminal, profit by it. What da Costa said of the invention of
   printing, that it was a gigantic step to heaven and to hell, may be
   applied to all scientific and technical elements of culture.

   We are indeed witnesses in our own developed society that sin and crime
   increase frightfully, not only in the lowest ranks of population, but
   quite as much in high aristocratic circles. Unbelief and superstition
   in all forms; adultery, unchastity, and unnatural sins, voluptuousness
   and excess, avarice, theft, and murder, jealousy, envy, and hatred,
   play no less a part in the life of cultured humanity than among the
   lower races. Art and literature are not infrequently handmaids to all
   these sins, and the plays, which in such centres of civilization as
   Paris and Berlin are given before the èlite, seriously raise inquiries
   whither we are bound with all our civilization. [445] And at the same
   time with these iniquities the cleft becomes wider between religion and
   culture, between morality and civilization, between science and life,
   between the various classes and ranks of society. Legislation is almost
   powerlesshere; internal corruption, moral degeneration, and religious
   decay cannot be removed by a law of the state; on the contrary, every
   law has to reckon with the egoism and the passion of men, if it does
   not wish to be doomed to complete impotence; if law does not find
   support in conscience, it does not touch life. Besides this,
   legislation is put more and more into the hands of the people, so that
   it is not seldom made the servant of party interests. Complaints about
   the shady side of parliamentary government increase in all lands; [446]
   the state, which is above all, and has to further the interests of all,
   tends to become a ball in the strife of parties, and a powerful means
   by which the majority tries to suppress the minority. The benefit of
   liberty itself, in religious, social, and political domains, comes very
   seriously into question in many countries, such as France.

   There is even reason for the question, whether the theory of evolution
   does not promote in a high degree this continual triumph of the power
   of the strongest. For though it believes in progress in this sense,
   that the material gives birth to the spiritual in the way of gradual
   development, it also teaches that in the struggle for life the unfit
   perish, and only the fittest survive. Therefore opinions greatly differ
   on the relation between Darwinism and socialism; according to Virchow,
   Loria, Ferri, and others, Darwinism is serviceable to socialism, but
   Haeckel, O. Schmidt, Ammon, H. E. Ziegler, and H. Spencer maintain, on
   the contrary, that the principle of selection bears an aristocratic
   character. [447] In any case, we are witnesses to this remarkable fact,
   that a social aristocracy is raised against a social democracy; the
   Herrenmoral of Nietzsche is also defended on economical grounds;
   capitalism is deeply despised and fanatically opposed, but it gains
   also strong support and passionate defence; [448] and art in late years
   very seriously protests against social levelling, and makes a strong
   plea for riches and luxury, for the genius and aristocracy of the mind;
   it is highly normal, it is said, that the many should live for the few
   and the few live at the cost of the many. [449]

   The same fact also presents itself internationally in the mutual
   relations of the nations. The cosmopolitanism of the "Enlightenment"
   was not only exchanged in the nineteenth century for patriotism, but
   this patriotism was not infrequently developed into an exaggerated,
   dangerous, and belligerent chauvinism, which exalts its own people at
   the cost of other nations. In its turn this chauvinism was fed and
   strengthened by the revival of the race-consciousness which in Gobineau
   and H. St. Chamberlain found its scientific defenders. Not only in the
   different parts of the earth, but also often among the same people, and
   in the same land, races are sharply opposed to each other, striving
   after the chief power in the state, and supremacy in the kingdom of the
   mind. This race-glorification acquires such a serious character, and so
   far exceeds all bounds, that the virtues of the race are identified
   with the highest ideal. Deutschtum, for example, is placed on a level
   with Christendom, and Jesus is considered as an Aryan in race. [450]

   Economical interests besides sharpen the competition between the
   nations. Though this competition still bears outwardly a peaceful
   character, it widens the gulf between the nations, feeds egoism,
   stimulates the passions, and may on the smallest occasion break out
   into a war which would surpass all previous wars in devastation. From a
   kingdom of peace, which shall embrace all nations, we are farther away
   than ever. Many men have, indeed, dreamed sweet dreams of such a peace,
   or at least of a palace of peace and international arbitration; [451]
   but they have been sadly undeceived, and forced into fresh reflection
   by the sudden apparition of Japan. Just as many in the state are
   returning to monarchy and despotism, and wish again to accord the first
   place in society to aristocracy and capitalism, so others in
   international relations defend the arming of nations, the conflict of
   races, and sanguinary war. The effacement of all differences between
   the nations is not, according to their opinion, the highest aim to be
   striven after. An amalgamated humanity would cause, without doubt, an
   impoverisheel civilization and a weakening of human life. Of course
   race-hatred and contempt for foreigners are not approved on this
   account; but it is said that strong nations, just like strong
   individuals, will respect most the rights of others and will be most
   merciful to their defects. And though this diversity between nations
   and races may now and then cause a war, history proves that such a war
   has been a source of strength and welfare for many peoples, and for
   humanity as a whole. [452] War is, according to Moltke, an element of
   the world-order, as it is established by God, in which the noblest
   virtues of men are developed, such as courage and self-denial,
   faithfulness to duty, and self-sacrifice; without war the world would
   become a morass, and would sink into materialism. [453]

   If we take into account all these facts, it is not to be wondered at
   that culture is often treated with deep disdain, not only by
   Christians, but by the children whom it has fed and nourished. There
   are those--and their number increases--who, with Buckle,
   notwithstanding the intellectual development which has taken place, do
   not believe in any moral progress and speak only of a circle of
   development. [454] Others go still farther, and are of opinion that the
   human race, just in consequence of culture, is retrograding physically,
   psychically, intellectually, morally, and socially, and that safety can
   be obtained only by a radical change, namely, by a return to nature, or
   even to the animal state in which men originally lived. The great
   number of reformers who appear to-day in every domain of thought and
   action, indeed, sufficiently shows that culture, with all its
   blessings, does not content the heart, and does not meet all the needs
   of the soul. Evolutionists and socialists, though glorying in the
   conquests which the man of culture has made, vie with each other in
   condemning present-day society, and build all their hopes on the
   future. But that future is distant and uncertain ; for he who considers
   the moral corruption which has attacked our culture at the core, and
   takes into consideration the perils which press upon us from without,--
   the red, the black, and the yellow peril,--feels the anxious question
   rising within him, whether our whole modern culture is not destined
   sometime to devastation and annihilation like that of Babylon and
   Egypt, Greece and Rome. [455]

   Thus it appears that neither science nor philosophy, neither ethics nor
   culture, can give that security with regard to the future which we have
   need of, not only for our thought, but also for our whole life and
   action. This need of security cannot be voided by saying that every one
   must do his duty and leave the future to itself. For though there is
   great truth in the Christian motto, "Blind for the future, and seeing
   in the commandment," such true resignation is not born of doubt,but of
   faith, and does not leave the future to itself, but to God's fatherly
   guidance. The need of security concerning the future and the ultimate
   end of the world, therefore, always remains with us, because everything
   we value in this life is inseparably connected with the future. If the
   world at the end of its development is dissolved in a chaos, or sinks
   back into everlasting sleep, the value of personality, of religious and
   ethical life, and also of culture, cannot be maintained. The weal and
   woe of man, and the safety of our souls, are closely interwoven with
   the final destiny of the world. Therefore, in order to live and to die
   happily we need a consolation which is firm and durable, and gives
   security to our thought and labor. All world-views, therefore, end in
   an eschatology, and all eflorts at reformation are animated by faith in
   the future.

   If neither science nor culture, nor the combination of both, [456] can
   give us such security, the question remains whether there is anything
   else in the whole world in which we can trust at all times, in
   adversity and death, with our whole heart? Now history teaches, with a
   distinctness which precludes all doubt, that there is only one power
   which can give such a security, and can awaken such an absolute
   confidence in the heart always and everywhere, and that is religion.
   While science can boast of only a few martyrs, religion counts its
   witnesses by thousands and tens of thousands. Who would be ready to
   sacrifice his life for a purely mathematical or scientific truth? If we
   wish to find the security which gives us rest in life and death and
   keeps us firm in the midst of the storms of doubt, we must seek it in
   religion, or we can find it nowhere. All certainty concerning the
   origin, the essence, and the end of things, is based on religion. As
   soon as a world-view attacks these problems, it is met by the
   alternative, either to content itself with guesses and doubts, or to
   take refuge in a religious interpretion of the world. Comte thought,
   indeed, that religion and metaphysics belonged to the past, but none
   the less made his positivism serviceable for the preaching of a new
   religion; and Herbert Spencer did not explain how he, in his
   philosophy, could accept an unknowable power behind phenomena, and
   could give expression to the suggestion that this power is the same as
   that "which in ourselves wells up in the form of consciousness." [457]

   The reason why religion alone can create such a security lies at hand.
   First, it always includes faith in a divine power, which is distinct
   from the world, far above it, and can govern and guide it according to
   its own will; and, secondly, it puts man himself personally into
   connection with the divine power, so that he sees in the affairs of God
   his own affairs, and allied with God can defy the power of the whole
   world, even unto death. But this idea of religion has only come to its
   true and full embodiment in Christianity. For all religions which exist
   without the special revelation in Christ, and equally all confessions
   and world-views which differ from it, are characterized by this common
   peculiarity, that they identify God and the world, the natural and the
   ethical, being and evil, creation and fall, and therefore mix up
   religion with superstition and magic. There is only one religion which
   moves on pure lines and is conceived altogether as religion, and that
   is Christianity.

   In this religion God is the creator of all things. The whole world is
   the work of his hands; matter itself is made by him, and before its
   making was the object of his thought. All being and becoming thus
   embody a revelation of God. This revelation is the starting point of
   the unity of nature, the unity of the human race, the unity of history,
   and is also the source of all laws,--the laws of nature, of history,
   and of all development. The ideas and norms which govern religious,
   ethical, and social life, and appear in the self-consciousness and the
   thought of humanity, are the product of this revelation of God. In a
   word, that the world is no chaos, but a cosmos, a universe, is the
   silent postulate of all science and art for which they are indebted to
   the revelation which Christianity makes known to us. Nature and grace,
   culture and cultus, are built upon the same foundations.

   But this revelation is not sufficient. God is creator: he is further
   the reconciler of all things. There is much evil in the world,--natural
   and moral evil, sin and misery. Christianity is the one religion which
   connects these two kinds of evil and yet distinguishes them. Sin does
   not lie in matter, nor in nature, nor in the substance of things, but
   it belongs to the will of the creature; it is of ethical nature, and
   thus capable of being expiated, effaced, extinguished. It can be
   separated from the creature, so that it disappears and the creature
   remains intact, yea, much more, is restored and glorified. For God is
   above the world, and is also above sin and all evil. He allowed it
   because he could expiate it. So he maintained through all centuries and
   among all men the longing and the capacity for redemption, and wrought
   that redemption himself in the fulness of time, in the midst of
   history, in the crucified Christ. "God was, in Christ, reconciling the
   world with himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them." The cross
   of Golgotha is the divine settlement with, the divine condemnation of
   sin. There it is revealed that sin exists; it is no fiction which can
   be conquered by thought, no external defect which can be obliterated by
   culture; but it is an awful reality, and has a world-historical
   significance. But although it exists, it has no right of existence; it
   should not exist, and therefore it shall not exist.

   For God is the creator and redeemer, but also finally the restorer and
   renewer of all things. The history of mankind after the resurrection of
   Christ is the execution of the judicial sentence which was passed on
   the cross, of the sentence which in Christ condemns sin and absolves
   the sinner, and therefore gives to him a right and claim to forgiveness
   and renewal. The cross of Christ divides history into two parts, - the
   preparation for and the accomplishment of reconciliation; but in both
   parts, from the creation to the cross and from the cross to the advent,
   it is one whole, one uninterrupted work of God. Christianity is as
   religion much more than a matter of feeling or temperament; it embraces
   the whole man, all humanity, and the totality of the world. It is a
   work of God, a revelation from the beginning to the end of the ages, in
   word and in deed, for mind and heart, for the individual and the
   community. And it has its heart and centre in the person and the work
   of Christ.

   Christ occupies in Christianity quite a different position from that
   which Zarathustra or Confucius, Buddha or Mohammed, hold in the
   religion which was founded by each of them. Christ is not the founder
   of Christianity, nor the first confessor of it, nor the first
   Christian. But he is Christianity itself, in its preparation,
   fulfilment, and consummation. He created all things, reconciled all
   things, and renews all things. Because all things have in him their
   source, their being, and their unity, he also gathers in one all things
   under himself as Head, both those which are in heaven and those on
   earth. He is Prophet and Priest, but also King, who does not cease his
   work until he has delivered the kingdom perfect and complete to God the
   Father. This one equally sovereign and almighty, holy, and gracious
   will of God, which meets us and speaks to our conscience in the person
   and the, work of Christ, is the firm basis of our certainty, of our
   certainty concerning the past, the present, and the future. For nobody
   can deny that if there is and works such a will, then the origin,
   development, and destiny of the world are certain; then the life and
   fate of every man who identifies himself with this will of God and
   makes God's cause his own is assured now and for eternity. But the
   world of science and art, culture and technique, knows nothing of such
   a merciful will of God. It can advance no further, with all its
   thoroughness and sagacity, than the postulate that there must be such a
   will of God.

   But even this result of human knowledge and effort is a significant
   fact; for it contains the confession that the whole world, with all its
   development, is lost and must perish if it is not sustained and guided
   by an almighty will, which can cause light to appear out of darkness,
   life out of death, and glory out of suffering. What eye has not seen,
   nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to conceive
   otherwise than as a wish or a sigh, is revealed to us in the gospel.
   Jesus Christ came into the world to preserve it and to save it. This is
   the content of the gospel and the testimony of Scripture in spite of
   all criticism and opposition. By this testimony the prophets have
   lived, and the apostles and the whole Christian Church, and by it men
   will live till the end of time. For the truth of this testimony lies
   outside and beyond the bounds of all criticism in the system of the
   whole world, in the existence of the Christian church, and in the need
   of the human heart. The world cries: Such a will of God ought to be, if
   I am ever to be saved; and the gospel says: There is such a will of
   God; lift your eyes to the cross. Between the world as it exists around
   us, with all its laws and all its calamities; between culture, with all
   its glory and all its miseries; between the human heart, with all its
   aspirations and all its pains; between this whole universe and the will
   of God as it is made known to us in the gospel, there exists a
   spiritually and historically indissoluble unity. Take away that will,
   and the world is lost; acknowledge that will, and the world is saved.
   Revelation in nature and revelation in Scripture form, in alliance with
   each other, an harmonious unity which satisfies the requirements of the
   intellect and the needs of the heart alike.

   This result of a philosophy of revelation is finally confirmed by this,
   that the will of God, which, according to the gospel, aims at the
   salvation of the world, yet acknowledges fully here and hereafter the
   diversity which exists in the world of creatures. Monism in all its
   forms sacrifices the richness of reality to the abstract unity of its
   system. It asserts that all that exists is but the development of one
   matter and one power; it sees in the diversity only modifications of
   the same being; it dissolves even the contrasts of true and false, of
   good and evil, of right and wrong, into historical moments of the same,
   movement, and it concludes with the declaration that the world at the
   end of the process returns to chaos, to darkness and death, perhaps
   after a while to begin anew its monotonous round. The eschatological
   expectations which present themselves under the name of the restitution
   of all things, hypothetical or absolute universalism, and conditional
   immortality, also have received so much sympathy only because man
   closes his eyes consciously or unconsciously to reality and transforms
   the wishes of his heart into prophecies of the future. By the magic
   formulas of monism and evolution men make the world to be and to become
   in the past, present, and even in the future, everything they please.
   But reality scoffs at these phantasies; it places before us the
   sorrowful facts that the power of evil raises itself against good, that
   sin does not annihilate man, but hardens him spiritually, and that
   virtue and happiness, sin and punishment, are not in proportion to each
   other here upon earth as all hearts and consciences require. And yet
   since this is what really exists, it must in some way be in accordance
   with the holiness and goodness of God. [458]

   The gospel is suited to this reality, and is quite in agreement with
   it; it takes and acknowledges the world exactly as it is shown to our
   unbiassed view; it does not fashion it after a prescribed pattern, but
   accepts it unprejudicedly, with all its diversities and contrasts, with
   all its problems and enigmas. Man is indeed what Scripture describes
   him, and the world appears as Scripture shows it to us. A superficial
   view may indeed deny it; deeper experience and more serious inquiry
   always lead back again to the acknowledgment of its truth; the greatest
   minds, the noblest souls, the most pious hearts have repeated and
   confirmed the witness of Scripture from age to age. Scripture therefore
   does not stand isolated in its contemplation of the world and life, but
   is surrounded, upheld, and supported on all sides by the sensus
   communis of the whole of humanity; there is neither speech nor language
   where its voice is not heard. The world certainly was not originated in
   a monistic way, and it does not exist in this way. From the beginning
   it has shown a great variety, which has had its origin in divine
   appointment. This variety has been destroyed by sin and changed into
   all kinds of opposition. The unity of humanity was dissolved into a
   multiplicity of peoples and nations. Truth, religion, and the moral law
   have not kept their unity and sovereignty, but are confronted by lies,
   false religion, and unrighteousness. So the world was, and so it still
   remains. In spite of all striving after unity by means of world
   conquest, political alliance, and international arbitration, trade
   unions and economical interests ; in spite of the advocacy of an
   independent, positive, and common world-language, world-science,
   world-morality, and world-culture--unity has not and cannot be
   realized. For these forces can at the most accomplish an external and
   temporal unity, but they do not change the heart and do not make the
   people of one soul and one speech. The one true unity can only be
   brought about by religion, by means of missions. If there is ever to be
   a humanity one in heart and one in soul, then it must be born out of
   return to the one living and true God.

   Although the gospel lays this missionary work on the consciences of all
   its confessors with the greatest earnestness, yet it never flatters us
   with the hope that thereby the inner spiritual unity of mankind will be
   accomplished in the present dispensation. The idea of a millennium
   stands in direct opposition to the description of the future which runs
   through the whole of the New Testament. Jesus portrays to his disciples
   much rather a life of strife, oppression, and persecution. He promises
   them on earth not a crown, but a cross. The highest ideal for the
   Christian is not to make peace with the world, with science, with
   culture at any price, but in the world to keep himself from the evil
   one. We have no guarantee that the church and the world will not as
   fiercely strive with one another in the future as in the first
   centuries of Christianity. We have not the least assurance that, in
   spite, of all preaching of tolerance, a persecution which will exceed
   all previous oppressions will not break out against the church of
   Christ before the end of time. On the contrary, there is great danger
   that modern culture, progressing in its anti-supernaturalistic course,
   will be stirred up to anger against the steadfastness of believers and
   attempt to accomplish by oppression what it cannot obtain by reasoning
   and argument. At any rate, this is what the teaching of Christ and the
   apostles predicts of the last days.

   Because it recognizes this reality the gospel cannot end in a monistic
   formula; there remains difference, there remains an opposition, until
   and, indeed, even after the advent. Heaven and hell in what concerns
   their essence are no products of imagination, but elements of all
   religious faith, and even postulates of all thought which seriously
   takes into account the majesty of the moral world-order, the
   ineradicable consciousness of justice in the heart of man, and the
   indisputable witness of his conscience. [459] But in contradistinction
   to all other religions Christianity teaches that the position which man
   will hold in the future world is, in principle, determined by the
   relation in which he stands to God and his revelation, and that the
   allotment of that position will be made by no one else than Chdst, who
   created the world, who continually supports it in its being and unity,
   who is the life and light of man always and everywhere, who appeared in
   the fulness of time as the saviour of the world, and who therefore
   knows the world through and through, and can judge it in perfect
   justice. Nobody will be able to make objection to the righteousness and
   equity of his sentence. Whatever may be the result of the
   world-history, it will be acknowledged by all willingly or unwillingly,
   be raised above all criticism, and be consonant with God's virtues.
   Right and left from the great dividing line there remains room for such
   endless diversity that no single idle word will be forgotten, nor will
   a single good thought or noble action fall unnoted. Nothing of any
   value will be lost in the future; all our works do follow us, and the
   kings and nations of the earth will bring together into the city of God
   all their glory and honor. Above all differences, and over every
   variety, there will extend into the future the one holy and gracious
   will of God, which is the bond of the whole universe, and to which all
   will be subject and ancillary. The absolute, immutable, and inviolable
   supremacy of that will of God is the light which special revelation
   holds before our soul's eye at the end of time. For monism the present
   economy is as a short span of life between two eternities of death, and
   consciousness a lightning flash in the dark night. [460] But for the
   Christian this dark world is always irradiated from above by the
   splendor of divine revelation, and under its guidance it moves onward
   towards the kingdom of light and life. Round about revelation are
   clouds and darkness; nevertheless righteousness and judgment are the
   foundation of God's throne.







     __________________________________________________________________

   [388] Carneri, Der moderne Mensch., Volksausgabe, Stüttgart, p. xi.

   [389] H. D. Lloyd, Man the Social Creator, London, 1908, p. 3.

   [390] Ellen Key, Das Jahrhundert des Kindes, Berlin, 1902, p. 358.

   [391] Lloyd, op. cit., pp. 12, 13.

   [392] Jeruzalem, Gedanken und Denker, 1905, pp. 133-148.

   [393] L. Stein, Der Sinn des Daseins, 1904, p. 1, 5.

   [394] Proudhon, Philosophie du Progrès, Bruxelles, 1853, pp. 20, 24,
   25.

   [395] Stanley Hall, Adol., I, pp. 131.

   [396] Proudhon, op. cit., pp. 25, 19, 156.

   [397] G. Portig, Das Weltgesetz des kleinsten Kraftanwandes in den
   Reichen der Natur, 1903-1904.

   [398] E. Key, Das Jahrh. des Kindes., pp. 322, 3-5.

   [399] In Fr. Galton, Probability, the Foundation of Eugenics, The
   Herbert Spencer Lecture Delivered on June 5, 1907, p. 10.

   [400] E. Key, op. cit., p. 2. Stanley Hall, Adol., II, p. 123.

   [401] Galton, op. cit., Stanley Hall, Adol., II, p. 722. Lankester,
   Natur und Mensch, pp.44,49. Ludwig Wilser, Rassentheorien, Stuttgart,
   1908. Wynaendts Franken, Sociale Vertoogen, Haarlem, 1907, pp. 1-46. H.
   Treub, Verspreide Opstellen, Haarlem, 1904. Nijhoff, De
   Noodzakelijkheid van geneeskundig Onderzoek vóór het Huwelijk,
   Rotterdam, 1908.

   [402] Stanley Hall, Adol., II, pp. 561 ff. Ellen Key, op. cit., pp. 86,
   253. Louise Stratenus, Het Kind., pp. 128, 336.

   [403] Stanley Hall, op. cit., I, p. ix; II, p. 55.

   [404] Stanley Hall, op. cit., I, p. viii; II, pp. 62, 69.

   [405] Ellen Key, p. 293. Stanley Hall, I, pp. 168 ff.

   [406] Ellen Key, pp. 110 ff., 181. Louise Stratenus, Het Kind., p. 103.
   Stanley Hall, II, p. 497. Lodge, Literary World, Aug., 1907, p. 380;

   [407] Stanley Hall, I, pp. 131 ff.,170 ff. II, pp. 40 ff., 58 ff., 204
   ff.

   [408] Stanley Hall, II, pp. 153 ff. Lankester, Natur und Mensch, pp.
   56, 66, Mach, Popular-wissensch, Vorlesungen. Leipzig, 1896 (last
   lecture). Lehmann-Hohenberg, Naturwissenschaft und Bibel, Jena, 1904,
   pp. 5, 45, 55, etc.

   [409] The Socialistic literature is sufficiently well-known. Comp. only
   H. D. Lloyd, op. cit., H. G. Wells, New Worlds for Old, London,1908. R.
   J. Campbell, Christianity and the Social Order, London, 1907. A series
   of articles on The New Socialism, an Impartial Inquiry, in the British
   Weekly, 1908.

   [410] Woltmann, Der histor. Materialismus, pp. 418-430. Weisengrun, Das
   Ende des Marxismus, Leipzig, 1899. Ed. Bernstein, Wie ist wissensch.
   Socialismus Mglich? Berlin, 1901.

   [411] Paul Kleinert, Die Profeten Israels in sozialer Beziehung,
   Leipzig, 1905, p. 27

   [412] Bebel, Die Frau, 16e Aufl. 1892, pp. 263 ff.

   [413] Gumplovicz, Grundriss der Soziologie, p. 361.

   [414] L. Stein, An der Wende des Jahrh., p. 332. Id., Der Sinn des
   Daseins, pp. 149 ff.

   [415] Metschnikoff, Beiträge zu einer optimistischen Weltauffassung,
   Deutsch von Michalsky, München, 1908.

   [416] Stanley Hall, Adol., I, pp. viii, xviii.

   [417] James, Pragmatism, pp. 243 ff.

   [418] Comp. also Proudhon, Philos. du Progrès, p. 65. H. D. Lloyd, op.
   cit., p. 12.

   [419] Comp. Paul Kalweit, Religion und Philos. Idealismus, Religion und
   Geisteskultur, II, 1908, pp. 44-60.

   [420] Paulsen, Ethik, in Die Kultur der Gegenwart, System. Philos., p.
   309. Haering, Das Christliche Leben, 1907, pp. 104 ff. Kulpe, Einl. in
   die Philos., 1907, p.332. Kulpe here declares: "No immanent definition
   of the supreme good can possess more than relative character; the
   positing of a transcendental goal alone (which as such is inaccessible
   to scientific ethics) satisfies the idea of an ultimate, supreme,
   absolute value." Comp. also C. Fraser, Our Final Venture, Hibbert
   Journal, Jan., 1907, and G. F. Barbour, Progress and Reality, Hibbert
   Journal, Oct., 1907.

   [421] Lankester, Natur und Mensch, p. 26.

   [422] Gust. Le Bon, Psychologie du Socialisme, Paris, 1902. Ed.
   Dolléans, Le Caractère religieux du Socialisme, Paris, 1906.
   Diepenhorst, Naast het Kruis de roode Vaan., Amst., p. 46.

   [423] Lloyd, op. cit. pp. 6 ff. Stanley Hall, Adol., I, pp. 546 ff. II,
   p. 123.

   [424] Bruno Wille, Darwins Lebensanschauung, p. 6.

   [425] Stanley Hall, Adol., I, p. viii; II, pp. 63,-64.

   [426] Comp. Jos. Royce, Immortality, Hibbert Journal, July, 1907. Sir
   Oliver Lodge, The Immortality of the Soul, ib., Jan., April, 1908.
   Eucken, The Problem of Immortality, ib., July, Jan., 1908.

   [427] For example, William Crookes, Alfred Wallace, Sir Oliver Lodge,
   Fred. W. H. Myers in England, Fechner, Zöllner, Carl du Prel in
   Germany, Hartogh Heys van Zouteveen in Holland.

   [428] For example, McTaggart, Some Dogmas of Religion, pp. 112 ff.

   [429] Comp. W. Bruhn, Theosophie und Theologie, Glückstadt, 1907.

   [430] Schelling, Philos. der Offenbarung, p. 365. Liebmann, Analysis
   der Wirklichkeit, pp. 398 ff.

   [431] Bruno Wille, Darwins Lebensanschauung, p. 6. Ed. von Hartmann,
   Die Weltanschauung der modernen Physik, p. 33. Otto, Natur und relig.
   Weltansicht, p. 47. J. Ude, Monist. oder Teleolog. Weltanschauung,
   Graz, 1907. J. C. Snijders, De Ondergang der Wereld, Tijdspiegel, Oct.,
   1907. Fridtjof Nansen, Hibbert Journal, July, 1908, pp. 748 ff.

   [432] Höffdign in Paul Kalweit, Religion und Geisteskultur, 1908, pp.
   44 ff.; in Lodge, Hibbert Journal, April, 1908, p. 565, and Barbour,
   ib., Oct., 1907, pp. 59 ff. Münsterberg in Royce, ib., July, 1907, pp.
   724 ff.

   [433] About Schopenhauer's Nirvana comp. J. de Jager, De Beteekenis van
   Schopenhauers Pessimisme, Gids, Nov. 1907.

   [434] J. Kaftan, Aus der Werkstatte des Uebermenschen, Deutsche
   Rundschau., Oct. and Nov., 1905. George S. Patton, Beyond Good and
   Evil, The Princeton Theol. Review, July, 1908, pp. 392-436, especially
   pp. 430 ff. On the idea of an endless return of things, comp. Zeller,
   Die Philos. der Griechen, III, pp. 154 ff. Further, Gumplovicz,
   Soziologie, pp.158, 166ff., 348: E. Arrhenius, Die Vorstellung vom
   Weltgebaude im Wandel der Zeiten. Das Werden der Welten, 1907.

   [435] Comp. also Ostwald, Biologie en Chemie, Wet. Bladen, Dec. 1904,
   pp. 420-443.

   [436] Ostwald, Naturphilos., Syst. Philos. in Die Kultur der
   Gegegenwart, pp. 170-171.

   [437] Thus, in agreement with Huxley, Romanes, James, also Siebeck, Der
   Fortschritt der Menschheit, in Zur Religionsphilosophie, Tübingen,
   1907.

   [438] [Ed: There is no text in the notes for reference 51.]

   [439] Hieron. Lorm, Der grundlose Optimismus, in Jerusalem, Gedanken
   und Denker, pp. 156-163. L. Stein, An der Wende des Jahrh., p. 54. Der
   Sinn des Daseins, p. 76. Comp. an address by Dr. D. G. Jelgersma on, Is
   de Geschiedenis der Philosophie meer dan eene Geschiedenis van
   menschelijke Dwalingen? Handelsblad, Oct. 33, 1907. Also Topinard in
   Philip Vivian, The Churches and Modern Thought, London, 1907, pp. 266
   ff.

   [440] Prof. H. van Embden expressed himself to this effect in a
   discussion with Prof. Aengenent, Handelsblad, Nov. 28, 1907.

   [441] James, Varieties, pp. 136 ff.

   [442] Joh. Jüngst, Kultus- und Geschichts-religion (Pelagianismus und
   Augustinismus). Ein Beitr. zur relig. Psych. und Volkskunde, Giessen,
   1901.

   [443] Berthelot, Science et Morale, Paris, 1897. Ladenburg, Der
   Einfluss der Naturwiss. auf die Weltanschauung, 1903.

   [444] Comp. Lect. VI. note 33.

   [445] E.g. Max Weber, Die Protestantische Ethik und der "Geist" des
   Kapitalismus, Archiv. f. Sozialwiss. und Sozialpolitik, XX, pp. 1 ff.,
   XXI pp. 1 ff. He concludes his important survey with the question
   whether culture is to issue in this, that men become "professionals
   without spirit, pleasure-seekers without heart; non-entities of this
   sort pride themselves on having mounted to a previously unattained
   stage of culture."

   [446] Paulsen, Parteipolitik und Moral, Dresden, 1900. Valckenaer Kips,
   Tijdspiegel, March, 1908.

   [447] Dr. D. van Embdon, Darwinisme en Democratie. Maatsch. Vooruitgang
   en de Hulp aan het Zwakke. s Gravenhage,1901.

   [448] J. St. Loe Strachey, Problems and Perils of Socialism, London,
   1908. Comp. Handelsblad, April 12, 1901, Avondblad 2, on an essay by R.
   Ehrenberg, Over het Ontstaan en de Beteekenis van groote Vermogens, and
   Ammon, Die Gesellschaftsordnung und ihre naturlichen Grundlagen,
   1895-1900.

   [449] Van Deyssel, Prozastukken, 1895, pp. 43 ff., 277 ff. Karl
   Bleibtreu, Die Vertreter des Jahrh. Berlin, 1904, II, pp. 260-303. W.
   His, Medizin und Ueberkultur, Leipzig, 1908. Gérard, Civilization in
   Danger, Hibbert Journal, July, 1908.

   [450] Steinmetz, De Rassenquaestie, Gids, Jan. 1907.

   [451] L. Stein, An der Wende des Jahrh., pp. 348 ff.

   [452] Steinmetz, Die Philosophie des Krieges, Leipzig, 1907.

   [453] Thus also Ruskin, who declared that he had always observed that
   all great nations acquired their power of resistance and mental vigor
   in war, that war has instructed, peace has deceived them; war has
   schooled them, peace led them astray, in a word that war has made and
   peace has unmade them.

   [454] Gumplovicz, Soziologie, pp. 158-166 ff., 348.

   [455] Ibid. pp. 350, 352, 354. A. J. Balfour, Decadence, Cambridge,
   1908, p. 42.

   [456] Balfour, op. cit., p. 48.

   [457] C. Frazer, Hibbert Journal, Jan., 1907, p. 242.

   [458] C. Frazer, Philos. of Theism., p. 277. McTaggart, Some Dogmas of
   Religion, p. 114.

   [459] Kant judged an "Ausgleichung" between virtue and happiness
   necessary hereafter, and Paulsen is of the same opinion, Ethik, in Die
   Kultur der Gegenwart, System. Philos., pp. 304 ff. Comp. also a paper,
   with discussion, on Eschatological Expectations in the meeting of
   Modern Theologians, April 28, 29, 1908.

   [460] Poincaré, La Valeur de la Science, Paris, 1905, p. 276. Comp. J.
   Woltjer, De Zekerheid der Wetenschap, Amsterdam, 1907.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]14:18-20   [2]14:20

   Deuteronomy

   [3]26:5

   Jeremiah

   [4]51:7

   Romans

   [5]1:19-23
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/b/bavinck/revelation/cache/revelation.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=18#viii-p27.3
   2. file:///ccel/b/bavinck/revelation/cache/revelation.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=20#viii-p27.4
   3. file:///ccel/b/bavinck/revelation/cache/revelation.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=26&scrV=5#viii-p27.6
   4. file:///ccel/b/bavinck/revelation/cache/revelation.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=7#viii-p30.3
   5. file:///ccel/b/bavinck/revelation/cache/revelation.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=19#ii-p21.2
