     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Meditating on Scripture with the Saints
      Creator(s): Pasko, Mark
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

Introduction

   What is this book?

   Over the last ten years, I have learned to enjoy and rely on daily
   meditation books, both Christian (Living Faith, The Upper Room, Daily
   Bread) and general recovery material (such as Melody Beattie's "The
   Language of Letting Go"). They allow me/teach me to meditate or work on
   an issue every day, or several times a day, without having to spend a
   great deal of time in any one session. I've also learned to appreciate
   and enjoy anthologies, both Christian (such as Benedict Groeschel's
   "The Journey Toward God") and general (such as Norton's "Anthologies of
   World Literature" or Stephen Mitchell's "The Enlightened Heart"). These
   books are a compilation of a variety of information from a large number
   of sources into handy and easy-to-use formats that are both interesting
   and entertaining. They are a library at your fingertips.

   This book, I hope, combines the best of both of these types of
   literature into one Christian source of both meditative material and
   training in the practice of meditation. It combines the writings of
   many of the great Christian Saints, whose lives have been examples of
   how to live a holy life in all times and places, along with similar
   Bible readings, and various types of Christian prayer and meditation
   practices.

   Why is it needed?

   My temperament (highly charged and active) and experiences (a
   non-cleric lacking in meditative and mind training in my religious
   tradition) make it difficult to live a serene, devout and unchaotic
   life by learning meditative techniques. I need sources of inspiration
   that are short and directive but still allow me to experiment with
   different types of meditation.

   Why am I compiling it?

   I searched far and wide for a book of the type I needed. I didn't find
   one. There are very few Christian anthologies and most are out of
   print. Most available anthologies are of the world religions variety
   that lacked in traditional Christian sources. While I've enjoyed and
   learned much from these sources, they were not what I am looking for in
   this most recent part of my spiritual journey. Meditative material I've
   seen was generally non-Christian, were developed for Christian clerics
   in the Middle Ages or were fairly recent meditations of the Gnostic
   variety. Again, while all of these sources are useful in my spiritual
   development, they are not what I need at this moment.

   Since I didn't find the book I needed, I was "inspired" to compile it
   myself. I evidently need to teach others what I, myself, need to learn.
   While it is odd, I suspect that there is a real spiritual principal at
   work here.

   Though I've written this book primarily for my own use, I hope that it
   will be useful for others for their growth and God's glory. I hope that
   it will meet the needs of Christian from a variety of traditions. I've
   learned much from non-Christian sources and I suspect that this book
   will be a useful source of inspiration and Christian knowledge for any
   "searcher for God."

   The layout of Book

   The book is developed as 365 daily units. It is not being built on
   either a Church year or calendar year. Day one is the day you open and
   use the book. The meditation for each day will include the following:

   -a title,(in bold)

   -a short meditative phrase in brackets (in bold and underlined),

   -a reading from one of the Saints/Fathers of the Church,

   -a related Bible reference (in italics),

   -a short reflection in commentary form meant to give perspective to the
   readings and includes relevant questions to get the thoughts flowing,
   and

   -writing space either for reflections or resolutions

   To help your practice of prayer and meditation , here are some
   suggestions that have been part of the tradition of Christian
   spirituality:

   *Create a sacred space: "When you pray, go to your private room, shut
   yourself in, and so pray to your God who is in the secret place, and
   your God who sees all that is done in secret will reward you" (Matthew
   6:5-6)

   *Open yourself to the power of prayer: Remind yourself that God is
   present and consciously place yourself in His presence. Come to prayer
   with an open mind, heart and will. Be flexible because God's Spirit
   goes where God wills it.

   *Read meditatively: Read the writings of the Saint and the Bible
   passage. Take your time reading. If a particular phrase touches you,
   stay with it for a while. Do not hurry.

   *A number of meditative approaches can be used for any of the daily
   meditations. By using a variety of techniques, this book can be used
   for years without repeating any meditation in an identical manner.
   Meditative approaches include the following:

   -Centering Prayer- After reading the writing of the Saint and Bible,
   use either the short phrase in parentheses after the title or any other
   that you feel "inspired" to use. It will help you to focus your prayer
   by repeating it slowly in harmony with your breathing. (See meditation
   one and 2)

   -Lectio Divina- This type of meditation, "divine studying," is a
   concentrated reflection on the readings. Read the passages several
   times and then concentrate on one or two sentences that inspire you,
   pondering their meaning for you and their effect on you. Let your
   reading and thinking lead you to prayer on the topic. End by writing a
   resolution noting how the reading will change your life in the space
   provided. (See meditation seven and 60)

   -Guided Meditation- In this type of meditation, our imagination helps
   us consider alternative actions and likely consequences. Read the scene
   or story several times and place yourself in it. What character are
   you? How do you feel? How do you act? (See meditation five and 47)

   -Examen of consciousness- Examine how God has been speaking to you in
   your past and present experience. Examine your awareness of God's
   presence in your life. (See meditation 11 and 29)

   -Journal writing- Writing is a process of discovery. Reserve a special
   notebook for your writings. If you like, you can go back to your
   journal entries at a future time for an examen of consciousness. (See
   meditation six and 58)

   *End with a Prayer of Silence - After completing your meditation, end
   with silence, simply listening to anything the Holy Spirit wishes to
   tell you. This is not easy and takes much practice to eliminate
   unwanted ego thoughts. It is suggested that you start with brief
   periods of such silence and increase their time and frequency as you
   become more skilled. The following schedule will help you to slowly
   build up time in silent prayer:

   Day     Duration     Frequency        Total Time (min)

   1-5      1 min        2x(on rising/sleeping) 2

   6-10     2 min        2 x                 4

   11-15    3 min        2 x                 6

   16-20    2 min        4 x                 8

   21-25    5 min        2 x                10

   26-30    3 min        4 x                12

   31-35    2 min        7 x                14

   36-40    4 min        4 x                16

   41-45    2 min        9 x                18

   46-50    10 min       2 x                20

   51-55    2 min        11 x(every hour)   22

   56-60    12 min       2 x                24
     __________________________________________________________________

A Trinitarian Trilogy by the Sea (2004)

(Inspired by Ephesians 1:3-14 and St. Augustan)

I

   The healing and holiness of God are rarely as apparent to me as in the
   Cathedral of Nature- especially the ocean shore. It is here that I am
   truly re-created with all of my senses filled completely. Sight is
   filled with waves and birds. Ears, with the roar of waves, the
   whispering of winds and the laughter of children. Touch the graininess
   of sand, the chill of ocean, the refreshing breeze. Taste and smell the
   tangy saltiness- symbol for preservation and zest. Likewise, God is all
   filling.

   The symbols of the seashore are often used in both Old and New
   Testament. In the Old, Yahweh is portrayed as the Rock of Faith (Ps 62:
   1-7), the Water to quench all thirst (Jer 2: 13), and the Breath that
   gives Life (Ezek 37: 1-10). Christ describes the Father as building a
   home on Rock (Matt 7: 21-27). He described Himself as the Water of Life
   (John 4: 1-14) and He described the working of the Wind of the Spirit
   (John 3: 1-8).

   By bathing myself in the wonders of the shore, I am immersing myself in
   the mystery that is the Triune God.

II

   God is an ocean shore of salt, breeze and sea

   all very different

   but makes one shore of the three.

   The Father, the Solid Rock of Creation, is the Beach of Being,

   is the maker of boulder and sand.

   The Father is silent, barely a whispering sound

   as ocean and wind embrace all around.

   The Son, the Water of Life, is the liquid ocean

   caressing the Rock and Wind with devotion.

   The roaring waves beckon: "Come".

   The Spirit is the airy Wind,

   tinged with the salty tang of healing and holiness

   loving both Beach and Ocean as He blows.

   Where? Only God knows!

   Without each: beach, wave and sea

   Like Father, Son and Spirit,

   neither shore nor God would be.

III

   Blessed be the Father,

   maker of sun, sand and sea

   Without whom these would not be.

   Bond between the Word of God and the Wind of God.

   Honor to the Holy Spirit

   The Sustainer and Sanctifier of Life

   Without whom neither dolphin nor dove would live

   Bridging the breach between God-man and Ground of Being.

   Praise to the Son, the Redeemer and Ransomer of existence,

   without whom there would be no consciousness of wonder or praise.

   Joy and laugher between the Creator of Life and the Breath of Life.

   Glory to Father, Son and Spirit,

   the All-in-All

   Lover of all that is,

   that makes all whole and one.
     __________________________________________________________________

   1. Prayer to the Holy Spirit

   (Holy Spirit Come)

   Holy Spirit, powerful Consoler, sacred bond of the Father and the Son,
   hope of the afflicted, descend into my heart and establish in it your
   loving rule. Enkindle in my lukewarm soul the fire of your love so that
   I may be wholly subject to you.

   We believe that not only that you dwell in us, but that you prepare a
   dwelling for the Father and Son. Come to me Consoler of abandoned souls
   and protector of the needy. Help the afflicted, strengthen the weak,
   and support the wavering.

   Come and purify me. Let no evil desire take possession of me. You love
   the humble and resist the proud. Come to me, glory of the living and
   hope of the dying. Lead me by your grace that I may always be pleasing
   to you. Amen.

   --St. Augustine (Prayers for Urgent Occasions)LF

   Wisdom 7:22-30

   When I pray, I rarely think of the Third Person of the Trinity: the
   Holy Spirit. Do I pray to Jesus? -Absolutely. Do I pray to the Father?
   -Sometimes. Prayer to the Holy Spirit? -Somehow this gets lost even
   though this is the main contact between God and humanity in this world.
   As I listen to the Holy Spirit, I will pick up many of the Holy
   Spirit's characteristics (also characteristics of Jesus)including
   holiness, intelligence, subtlety, incisiveness, lucidity, benevolence,
   friendliness, steadfastness, dependability and peacefulness (Wisdom 7:
   22-23).

   Am I becoming more "Spirit-like"?

   2. Words to Memorize

   (Be Not Afraid)

   Let nothing disturb you,

   Let nothing frighten you,

   Though all things pass,

   God does not change.

   Patience wins all things.

   But he lacks nothing

   Who possesses God;

   For God alone suffices.

   --St. Teresa (her bookmark)JTG

   Psalm 127:1-2

   These few words of this great saint must have been very important to
   her since she wrote them on the bookmarker of her Bible. She wanted to
   see the words often and remember them and absorb them. This saint died
   at the age of 22 years, in great pain and with nearly no spiritual
   light in her last months. How she needed to know of the constancy of
   God in a changing world in spite of her feelings.

   Do I still become frightened (the opposite of love) by daily events?

   3. Benefits of Being Part of the "Family"

   (Rejoice My Soul)

   Mine are the heavens

   And mine is the earth

   The angles are mine

   And the Mother of God;

   And God himself is mine and for me,

   Because Christ is mine

   And all for me.

   Yours is all of this,

   My soul.

   Go forth and exult

   In your glory!

   Hide yourself in it and rejoice!

   --St. John of the Cross (JTG)

   Romans 8:14-17, 28-30

   When I read these words of St. John, I feel shocked! This sounds like
   grandiosity and pride--certainly not characteristics that I would
   strive for. Then I remember the words of St. Paul indicating that I am
   a child and heir of God and a joint-heir and a younger brother of
   Jesus. Maybe it is pride and grandiosity, in a sort of negative way,
   not to accept my status and heritage in Jesus.

   Am I afraid to live up to my responsibilities as a younger brother of
   Jesus?

   4. God, a Garden?

   (God, My Beloved)

   As for that part of the Garden, my beloved,

   which is situated so gloriously

   at the summit of that height

   where dwells the Glory,

   not even its symbol

   can be depicted in man's thought;

   for what mind

   has the sensitivity

   to gaze upon it,

   or the faculties to explore it,

   or the capacity to attain to that Garden

   whose riches are beyond comprehension.

   --St. Ephrem of Syria (Hymns on Paradise)JTG

   Song of Songs 4:12-15

   As a man, I have a hard time referring to God (a masculine connotation)
   as my "beloved" (a female connotation). Using the symbol of a "garden"
   to describe God as rich, fruitful and living is a little easier to
   accept. According to the Song of Songs, however, God uses the same
   image of a garden to describe His Beloved (protected, watered, bearing
   exquisite fruit). Since God's Beloved is His Church of which I am a
   part, do I feel protected, cared for and, as a result, bear lavish
   fruit?

   Am I being creatively fruitful as a result of my close contact with
   God's fruitfulness? Am I allowing myself to be a branch since God is
   the Vine?

   5. The Savior's Darkness

   (God is Love)

   For a huge mass of troubles took possession of the tender and gentle
   body of our most holy Savior. He knew that His ordeal was imminent and
   just about to overtake Him; the treacherous betrayer, the bitter
   enemies, binding ropes, false accusations, slanders, blows, thorns,
   nails, the cross, and horrible tortures stretched out over many hours.
   Over and above these, He was tormented by the thought of His disciples'
   terror, the loss of the Jews, even the destruction of the very man who
   so disloyally betrayed Him, and finally the ineffable grief of His
   beloved mother. The gathered storm of all these evils rushed into His
   most gentle heart and flooded it like the ocean sweeping through broken
   dikes.

   --St. Thomas More (The Sadness of Christ) JTG

   Luke 22:39-46

   At Gethsemane, and the remainder of the Passion, we see the most human
   side of Jesus' nature. It is hard to imagine the intensity of his
   feelings of grief, sadness and anxiety. His feelings were so intense
   that He sweated blood. He could have had feelings of fear (the opposite
   of love) and abandonment (by God, His disciples, His friends). These
   are the two things that, according to modern thought, create most of
   this world's psychological "problems." The real issue, though, the one
   that separates the human side of Jesus from the Godly side, is not that
   He had these "feelings" but what He did: He did God's will in spite of
   them.

   Am I willing to go beyond my feeling and do what is right instead?

   6. Love Letters to God

   (I Hunger for You)

   At last I love you alone, you alone do I follow, you alone do I seek.
   You alone am I ready to serve, for you alone, by right, are ruler.
   Under your rule do I wish to be. Command me, I pray you, and order what
   you will, but first heal and open my ears that I may hear your
   commands, heal and open my eyes that I may see your every movement.
   Remove all unsoundness from me so that I may recognize you. Tell me
   where to look so that I may look upon you, and I shall hope to do all
   the things you command!

   Too late have I loved you, O beauty so ancient and yet so new! Too late
   have I loved you. And behold, you were within me and I was away
   outside, and there I searched for you, deformed, plunging, absorbed in
   those beautiful things which you had made. You were with me, but I was
   not with you. Things held me far from you, things which would not have
   existed at all except for you. You called, you shouted, and burst in on
   my deafness. You shone and gleamed brightly at me and dispersed my
   blindness. You breathed forth fragrances, and I drew in my breath, and
   still I pain for you. I tasted much, and I hunger and thirst for more.
   You touched me, and I burned for your peace.

   --St. Augustine (Soliloquies and Confessions, Book 10)JTG

   John 3:16, Song of Songs 8:6-7

   What love poetry! St. Augustine almost makes me blush. He searches for
   his love everywhere, in all created things, not realizing that God was
   with him all along; calling him, shouting to him, bursting in on his
   deafness, dispersing his blindness, perfuming his spiritual breath with
   His fragrance. Augustine still hungers, thirsts and burns for the love
   of God. God responds because He so loved the world that He gave His
   only Son.

   Do I know how much God loves me? In what ways do I love God? Is there
   any balance between the two?

   7. The A-B-C's of Spiritual Growth

   (Faith is Love in Action)

   There are means in which a contemplative apprentice should be
   occupied...reading, thinking and praying. These three are so coupled
   together, that unto them that be beginners...thinking may not goodly be
   gotten, without reading or hearing coming before. Without reading or
   hearing of God's word, it is impossible to man's understanding that a
   soul that is blinded in custom of sin should see the foul spot in his
   conscious. If this spot be any special sin, then is this well (to clean
   the soul) Holy Church, and this water confession... If it be but a
   blind root and a stirring of sin, then is this well merciful God, and
   this water, prayer... And thus may you see that no thinking may goodly
   be gotten in beginners without reading or hearing coming before: nor
   praying without thinking.

   -Anonymous, Cloud of Unknowing (14^th century), CCEL

   James 2:14-17, 24-26

   As a body without breath is dead, so is faith without good deeds. One
   must study the spiritual life and pray in order to grow in faith. To
   study the spiritual life, one must have and think about living and
   written examples of how to live the faith. Prayer requires practice.

   Am I willing to face the discipline of growing in faith and of living
   the holy life?

   8. Love Silence

   (Light Will Dawn)

   Love silence above everything else, for it brings you near to fruit
   which the tongue is too feeble to expound. First of all we force
   ourselves to be silent, but then from out of our silence something else
   is born that draws us into silence itself. May God grant you to
   perceive that which is born of silence! If you begin in this discipline
   I do not doubt how much light will dawn in you from it.

   After a time a certain delight is born in the heart as a result of the
   practice of this labor, and it forcibly draws the body on to persevere
   in stillness. A multitude of tears is born in us by this discipline, at
   the wondrous vision of certain things which the heart perceives
   distinctly, sometimes with pain, and sometimes with wonder. For the
   heart becomes small and becomes like a tiny babe: as soon as it clings
   to prayer, tears burst forth.

   --St. Isaac of Syria (The Heart of Compassion: Daily Readings with St.
   Isaac of Syria)JTG

   Mark 1:35-39

   Evidently, Jesus began every day in prayer and silence; especially on
   those days when big decisions needed to be made (picking the apostles
   for instance) or when strength was needed (performing miracles in
   places He was inspired to visit). According to St. Isaac, this silent
   time is a creative time when "light will dawn". This is evidently a
   reference to an intuition of God's plan and will. I find that while I
   have every reason to pursue this "silence," it is often difficult. I
   find it humbling that I, an engineer, one who was trained to think with
   discipline, lacks the discipline to do the most important thing in
   life!

   Am I willing to practice the discipline of silence every day, whether
   or not it is easy or convenient?

   9. The Voice of Jesus: the Still, Small Voice

   (God is Within)

   I have often reminded you, my dear sister, about the remembrance of
   God, and now I tell you again: unless you work and sweat to impress on
   your heart and mind this awe-inspiring Name, you keep silence in vain,
   you sing in vain, you fast in vain, you watch in vain. In short, all a
   nun's work will be useless without this activity, without recollection
   of God. This is the beginning of silence for the Lord's sake, and it is
   also the end.. This most desirable Name is the soul of stillness and
   silence. By calling it to mind we gain joy and gladness, forgiveness of
   sins, and a wealth of virtues. Few have been able to find this most
   glorious Name, save only in stillness and silence. Man can attain it in
   no other way, even with great effort. Therefore, knowing the power of
   this advice, I entreat you for the love of Christ always to be still
   and silent, since these virtues enrich remembrance of God within us.

   -Theophan the Recluse (Quoted in the Art of Prayer) JTG

   1 Kings 19:9-16

   It is hard to imagine how to be still, silent and still live an active
   life. When I think of Elijah the prophet listening to the "still, small
   voice" at the Mountain of God, I see a man of major action and power:
   walking (or running!) for forty days, anointing kings, fighting single
   handedly against the evil ambition of King Ahab to wipe out the worship
   of the Lord. I suspect that to reconcile these readings is what Brother
   Lawrence calls the Practice of the Presence of God: being in constant
   conversation with Him and living in His Peace while living an active
   life doing God's Will.

   How often do I "talk" with God during the day?

   10. Trust and Zeal-A Martyr's Encouragements

   (I Trust God)

   All brothers must pray very much and well. Work with fervor and don't
   worry too much about us, because nothing can happen to us without the
   permission of God and the Immaculata.(1)

   Let us promise to let ourselves be led more and more completely how and
   when the Mother of God wishes, so that, fulfilling our duty to the
   utmost, we may through love save all souls. (2)

   --St. Maximilian Kolbee (1-postcard 3/13/41, 2-postcard 5/12/41)JTG

   Matthew 6:25-34

   Wow! What faith it must take to be able to trust Providence, fulfill
   one's duty and, through love, to save souls while in a German
   concentration camp! St. Kolbee did his duty and save souls; he gave his
   life, through starvation, to save the life of a fellow prisoner. When
   Jesus, in the Sermon on the Mount, says to "set your heart on the
   Kingdom first and on God's saving justice and all these other things
   will be given you as well" and "will not God look much more after you
   of little faith?", he evidently doesn't mean that one will necessarily
   live a long life or die a pleasant death. He means that God will take
   care of me in all the ways that are truly important for all eternity.

   To what extent do I trust God?

   11. Forgiveness and the Interior Life

   (Forgive Me Lord)

   Without an interior life, we will never have strength to persevere in
   sustaining all the difficulties inseparable from any apostolate, the
   coldness and lack of cooperation even on the part of virtuous men, the
   calumnies of our adversaries, and at times even the jealousy of friends
   and comrades in arms...Only a patient virtue, unshakably based upon the
   good, and at the same time smooth and tactful, is able to move these
   difficulties to one side and diminish their power.

   --St. Pious X (Encyclical Manete in Me (Remain in Me), 1905)JTG

   Matthew 6:5-15

   Motives have always been a problem for me, especially ulterior motives.
   Why do I do "good deeds?" In addition to wanting to do God's will and
   to be a "healing vessel," I also want to be loved, appreciated and
   esteemed. When I have these other motivations, these "ego add-ons,"
   they often come to light in some public way and I am mortified and
   embarrassed. The most important thing I need do is to be aware of these
   ulterior motivations. This requires an interior life of reflection.
   Secondly, I need to accept these motivations as a part of my
   personality/character that I really want to change. Thirdly, I must
   cooperate with God's grace to change. A part of the change process is
   forgiveness: "if you forgive others their failings, your heavenly
   Father will forgive you yours."

   What ulterior motivations of the Ego do I have when I do good works?

   12. A Great Act of Forgiveness

   (I Love My Enemies)

   The dreaded words having been uttered, More was given one final
   opportunity to speak- a chance to plead for mercy customarily given to
   convicts after sentencing. But More did not ask for mercy, instead he
   offered forgiveness:

   More have I not to say, my lords, but that like as the blessed Apostle
   St. Paul, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, was present, and
   consented to the death of St. Stephen, and kept their clothes that
   stoned him to death, and yet be they now both twain holy Saints in
   heaven, and shall continue their friends forever, so I verily trust,
   and shall therefore right heartily pray, that through your lordships
   have now here in earth been judges to my condemnation, we may yet
   hereafter in heaven merrily all meet together, to our everlasting
   salvation.

   --St. Thomas More (Quoted in The King's Good Servant But God's
   First)JTG

   Acts 7:55-60

   I am struck by the similarity in attitude between St. Thomas More and
   St. Stephen. Neither were afraid of death and both were truly forgiving
   of their executioners""just as Jesus was. Both believed that truth was
   more important than this life and both had a powerful hope in the life
   to come.

   Would I be willing to die for the truth? Is my faith in the words of
   Jesus stronger than this life? Would I be able to forgive my
   "executioners?"

   13. Complete Charity

   (Jesus Doesn't Judge)

   All our religion is but a false religion, and all our virtues are mere
   illusions and we ourselves are only hypocrites in the sight of God, if
   we have not that universal charity for everyone-for the good and for
   the bad, for the poor and for the rich, and for all those who do us
   harm as much as for those who do us good.

   --St. John Vianney, the Cure of Ars (Quoted in Voice of the Saints)JTG

   Matthew 5:43-48

   I must always be careful of projection. Whenever I find myself judging
   someone, unless they are standing on my feet and punching me in the
   face, they are doing nothing to me! Most often, I am trying to disown a
   piece of myself that I am not proud to take ownership of. Often when I
   do take ownership of the characteristic, I find my judgment about the
   person disappears! Coincidence? I don't think so.

   Do I know how to love? Can I do good to my enemies? Can I pray for
   those who persecute me? Can I "rain" blessings on the "bad" and the
   "wicked?" Who are "bad" and "wicked" anyway? When I judge someone as
   "bad" or "wicked," am I sure I am not projecting some of my own
   imperfections onto others? Am I "perfect" like my heavenly Father?

   14. The Source of Humility

   (Jesus Learned Humility)

   Now humility of heart comes about in a person for two causes: either
   from precise knowledge of his sins, or from recollection of the
   greatness of God. I mean, how exceedingly the greatness of the Lord of
   all lowered itself, so that in such ways as these he might converse
   with and admonish men. He humbled himself so far as to assume a human
   body; he endured men and associated with them, and showed himself so
   despised in the world, he who possesses ineffable glory above with God
   the Father, and at whose sight the angels are struck with awe, and the
   glory of whose countenance shines throughout their orders.

   --St. Isaac of Syria (The Heart of Compassion: Daily Readings With St.
   Isaac of Syria)JTG

   Hebrews 4:14-16, 5:7-9

   Jesus was humble through choice. His persecutors tried to humiliate him
   but were unable to do so. Jesus already learned humility: He considered
   Himself a brother and a servant of all; especially the poor, the
   rejected, and the despised. He was "every man"; one of us by His own
   choice! He never exalted Himself. By the power of His love for Himself
   and His Father, He never forgot who He was in spite of what was
   happening to Him. Because of this love for Himself and His Father, He
   never lost His dignity and His love for others was unbounded.

   How do I build myself up by not being who and what I really am? Is
   being humiliated the only way for me to stop this game of the Ego?

   15. Great Love

   (Ask...Knock...Seek...Find)

   No good is possible except by an exceedingly great love. This we can
   see from the story of the woman in the Gospel, who was a sinner: God in
   his great mercy granted her the forgiveness of her sins and a firm
   union with Him, "for she loved much" (Lk. 7:47) . He loves those who
   love Him, He cleaves to those who cleave to Him, gives Himself to those
   who seek Him, and abundantly grants fullness of joy to those who desire
   to enjoy his love.

   To kindle in his heart such a divine love, to unite with God in an
   inseparable union of love, it is necessary for a man to pray often,
   raising the mind to Him. For as a flame increases when it is constantly
   fed, so prayer, made often, with the mind dwelling ever more deeply in
   God, arouses divine love in the heart. And the heart, set on fire, will
   warm all the inner man, will enlighten and teach him, revealing to him
   all its unknown and hidden wisdom, and making him like a flaming
   seraph, always standing before God within his spirit, always looking at
   Him within his mind and drawing from this vision the sweetness of
   spiritual joy.

   --St. Dmitri of Rostov (Quoted in The Art of Prayer)JTW

   Matthew 7:7-13

   Since 1991, the year I got sober, I've spent an hour each morning in
   prayer and spiritual reading. On most nights, I try to do the same. In
   the interim years, I've experienced divorce and depression at various
   times. During that time, I've become, amazingly, kinder and more
   loving. If I didn't keep "asking, knocking and seeking," I suspect I
   would have become bitter and less loving. The "flame" that St. Dimitri
   mentions felt like a fire burning away some of my ego and purifying me.

   Am I willing to be purified through legitimate suffering if that is
   required for my spiritual growth?

   16. The Foundation of Our Life

   (The Lord Is My Shepherd)

   Our good Lord protects us with the greatest of loving care when it
   seems to us that we are almost forsaken and abandoned because of our
   sins and because we see that we have deserved it. And because of the
   meekness that we obtain from this, we are raised very high in God's
   sight by his grace. And also God in his special grace visits whom he
   will with such great contrition, and also with compassion and true
   longing for him, that they are suddenly delivered from sin and from
   pain, and taken up into bliss and made equal with the saints. By
   contrition we are made clean, by compassion we are made ready, and by
   true longing for God we are made worthy...

   Peace and love are always in us, living and working, but we are not
   always in peace and in love; but God wants us to take heed that he is
   the foundation of our whole life in love, and furthermore that he is
   our everlasting protector, and mightily defends us against all our
   enemies.

   --Julian of Norwich (Showings) LF

   Matthew 7:24-27

   "Peace and love are always in us, living and working, but we are not
   always at peace and in love." These words of St. Julian of the 14^th
   century sound almost revolutionary to me in the 21^st century. I do not
   have to feel love in order to be loving! I do not need to feel peaceful
   in order to exude peace! Feelings are not facts, as recovery people are
   apt to say. It is only important that my foundations in faith are
   strong and secure.

   Are my feelings more important than doing what is right?

   17. God Wants Nothing But to Be Loved

   (God Is Love)

   Love is a great thing; as long as it returns to its beginning, goes
   back to its origin, turns again to its source, it will always draw
   afresh from it and flow freely. In love alone, of all the movements of
   the soul and the senses and affections, can the creature respond to its
   Creator, if not with an equal, at least with a like return of gift for
   gift. For example, if God is angry with me, can I return his anger? Not
   at all; I shall be afraid and tremble and beg for pardon. If he accuses
   me, I shall not return his accusation, but concede that he is right. If
   he judges me, I shall not judge him but adore him. And in saving me he
   does not seek to be saved by me in return, nor does he need to be set
   free by anyone in return when he frees all....Now you see how different
   it is with love. For when God loves, he wants nothing but to be loved;
   he loves for no other purpose than to be loved, knowing that those who
   love him are blessed by their very love.

   --St. Bernard of Clairvaux (Selected Works)LF

   Hosea 11:1-4,8-9

   The mighty Yahweh of the Old Testament, thank God, has a tender side!
   While it doesn't often show in the Old Testament, I suspect that this
   was due more to an inability of the "vessels" transmitting knowledge of
   the Lord then that the Lord became more tender over time. Evidently
   tenderness, especially in men, was not very common in ancient times. It
   is not particularly common even today! As a man, one of the most
   difficult things for me to ask for was for love! (How unmanly!).

   Am I willing to grow in tenderness and admit my needs to others?

   18. Avoiding the Dark Path

   (The Lord is My Soul's Guide)

   How different are your ways, O Lord,

   from what our feeble minds imagine!

   When a soul is resolved henceforth to love you,

   and to deliver itself into your hands,

   you want from it nothing more than obedience

   and that it should be well informed

   as to what it means to really serve you

   and to seek only that!

   It has no need to seek paths

   and choose between them,

   since from now on its will is yours.

   It is you, my Lord,

   who undertake to be its guide

   along the path that is to its best advantage.

   --St. Teresa of Avila (Praying With St. Teresa) LF

   Psalm 1:1-6

   Both St. Teresa and the psalmist agree that "the soul has no need to
   seek paths and choose between them since from now on its will is the
   Lord's" or "delights in the love of the Lord and murmurs its law day
   and night." By relying on the Lord's will/Law, many of the forks in the
   road will disappear and, instead, the clear way will emerge. By
   practicing the avoidance of the negative, only the positive will
   remain.

   Am I willing to be considered a "Pollyanna" by shaping my perceptions
   to perceive more of the good in others and events?

   19. Healing And Faith

   (Heal Me Lord-Within and Without)

   Not as an unknowing examiner, but as a questioner who knew everything
   beforehand, Jesus drew his petitioner into the center of attention. She
   was silent, making suggestions only by her thoughts, in ready waiting
   behind his back for the measures by which he exercised his powers. He
   made her stand before all so that she who had gained health for herself
   might also bring faith for all; that she who had his power might
   acknowledge his majesty; that she who had made him so fully known might
   not go away again unknown, herself, as she expected.

   While she was blushing over her wound and with so much concern fearing
   him as God, the woman found her faith getting darkened. Clouds of
   confusion obscured the light in her mind. Therefore, the voice of her
   questioning Lord, like a salutary wind, drove the clouds away,
   dispensed the mists, and enlightened her faith. It made her who had
   recently been in darkness of the night brighter than the very sun. For,
   she shines throughout the whole world, is resplendent in the whole of
   the Church, and is glorious among its members. Is she, then, less than
   a sun? If she had returned unseen-give me leave to say it-she would
   have escaped her Physician, not tested him. She could have ascribed
   what she obtained to herself rather than to her Healer. She would have
   believed that she had drawn her cure from the hem of his garment, not
   from his penetrating understanding.

   --St. Peter Chrysologus (M)

   Acts 3:1-10

   The purpose of healing, aside from reducing the suffering of a person,
   is ultimately to bring faith to others and glory to God through Christ.
   This is a lesson for me. My light (good works) is not to be "hid under
   a basket" but to be shown openly, "declared from the rooftops," not to
   win fame for myself but to bring Jesus to others for their growth in
   faith.

   Am I willing to let God have all the credit for any good that I do and
   be content that I am being used as a channel of God's blessings?

   20. Being With Jesus

   (Thy Kingdom Come)

   Leaving the vanity of many, and their false doctrines, let us return to
   the word that was delivered to us from the beginning "watching unto
   prayer," and persevering in fasting; with supplication beseeching the
   all-seeing God "not to lead us into temptation." As the Lord has said,
   "The spirit truly is willing but the flesh is weak."

   Let us therefore, without ceasing, hold steadfastly to him who is our
   hope, and the earnest of our righteousness, even Jesus Christ, "who
   bore our sins in his own body of the tree; who did no sin, neither was
   guile found in his mouth," but suffered all for us, that we might live
   through him. Let us, therefore, imitate his patience, and, if we suffer
   for his name, let us, glorify him; for this example he has given us by
   himself, and so have we believed.

   --St. Polycarp to the Ephesians (a pupil of St. John) (M)

   1 John 2:29-3:2

   Like father, like son. Like teacher, like pupil. In this reading from
   St. Polycarp, I hear an echo of his teacher St. John, the beloved
   apostle. In the reading of St. John, I hear an echo of Jesus, his
   teacher and brother.

   In this trail of tradition and testimony, will those I meet hear the
   echo of Polycarpa, John, Jesus, in me? Am I spreading the message of
   the Gospel?

   21. The Power of Prayer

   (Lord, Hear My Prayer)

   The reason why the priest utters a greeting in church is this: that he
   may show that he is at peace with the whole assembly of the
   faithful...And so the priest before he offers sacrifice and prayers to
   God shows by this mutual greeting that he is bound to the faithful by
   the bond of brotherly love; he does this so that he may make this
   commandment of the Lord clear by his outward actions, as well as
   keeping it in his heart. Because of this, he sees as present with the
   eyes of the spirit all those for whom he prays, whether or not they are
   actually there in the flesh, he knows that all who are praying with him
   are present in spiritual communion. And so the eye of faith directs the
   words of his greeting and he realizes the spiritual presence of those
   whom he knows to be near at hand. Therefore let no brother who lives
   alone in a cell be afraid to utter the words which are common to the
   whole Church; for although he is separated in space from the
   congregation of the faithful yet he is bound together with them all by
   love in the unity of faith, although they are absent in the flesh, they
   are near at hand in the mystical unity of the Church.

   --St. Peter Damian (M)

   Genesis 18:20-33

   When Abraham interceded for the Sodomites, he must have "seen as
   present with the eyes of the spirit all those for whom he prayed..."
   Others must have also been "praying with him in spiritual communion."
   This is a story of the "mystical unity" of the community of Israel and
   its power--the actual power of God!

   How strong is my experience of the "communion of saints?"

   22. Forgiveness

   (My Sins Are Forgiven)

   If anyone had reason for complaint, it was the invalid. As though
   cheated he might well have asked: " Have you come to heal something
   else then? To put right a different malady? How can I be sure that my
   sins are forgiven?" In fact, however, he said nothing of the sort, but
   surrendered himself to the healer's power.

   The scribes, on the other hand, feeling left out and envious, plotted
   against the good of others. Jesus therefore rebuked them, but with
   forbearance. He said, "If you do not believe the first proof, and
   regard it as an empty boast, then see, I offer you another by revealing
   your secret thoughts; and to this I will add a third." What is the
   third to be? The healing of the paralytic.

   Jesus did not give a clear manifestation of his power when he first
   spoke to the paralytic. He did not say, "I forgive you your sins" but:
   Your sins are forgiven. When the scribes forced him, however, he showed
   his power more clearly, that you may know, he said, that the Son of Man
   has power on earth to forgive sins.

   Before doing this Jesus asked the scribes: Which is easier to say,
   "Your sins are forgiven", or to say, "Pick up your mat and go home?"
   This was the same as asking:" Which seems easier to you, to heal the
   body, or to forgive the soul its sins? Obviously, it is easier to heal
   the body. Indeed, as far as the soul is above the body, so far does the
   forgiveness of sins surpass physical healing. However, since the one is
   invisible, but the other visible, I grant you as well this lesser,
   visible miracle as proof of the one which is treated but invisible".
   Thus he showed by his deeds the truth of what John had said of him:
   that he takes away the sins of the world.

   --St. John Chrysostom (M)

   2 Kings 4:18-37

   St. John's comment is interesting: "As far as the soul is above the
   body, so far does the forgiveness of sins surpass physical healing."
   Evidently, this is true. Elisha was able to raise to life the dead son
   of his hostess. Was he able to forgive his sins as well? I don't think
   so but since physical healing is often a sign of spiritual healing, I
   would like to believe that God forgave his sins as well. It is just not
   obvious in the clamor of a raising from the dead!

   Do I want to believe that spiritual healing is more important than
   physical healing?

   23. Healing and Preaching

   (Lord, Increase My Faith)

   Oh my soul, when our corrupted nature overpowers, when we are sick of
   ourselves, weakened on all sides, discouraged with repeated relapses,
   wearied with sin and sorrow, we gently, sweetly, lay the whole account
   at his feet, reconciled and encouraged by his appointed representative,
   yet trembling and conscious of our imperfect dispositions, we draw near
   the sacred fountain-scarcely the expanded heart receives its longing
   desire than wrapped in his Love, covered with his Righteousness, we are
   no longer the same- adoration, thanksgiving, love, joy, peace,
   contentment- unutterable mercy.

   Take this from me-though now the happiest of poor and banished sinners-
   then most, most wretched desolate-what would be my refuge-Jesus is
   everywhere, in the very air I breath. Yes, everywhere-but in his
   sacrament of the alter as present actually and really as my soul within
   my body in this sacrifice daily offered, as really as once offered on
   the cross- merciful Savior, can there be any comparison to his
   blessedness-could any other plan satisfy offended Justice- form an
   acceptable oblation to your eternal Father, or reconcile us to
   yourself?

   Adored Lord, increase my faith-perfect it-crown it your own, your
   choicest, dearest gift, having drawn me from the pit, and borne me to
   your fold, keep me in your sweet pastures-and lead me to eternal life.

   --St. Elizabeth Ann Seton (M)

   John 6:1-14

   "Adored Lord, increase my faith-perfect it-crown it your own, your
   choicest, dearest gift... Jesus is everywhere, in the very air I
   breathe...but in his sacrament of the altar (the Eucharist) as present
   actually and really as my soul within my body..." When I read the story
   of the foreshadowing of the Eucharist, the feeding of the five
   thousand, the one in the crowd with the greatest amount of childlike
   faith and love is the young boy who gave his family's dinner at the
   request of the Preacher not knowing what He would do but trusting,
   none-the-less, that all would be well.

   If the boy had not the faith to offer his sustenance, would the crowd
   have been fed with this miraculous bread? Increase my faith, Lord.
   Perfect it and crown it your own.

   24. The Gospel Sense of Duty

   (May I Imitate the Virtue of the Saints)

   The Lord puts such great power into operation through his saints. He
   wants to confound, by the weight of his own condemnation, those acts of
   diabolical wickedness which are perpetrated through wounding blows and
   invisible tears. He also wants to disapprove and check the attractions
   to sin which lie hidden in the authority of some torturers. What wise
   man, aware that he must face those attractions, would not immediately
   deplore whatever infidelity he finds in himself? Mindful of his
   condition, would he not through his unceasing sense of duty very
   properly honor the memory of the saints? Clearly, he can easily
   understand what place those men have with the Lord, or in what honor we
   should hold them, to whom, as he sees, a favorable judgment has been
   awarded because of consideration of their martyr's palms.

   Therefore, dearly beloved, the examples of these saints should be
   followed, and their faith pursued, and their virtue imitated, it is not
   difficult for anyone to accomplish all this, if you think about the
   crown that is promised as a reward, you will find it easy to overcome
   every injury of the persecution.

   --St. Valerian (M)

   Revelations 19:1-10

   "The example of the saints should be followed, their faith pursued and
   their virtue imitated" because "the bride of the Lamb has been able to
   dress herself in dazzling white linen made of the good deeds of the
   saints." Since the bride of the Lamb is the Church, the saints make the
   Church more and more beautiful to Jesus, her Husband.

   In what ways am I helping to beautify the Body of Christ?

   25. Crumbs of Grace

   (May I Grow In Holiness)

   Make me, in loving contrition and humble repentance always, like a
   little dog, gnaw on my sins and on the imperfect works caused by my
   defects so that, after this life, I may receive that most dulcet crumb,
   the most dulcet fruition of the mellifluous face of my Jesus. And then,
   through you, let me be satisfied in eternal gladness when the glory of
   my Jesus appears.

   O stable love, strong and insurmountable, may your sagacity teach me to
   cherish Jesus with unconquerable steadfastness and to serve him with
   unconquered perseverance. And, aroused by you and agitated by you, may
   I always be prepared when my Lord comes in the first or second watch so
   that I may not be listless or sleepy when the cry is made at midnight,
   but, moving forward with you and under your guidance, may I worthy
   enter into the nuptials with the Lamb. Ah, and then with you taking
   care of me, let my lamp be found full of the oil of charity, full of
   cherishing conflagration, full of the splendid light of the works of
   living faith that, through you, I may possess the delights of eternal
   life.

   --St. Gertrude the Great (M)

   Matthew 18:21-22

   This passage from St. Gertrude seems both very old (it is from the
   Middle Ages) and odd (bordering on scrupulosity). The idea of "gnawing"
   on my sins and imperfect works bothers me and seems very pre-Vatican
   II. Why do I need to harp on my imperfections and belittle my works?
   While it is true that God will forgive me for my imperfections "seven
   times seventy times," I need to be careful of presumption; taking God's
   love and mercy for granted. If I don't keep this in mind, I could find
   myself saying, for example: "Why would God care that I save up so much
   money for retirement when I do so many other good works "for His
   glory?" Or: "Why does God care about my "ulterior motives" when I'm
   trying to be a "healing vessel?". I must not ignore my weaknesses and
   remember that it is only the grace of God that allows me to accomplish
   anything of value with my life and His gifts.

   What flaws and weaknesses in my character and behavior do I try to make
   excuses for?

   26. The Necessity of Prayer

   (Lord, My Time Is Yours)

   Prayer opens the understanding to the brightness of Divine Light, and
   the will to the warmth of Heavenly Love-nothing can so effectually
   purify the mind from its many ignorance, or the will from its perverse
   affections. It is as a healing water which causes the roots of our good
   desires to send forth fresh shoots , which washes away the soul's
   imperfections, and allays the thirst of passion.

   But especially I commend earnest mental prayer to you, more
   particularly such as bears upon the Life and Passion of our Lord. If
   you contemplate Him frequently in meditation, your whole soul will be
   filled with Him, you will grow in His Likeness, and your actions will
   be molded on His.... Children learn to speak by hearing their mother
   talk, and stammering forth their childish sounds in imitation, and so
   if we cleave to the Savior in meditation, listening to His words,
   watching His actions and intentions, we shall learn in time, through
   His Grace, to speak, act and will like Himself. Believe me....there is
   no way to God save through this door.

   --St. Francis de Sales, An Introduction to the Devout Life (CCEL)

   Acts 2:22-25

   Regardless of what I say is important to me, my actions, what I spend
   my time doing, tells it all. If I have spent so much time listening to
   and trying to obey my mother even long after she died, should I not
   spend my time listening to and obeying her Teacher, who lives forever?

   What in my life deserves more time than developing my relationship with
   Jesus and learning to imitate Him?

   27. "Small Deposits of Faith" for God

   (Lord, May You Accept My Offering)

   Give an hour every day in meditation before dinner, if you can, let it
   be early in the morning, when your mind will be less cumbered, and
   fresh after the nights rest. Begin all prayer, whether mental or vocal,
   by an act of the Presence of God. If you observe this rule strictly,
   you will soon see how useful it is. You should ...study them (the
   Creed, Lord's Prayer, etc.) diligently ...so as thoroughly to gather up
   the meaning of these holy words, which must be used fixing your
   thoughts steadily on their purport, not striving to say many words so
   much as seeking to say a few with your whole heart. If you have a gift
   for mental prayer, let that always take the chief place, so that if,
   having made that, you are hindered by business or any other cause from
   saying your vocal prayers, do not be disturbed, but rest satisfied with
   saying the Lord's Prayer, the Angelic Salutation, and the Creed after
   your meditation. If, while saying vocal prayers, your heart feels drawn
   to mental prayer, do not resist it, but calmly let your mind fall into
   that channel, without troubling because you have not finished your
   appointed vocal prayers. The mental prayer you have substituted for
   them is more acceptable to God, and more profitable to your soul. If it
   should happen that your morning goes by without the usual meditation,
   either owing to a pressure of business, or from any other cause, ...
   try to repair the loss in the afternoon, but not immediately after a
   mea, or you will perhaps be drowsy, which is bad both for your
   meditation and your health.

   --St. Francis de Sale, An Introduction to the Devout Life (CCEL)

   2 Kings 20:1-11

   I've heard it said that as a person deposits small amounts of money
   regularly into a savings account can make a large withdrawal when
   needed, so it is with prayer. One who daily deposits prayer and
   devotion into his spiritual account can summon a great response in time
   of trouble. This is the case with King Hezekiah. His daily devotion and
   prayer to the Lord won not only the protection of his country but the
   adding of fifteen years to his life as well.

   Do I pray enough?

   28. Blessedness

   (Happiness Equals Good Deeds)

   We say a goal is within our grasp when it is close enough for us to
   have sure hope of attaining it. What brings us close to the blessing of
   eternal happiness is exercise of the virtues and especially the gifts.
   So the blessings pronounced by Christ in the Gospels and called
   beatitudes are not dispositions distinct from the virtues and gifts,
   but actions exercising them. Certain actions are proposed in these
   blessings as deserving happiness and disposing us to possess it, either
   inchoately or perfectly, and what is presented as reward for those
   actions is either the perfect happiness of the life to come, or some
   inchoate beginning of it found in perfect men here and now. Thus the
   kingdom of heaven can be taken to mean the start of the reign of the
   Spirit in wise men, the possession of the land to mean the heart's
   repose in desire of a sure and everlasting inheritance, and so on. All
   of which will be perfectly realized in our heavenly home. A life
   devoted to pleasure is a false happiness which hinders the true
   happiness of the life to come, but the happiness of a life active in
   doing good prepares for true happiness, and the happiness of a
   contemplative life is already true happiness beginning. The
   contemplative life does not so much deserve blessing as constitute it.

   --St. Thomas Aquinas (M)

   Matthew 5:11-12

   "The happiness of a life active in doing good does not so much deserve
   blessing as constitute it." This is essentially the same as the modern
   aphorism that says that joy is not something that one pursues directly
   but is the result of "doing the right thing" on a regular basis. Doing
   the right thing is its own reward!

   Do I feel blessed when I am meek, merciful, a peacemaker, a pursuer of
   justice?

   29. Judging By God's Standards

   (I Will See the Good In Others)

   Only God is good by nature, but with God's help man can become good
   through careful attention to his way of life. He transforms himself
   into what he is not when his soul, by devoting its attention to true
   delight, unties itself to God, in so far as its energized power desires
   this. For it is written: "Be good and merciful as your father in
   heaven".

   Evil does not exist by nature, nor is any man naturally evil, for God
   made nothing that was not good. When in the desire of his heart someone
   conceives and gives form to what in reality has no existence, then what
   he desires begins to exist. We should therefore turn our attention away
   from the inclination to evil and concentrate it on the remembrance of
   God; for good, which exists by nature, is more powerful than our
   inclination to evil. The one has existence while the other has not,
   except when we give it existence through our actions.

   All men are made in God's image; but to be in his likeness is granted
   only to those who through great love have brought their own freedom
   into subjection to God. For only when we do not belong to ourselves do
   we become like him who through love has reconciled us to himself. No
   one achieves this unless he persuades his soul not to be distracted by
   the false glitter of this life.

   --St. Diadochos (M)

   Matthew 7:1-15

   I've learned from experience about the power of my perceptions and
   attitudes. I see what I choose to see. If I expect to see evil in
   someone, I will see it even if it is not really there. If I choose to
   see the good in someone, the good characteristics will come to my
   attention. I also have a strong tendency to project my own less than
   ideal characteristics into others. I tend to judge them even though the
   actual "problem" may be in me! This is what I believe Jesus means when
   He says that the standard that I use to judge others will be used to
   judge me. When I judge someone, I am really saying more about me than
   the other person. I am judging myself!

   How accurate are my attitudes and perceptions? Am I sure?

   30. Purifying Our Hearts

   (Jesus, Make Me Aware)

   Some of the saints have called attentiveness the guarding of the
   intellect; others have called it custody of the heart of watchfulness,
   or noetic stillness, and others something else. All these expressions
   indicate one and the same thing.

   Attentiveness is the sign of true repentance. It is the soul's
   restoration, hatred of the world, and return to God. It is rejection of
   sin and recovery of virtue. It is the unreserved assurance that our
   sins are forgiven. It is the beginning of contemplation or, rather, its
   presupposition, for through it God, descrying its presence in us,
   reveals himself to the intellect. It is serenity of intellect or,
   rather, the repose bestowed on the soul through God's mercy. It is the
   subjection of our thoughts; the palace of the mindfulness of Go, the
   stronghold that enables us patiently to accept all that befalls. It is
   the ground of faith, hope, and love. For if you do not have faith you
   cannot endure the outward afflictions that assail you, and if you do
   not bear them gladly you cannot say to the Lord, "Thou art my helper
   and my refuge." And if the Most High is not your refuge you will not
   lay up his love in your heart.

   -Nikiphoros the Monk (M)

   Psalm 90:1-17

   To me, attentiveness is awareness in action. I am aware of my frailty
   and God's strength; my short span of life and God's eternity; my fear
   and self-centeredness and God's universal love. I actively ask God to
   let me see the truth about my life so that I can reduce my needless
   suffering, which results from my false self-image, and increase my joy
   in life by accepting my status: a beloved child of God!

   In what ways do I create my own misery? How can I change my attitude to
   create more joy in my life?

   31. How to Pray: Practice

   (Lord, Teach Me To Pray)

   It may be...that you do not know how to practice mental prayer, for
   unfortunately it is a thing much neglected nowadays. I will therefore
   give you a short and easy method for using it...And first of all, the
   Preparation, which consists of two points: first, placing yourself in
   the Presence of God; and second, asking His Aid. And in order to place
   yourself in the Presence of God, I will suggest four chief
   considerations which you can use at first.

   First, a lively earnest realization that His Presence is universal;
   that is to say, that He is everywhere, and in a all, and that there is
   no place, nothing in the world, devoid of His Most

   Holy Presence, so that, even as birds on the wing meet the air
   continually, we, let us go where we will, meet with that Presence
   always and everywhere.

   The second way of placing yourself in this Sacred Presence is to call
   to mind that God is not only present in the place where your are, but
   that He is very specially present in your heart and mind, which he
   kindles and inspires with His Holy Presence, abiding there as Heart of
   your heart, Spirit of your heart.

   The third way is to dwell upon the thought of our Lord, Who in His
   Ascended Humanity looks down upon all men, but most particularly on all
   Christians, because they are His children; above all, on those who
   pray, over whose doings He keeps watch.

   The fourth way is simply to exercise your ordinary imagination,
   picturing the Savior to yourself in His Sacred Humanity as if he were
   beside you just as we are wont to think of our friends and fancy that
   we see or hear them at our side.

   --St. Francis de Sale (An Introduction to the Holy Life) (CCEL)

   Esther 4:17k-17z

   The prayer of Queen Esther is similar to the prayers in the Books of
   Daniel, Tobit and Judith. These deutro-canonical prayers are beautiful
   and teach me how to pray in the quiet of my own room by placing myself
   in the Presence of God. They teach me much about faith, penance, both
   personal and communal, and how they lead to action bringing salvation
   to Israel and glory to God.

   How can I improve my own prayer life by studying these great Old
   Testament prayers?

   32. Overlooking Faults in Others

   (Lord, May I Examine My Own Behavior)

   You detect little problems in others, but overlook big problems in
   yourself. You quickly feel and weigh what you suffer from others, but
   ignore what others suffer from you. Look at your own behavior
   carefully; that you keep you from finding so much in others to judge.
   If you are a Christian in your heart, put the nurture of spirit above
   everything else. When you look after your heart diligently, you find
   keeping silence about others easy. The test of genuine religion is
   this: Overlooking faults in others; Examining faults in yourself.

   --Thomas a Kempis (The Imitation of Christ-paraphrased by Donald E.
   Demaray) (LF)

   Matthew 18:23-25

   Overlooking faults in myself while judging failings in others is a part
   of the "projection" problem that I am often chagrined by. I've learned
   to ask myself automatically, when I find myself judging or criticizing
   another: "What do I see in this person that I do not want to see in
   myself?" If I'm willing to accept the painful truth, I've learned,
   amazingly, that those around me act as "mirrors" to my attitudes and
   perceptions. If I don't ask myself "The Question," I may well find
   myself treated like the unforgiving servant in the parable.

   What are the characteristics of my darker side?

   33. Becoming Children of Mary

   (Teach Me Brother Jesus)

   He who was born of the Father before all ages was of more noble birth
   and had no need to be born in time from a mother. And he was not even
   born for the angels. They had him great among them and had no need of a
   little child. He was born for us, therefore, and given to us because we
   need him. Now that he has been born and given to us, let us accomplish
   the purpose of this birth and this donation. He came for our good, let
   us use him to our good, let us work out our salvation from the Savior.
   Look, a little child is put in our midst. O little child so desired by
   your children! You are indeed a little child, but a child in
   evil-doing, not a child in wisdom. Let us make every effort to become
   like this little child. Because he is meek and humble in heart, let us
   learn from him, lest he who is great, even God, should have been made a
   little man for nothing, lest he should have died to no purpose, and
   have been crucified in vain. Let us learn his humility, imitate his
   gentleness, embrace his love, share his sufferings, be washed in his
   blood. Let us offer him the propitiation for our sins because for this
   he was born and given for us.

   -St. Bernard of Clairaux (M)

   John 13:12-17

   We are to become like our older brother and teacher by learning His
   humility, imitating His gentleness, embracing His love, sharing His
   suffering and washing each other' feet by becoming a servant. If I
   don't learn the lessons from my wise older brother, I will have to
   learn them by trial and error and pain. My elder brother wants me to
   learn them in the easiest way possible.

   Am I humble enough to learn the lessons from the experience of the
   wise?

   34. Total Abandonment to Christ

   (I Cannot Be a Saint By Halves)

   Sometimes Jesus is pleased to reveal his secrets to the littlest one,
   and the proof is after reading your first letter of October 15, 1895, I
   thought the same thing as your director: You cannot be a saint by
   halves, you will have to be one totally or not at all. I felt that you
   had to have a courageous soul, and it was for this that I was happy to
   become your sister.

   Do not think you frighten me by speaking "about your beautiful, wasted
   years". I myself thank Jesus, who has looked at you with a look of love
   as, in the past, he looked at the young man in the Gospel. More blessed
   than he, you have answered faithfully the Master's call, you have left
   all to follow him, and this at the most beautiful age of your life, at
   eighteen. Ah! Brother, like me you can sing the mercies of the Lord,
   they sparkle in you in all their splendor. You love St. Augustine, St.
   Magdalene, these souls to whom "many sins were forgiven because they
   loved much". I love them too. I love their repentance, and especially
   their loving audacity! When I see Magdalene walking up before the many
   guests, washing with her tears the feet of her adored Master, who she
   is touching for the first time, I feel that her heart has understood
   the abysses of love and mercy of the Heart of Jesus, and, sinner though
   she is, this Heart of love was not only disposed to pardon her but to
   lavish on her the blessings of his divine intimacy, to lift her to the
   highest summits of contemplation.

   --St. Therese of Liseux (M)

   1 Kings 19:19-21

   I cannot be a saint by halves. I will be one totally or not at all.
   This is echoed in the call of Elisha by Elijah. I must immediately give
   all, renouncing my past to pursue the beckoning voice of God.

   What is stopping me from following the Voice right now?

   35. Invocation, the Second Point of Preparation

   (My Hope Is In You Jesus)

   Invocation is made as follows: your soul, having realized God's
   Presence, will prostrate itself with the utmost reverence,
   acknowledging its unworthiness to abide before His Sovereign Majesty;
   and yet knowing that He of His Goodness would have you come to Him, you
   must ask of Him grace to serve and worship Him in this your meditation.
   You may use some such brief and earnest words as those of David: "Cast
   me not away from Thy Presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me".
   ...Dwell too upon the thought of your guardian Angel, and of the Saints
   connected with the special mystery you are considering, as the Blessed
   Virgin, St. John, the Magdalene, the good thief, etc. , if you are
   meditating in the Passion, so that you may share in their devout
   feelings and intention,-and in the same way with other subjects.

   --St. Francis de Sale (An Introduction to the Devout Life) (CCEL)

   Psalm 39:1-13

   Lord, my life is a puff of wind. What am I to hope for? My hope is in
   You, Jesus. I acknowledge my unworthiness yet knowing that You would
   have me come to You! May You grant me the grace and strength to serve
   You in this brief span of life. Amen.

   Knowing the brevity of my life, how should I use my remaining time?

   36. The Vision of the Crucified

   (Thank You Jesus For Your Love)

   One day there appeared to her (St. Catherine of Genoa) inner vision
   Jesus Christ incarnate crucified, all bloody from head to foot. It
   seemed that the body rained blood. From within she heard a voice say,
   "Do you see this blood? It has been shed for your love, to atone for
   your sins." With that, she received a wound of love that drew her to
   Jesus with such trust that it washed away all that previous fright, and
   she took joy in the Lord.

   She was also granted another vision, more striking yet, beyond telling
   or imagination. God showed her the love with which He had suffered out
   of love of her. That vision made her turn away from every other love
   and joy that did not come directly from God.

   In that vision, Catherine saw the evil in the soul and the purity of
   God's love. The two never left her. Had she dwelt on that vision any
   longer than she did, she would have fainted, become undone.

   --St. Catherine of Genoa (The Spiritual Dialogue) JTG

   John 19:1-3,16-18,28-30,32-34

   St. Catherine saw clearly the evil of the soul and the purity of God's
   love. The cruelty that man, made in God's image, is capable of vs. the
   radiant self-giving and forgiveness that God is telling man to imitate.

   What does it mean to me to turn from every love and joy that does not
   come directly from God?

   37. A Guide to Meditation

   (Worship...Reverence...Adoration to the Lord)

   Whenever you call upon God, three ideas should guide your act of
   worship: first, to humble your heart in reverence and adoration of God;
   second, to expand your heart with good will and thanksgiving and third,
   to lift up your heart in delight in that converse between lover and
   beloved.... If this be done well, such wonderful peace and joy result
   that they transport the soul from the realm of the senses, causing her
   to say: "It is good to be here".

   To be moved to reverence, look upon the divine immensity-then consider
   yourself, see your own littleness. To be filled with good will, look
   upon the benevolence of God and your own unworthiness. To be raised
   unto the union of love, remember the charity of God and your own
   lukewarmness. Only by such comparisons will you go beyond the things of
   the senses.

   Once you are moved to the reverence for God, it should be manifested in
   three ways: first, reverence to the Father-it is He who made you what
   you are, second, reverence to the Son-it is He who redeemed you from
   the dungeon of hell's prison, who has journeyed with you to the
   vineyard of the Father; and third, reverence to the Judge-for you have
   been accused before Him, you have been convicted before Him, you have
   confessed your guilt. The first type of reverence mentioned above
   should be intense, the second yet more so, and the third most intense
   of all. In the first, we subject ourselves, in the second, we are made
   humble, but the third is the first two and more-complete submission to
   the will of God might best explain it.

   In order to expand our heart with good will and thanksgiving, in other
   words, with benevolence to God, three things are necessary: we must
   consider our unworthiness, we must consider the greatness of His grace,
   and we must consider the vastness of His mercy. Observe the things
   which God has given to us; think of the many times He has forgiven our
   sins; how very much He has promised us...

   We must raise our hearts in quietude, we must attain a certain
   complacency of spirit; and this, too, is done in three steps: first,
   that our love be so conformed with that of our Creator that we are
   enraptured by the very fact that only God is pleasing to us; second,
   that our heart be joyful because we ourselves are pleasing only to God;
   and lastly, that we be happy to see others sharing and partaking in
   this same complacency.

   Do we not see here a love which is gratuitous; a love which is due in
   justice; a love which is a combination of both? In the first, the world
   is crucified to man, in the second, man is crucified to the world, in
   the third, man is crucified for the world so that he wishes to hang
   upon the wood of the world, to die for all-But for one reason: that
   they, too, may be pleasing to God.

   This, my dear soul, is the ascent and the state of purest charity.
   Unless you have attained it, never consider yourself perfect! You are
   closest to the attainment of this perfection when the heart is not only
   willing but even eager to die for salvation-the salvation of fellow
   men! But one does not reach this perfect love of neighbor unless he
   first has attained a perfect love of God: this follows from reason. For
   who can love the creature without loving the Creator more?

   --St. Bonaventure (JTG)

   Psalm 139:1-18

   As I read the brief guide to meditation of St. Bonaventure, the first
   thing that comes to my mind is Psalm 139. It is a comparison of the
   greatness of God and the lowliness of man. Humility in reverence and
   adoration of God should guide my worship. I should look upon the divine
   immensity and my own littleness. Reverence should be manifested in
   complete submission to His will. Why? Because God knows me through and
   through, my being holds no secrets from Him. He created my inmost self
   and knit me together in my mother's womb. His eyes could see my embryo.
   This is especially striking to me today; the day of the birth of my
   first grand child!

   What mighty works does God have planned for this child?...and me?

   38. The Physician's Care

   (Heal Me Lord)

   The tyrant Quintianus ordered Agatha back to prison, and forbade the
   jailers to allow any physician to care for her or anyone to bring her
   food or water. But toward the middle of the night an aged man, preceded
   by a boy carrying a light, came to her. He brought various medications
   to Agatha . "Though this mad consul has inflicted torments on you, the
   way you have answered him has tormented him even more, and though he
   has caused your breasts to be injured, his exuberance will turn to
   bitterness. I was there when all this was done to you, and I saw that
   your breast could be healed". Agatha: "I have never applied any
   material remedy to my body, and it would be shameful to lose now what I
   have preserved for so long." The aged man said to her: "I am a
   Christian, so you need not be ashamed." Agatha: "How could I be
   ashamed, since you are so old and a grandfather, and I am so cruelly
   mangled that no one could possibly desire me? But, I thank you, kind
   sir and father, for deigning to have such solicitude in my regard."
   "But why", the old man asked, "why do you not allow me to heal you?"
   "Because I have my Lord Jesus Christ," Agatha replied, "and he by a
   single word can cure everything and by his word restore all things. If
   he so wills, he can cure me instantly." The aged man smiled, "I am his
   apostle," he said, "and he sent me to you. Know that in his name you
   are healed." And Peter the Apostle vanished. Agatha knelt in
   thanksgiving, and found that all her hurts were healed and her breast
   restored to her bosom.

   -Blessed Jacobus DeVoragine (M)

   Acts 12:1-11

   In the reading from Acts, an angelic visitor, ministering in the name
   of God, rescues St. Peter from prison. In the second reading, St.
   Peter, ministering in the name of God, heals St. Agatha while in
   prison.

   Who is the angelic visitor being sent into my life to rescue me from my
   self-made prison? To whom am I to be an angelic visitor to rescue in
   the name of God?

   39. Jesus Wonderful in His Miracles

   (May the Lord Heal My Blindness)

   "He is the one who alone does marvelous things." He transforms the
   elements, multiplies the loaves of bread, walks upon the sea, and calms
   the waves, he curbs the demons and puts them to light, he cures the
   sick, cleanses the lepers, and raises the dead, he restores sight to
   the blind, hearing to the deaf, speech to the mute, the power to walk
   to the crippled, sensation and movement to the paralytic and those
   withered limbs.

   To him our sinning conscience calls out like the faithful leper. Lord,
   if you wish, you can make me clean. Now like the centurion: Lord, my
   servant boy is lying at home paralyzed and is suffering intensely. Now
   like the woman of Canaan: Have mercy on me, Son of David. Now like the
   woman with the issue of blood: If I touch the hem of his garment, I
   will be cured. How with Mary and Martha: See, Lord the one you love is
   ill.

   --St. Bonaventure (M)

   Matthew 11:2-6

   Jesus brings both physical and spiritual sight to the blind. Fifteen
   years ago, I almost became totally blind for a period of three years.
   The suffering associated with losing my sight at age 34 opened me up to
   a spiritual healing through the recovery process several years later.
   When I was willing to accept my spiritual "blindness", God restored my
   physical sight as well.

   In what ways am I still blind?

   40. Trusting in God During Darkness

   (I Will Not Fear)

   If there is no one to understand these persons, they either turn back
   and abandon the road or lose courage, or at least they hinder their own
   progress because of their excessive diligence in treading the path of
   discursive meditation. They fatigue and overwork themselves, thinking
   that they are failing because of their negligence or sins. Meditation
   if now useless for them, because God is conducting them along another
   road, which is contemplation and which is very different from the
   first. For the one road belongs to discursive meditation and the other
   is beyond the range of the imagination and discursive reflection.

   Those who are in this situation should feel comforted; they ought to
   persevere patiently and not be afflicted. Let them trust in God Who
   does not fail those who seek Him with a simple and righteous heart; nor
   does He fail to impart what is needful for the way until getting them
   to the clear and pure light of love. God will give them this light by
   means of that other night, the night of spirit, if they merit that He
   place them in it.

   --St. John of the Cross (The Dark Night, Book 1, Chapter 10) (JTG)

   Matthew 27:45-50

   "My God...why have You forgotten me?" Jesus cried from the Cross. St
   John's insight here, I assume, is a reflection on this as well as on
   his own life. "Let them trust in God who does not fail those who seek
   Him with a simple and righteous heart, nor does He fail to impart what
   is needful for the way until getting them to the clear and pure light
   of love. God will give them this light by means of the night of the
   spirit, if they merit it."

   How do I feel about this "night of the spirit" being a good thing for
   my spiritual growth?

   41. Christ the Friend in the Darkness

   (Be Not Afraid)

   Alone I was, without a single friend to give me a word of
   encouragement. I could neither pray nor read, but there I remained, for
   hours and hours together, uneasy in mind and afflicted in spirit on
   account of the weight of my trouble, and of the fear that perhaps after
   all I was being tricked by the devil, and wondering what in the world I
   could do for my relief. Not a gleam of hope seemed to shine upon me
   from either earth or heaven, except just this: that in the midst of all
   my fears and dangers I never forgot how Our Lord must be seeing the
   weight of all I endured.

   O my Lord Jesus Christ! What a true friend You are, and how powerful!
   For when You wish to be with us, you can be, and You always do with it,
   if only we will receive You. May everything created, O Lord of all the
   world, praise You and bless You! If only I could tramp the whole world
   over, proclaiming everywhere with all the strength that is in me what a
   faithful friend You are to those who will be friends with You! My dear
   Lord, all else fails and passes away. You, the Lord of them all, never
   fail, never pass away. What You allow those who love You to suffer is
   all too little. O my Lord, how kindly, how nobly, how tenderly, how
   sweetly You succeed in handling and making sure of Your own! Oh, if
   only one could secure that one would love nothing but just You alone!
   You seem, my dear Lord, to put to the trial with rods and agonies one
   who loves You, only that, just when You have brought her to the last
   extreme of endurance, she may understand all the more the boundless
   limits of Your love.

   --St. Teresa of Avila (Autobiography, Chapter 25) (JTG)

   Psalm 22:1-31

   The reading from St. Teresa reminds me of how important faith is and
   how changeable and how unreliable feelings are. If faith followed
   feelings, there would be no faith! While Jesus began reciting Psalm 22
   (1-8) on the Cross, I'm sure He also knew verses 19-34: You who fear
   the Lord pray to Him for He has not turned away His face but has
   listened to the cry for help.

   How do I bolster my faith when feelings fail?

   42. A Saint Approaches Death

   (I Choose To Believe)

   When I want to rest my heart, wearied by the darkness which surrounds
   it, by the memory of the luminous country to which I aspire, my torment
   redouble; it seems to me that the darkness, borrowing the voice of
   sinners, says mockingly to me, "You are dreaming about the light, about
   a country fragrant with the sweetest perfumes, you are dreaming about
   the eternal possession of the Creator of all these things; you believe
   that one day you will walk out of this fog which surrounds you! Dream
   on, dream on; rejoice in death which will give you not what you hope
   for, but even deeper night, the night of nothingness."

   I may perhaps appear to you to be exaggerating my trial. In fact, if
   you go by the sentiments I express in my little poems composed this
   year, I must appear to you as a soul filled with consolations and one
   for whom the veil of faith is almost torn aside. It is no longer a veil
   for me, it is a wall which reaches right up to the heavens and hides
   the starry firmament. When I sing of the happiness of heaven, of the
   eternal possession of God, I feel no joy in this, for I sing simply for
   what I want to believe.

   --St. Therese of Lisieux (The Story of a Soul) (JTG)

   1 Corinthians 15:1-8

   It is encouraging to me that Christ appeared to 500 people at one time
   and that most were still alive when St. Paul wrote his letter. I
   suspect that he talked with many of them and learned from their
   experiences. In the same way, I suspect that St. Teresa gained hope
   from St. Paul in spite of the fact that she felt nearly no spiritual
   comfort before her death. She believed because she choose to.

   How can I best increase my faith in spite of feelings?

   43. All Manner of Things Shall Be Well

   (The Lord Will Reconcile)

   One time, our good Lord said: "All things shall be well." And another
   time, He said: "You shall see for yourself that all manners of things
   shall be well." The soul understood several things from these two
   sayings.

   One was this: that it is his will that we should understand that not
   only does He take care of great and noble things but also of little and
   humble things, simple and small...And this is what He means when He
   says: "All manners of things shall be well." For he wants us to
   understand that the smallest thing shall not be forgotten.

   Something else I understood was this: that we see such evil deeds done,
   and such great harm caused by them, that it seems to us that it is
   impossible that any good deed should come out of them. And we look on
   them, sorrowing and mourning over them, so that we cannot find rest in
   the joyful sight of God, as we ought to.

   The trouble is this: that the range of our thinking is now so
   blinkered, so little and small, that we cannot see the high, wonderful
   wisdom and the power and goodness of the blessed Trinity. And this is
   what He means when He says: "You shall see for yourself that all
   manners of things shall be well." It is as if He said: "Have faith, and
   have trust, and at the last day you shall see it all transformed into
   great joy."

   --Julian of Norwich (Revelation of Divine Love) (JTG)

   Colossians 1:15-20

   St. Paul indicates that God will reconcile all things through Jesus
   while St. Julian says "Have faith and have trust and at the last day
   you shall see it (all evil deeds) transformed into great joy." Thank
   God!

   In what ways do I doubt that God cares for the smallest details of
   life? Do I doubt that God will reconcile all things to Himself so that
   "all will be well"?

   44. Exhortation to Various Graces

   (Lord, May You Transform My Human Anger)

   For I trust that you are well versed in the Sacred Scriptures, and that
   nothing is hid from you; but to me this privilege is not yet grasped.
   It is declared then in these Scriptures, "Be angry, and do not sin" and
   "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath." Happy is he who remembers
   this, which I believe to be the case with you. But may the God and
   Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ Himself, who is the
   Son of God, and our everlasting High Priest, build you up in faith and
   truth, and in all meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering,
   forbearance, and purity, and may He bestow on you a lot and portion
   among His saints, and on us with you, and on all that are under heaven,
   who shall believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and in His Father, who
   "raised Him from the dead". Pray for all the saints. Pray also for
   kings, and potentates, and princes, and for those that persecute and
   hate you, and for the enemies of the cross, that your fruit may be
   manifest to all, and that you may be perfect in Him.

   --St. Polycarp to the Philippines (a pupil of St. John) (EECL)

   Colossians 3:3-17

   According to both of these readings anger, in its unpurified forms,
   must be relinquished. St. Paul indicates that "human anger, hot temper
   and malice" must be given up. St. Polycarp notes two scriptural
   readings that imply the same thing: "be angry but do not sin" and "let
   not the sun go down on your wrath." What does this leave? Godly anger
   doesn't last long, doesn't lead to sin, and is not of human origin.
   Perhaps Jesus felt and acted on such anger when he cleared the Temple
   and denounced the scribes and Pharisees.

   Do I feel capable of Godly anger? Under what circumstances would such
   anger be warranted?

   45. Prayer After Communion

   (Maranatha, Come Lord Jesus)

   We offer thanks, Holy Father,

   For your holy name which fills our hearts

   And for the knowledge, faith, and eternal life,

   You made known to us through your servant Jesus;

   Yours is the glory forever.

   Almighty Master, You created all things for Your own purpose;

   You gave men food and drink to enjoy,

   That they might give You thanks;

   But to us You freely give spiritual food and drink,

   And eternal life through Your Servant.

   Foremost, we thank you because You are mighty;

   Yours is the glory forever.

   Lord, remember Your church,

   To deliver it from everything evil

   And perfect it according to Your love,

   And gather it from the four winds,

   Sanctified for Your Kingdom which You have prepared for it;

   For the power and glory are Yours forever.

   Let Your grace come,

   And let this world pass away.

   Hosanna to the God of David!

   May all who are holy come;

   Let those who are not, repent.

   Maranatha, Amen.

   -Didache (The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, first century) (Ivan
   Lewis, 1998)

   Matthew 18:19-20

   This non-canonical relic from the first century notes the importance of
   the Church and communal prayer. An echo of Jesus can be heard: Wherever
   two or three of you are gathered in My name, there am I with them.

   How important is the Body of Christ to my religious experience?

   46. The Wonderful Constancy of the Martyrs

   (May I Serve Night and Day)

   All the martyrdoms, then, were blessed and noble which took place
   according to the will of God. For it becomes us who profess greater
   piety than others, to ascribe the authority over all things to God. And
   truly, who can fail to admire their nobleness of mind, and their
   patience, with that love towards their Lord which they displayed? -who,
   when they were so torn with scourges, that the frame of their bodies,
   even to the very inward veins and arteries, was laid open, still
   patiently endured, while even those that stood by pitied and bewailed
   them. But the reached such a pitch of magnanimity, that not one of them
   let a sigh or a groan escape them, thus proving to us all that those
   holy martyrs of Christ, at the very time when they suffered such
   torments, were absent from the body, or rather, that the Lord then
   stood by them, and communed with them. And, looking to the grace of
   Christ, they despised all the torments of this world, redeeming
   themselves from eternal punishment by the suffering of a single hour.
   For this reason the fire of their savage executioners appeared cool to
   them. For them kept before their view escape from that fire which is
   eternal and never will be quenched, and looked forward with the eyes of
   their heart to those good things which are laid up for such as
   enduring, things "which ear hath not heard, nor eye seen, neither have
   entered into the heart of man,"- but were revealed by the Lord to them,
   inasmuch as they were no longer men, but had already become angels.
   And, in like manners, those who were condemned to the wild beasts
   endured dreadful tortures, being stretched out upon beds full of
   spikes, and subjected to various other kinds of torments, in order
   that, if it were possible, the tyrant might, by their lingering
   tortures, lead them to a denial of Christ.

   --The Encyclical Epistle of the Church at Smyrnium (second century)
   (CCL)

   Revelations 7:9-17

   The passage from Revelations indicates that the saints are serving God
   night and day. The non-canonical epistle indicates that the saints are
   no longer men but angels; messengers of God. In either case, I find the
   idea of working for the salvation of others, even after my physical
   death, a very comforting one. In my current life, I pray that God will
   use me as a healing vessel for His glory and my joy. May this service
   continue in the next life as well.

   How do I see myself being used in the life to come?

   47. Meditation on Death

   (Death, Where Is Thy Sting?)

   A).Preparation

   1.Place yourself in the Presence of God

   2. Ask His Grace.

   3. Suppose yourself to be on your deathbed, in the last extremity,
   without the smallest hope of recovery.

   B)Considerations

   1. Consider the uncertainty as to the day of your death. One day your
   soul will quit this body-will it be in summer or winter? In town or
   country? By day or by night? Will it be suddenly or with warning? Will
   it be owing to sickness or an accident? Will you have time to make your
   last confession or not? Will your confessor or spiritual father be at
   hand or will he not? Alas, of all these things we know absolutely
   nothing: all that we do know is that die we shall, and for the most
   part sooner than we expect.

   2. Consider that then the world is at end as far as you are concerned,
   there will be no more of it for you, it will be altogether overthrown
   for you, since all pleasures, vanities, worldly joys, empty delights
   will be as a mere fantastic vision to you. Woe is me, for what mere
   trifles and unrealities I have ventured to offend my God? Then you will
   see that what we preferred to Him was naught. But, on the other hand,
   all devotion and good works will then seem so precious and so
   sweet.-Why did I not tread that pleasant path? Then what you thought to
   be little sins will look like huge mountains, and your devotion will
   seem but a very little thing.

   3. Consider the universal farewell which your soul will take of this
   world. It will say farewell to riches, pleasures, and idle companions,
   to amusements and pastimes, to friends and neighbors, to husband, wife
   and child, in short to all creation. And lastly it will say farewell to
   its own body, which it will leave pale and cold, to become repulsive in
   decay.

   4. Consider how the survivors will hasten to put that body away, and
   hide it beneath the earth- and then the world will scarce give you
   another thought, or remember you, any more than you have done to those
   already gone. "God rest his soul!", men will say, and that is all. O
   death, how pitiless, how hard thou art!

   5. Consider that when it quits the body the soul must go at once to the
   right hand or the left. To which will your soul go? What side will it
   take? None other, be sure, than that to which it had voluntarily drawn
   while yet in this world.

   C)Affections and Resolutions

   1. Pray to God, and throw yourself into His arms. O Lord, be Thou my
   stay in that day of anguish! May that hour be blessed and favorable to
   me, if all the rest of my life be full of sadness and trial.

   2. Despise the world. Forasmuch as I know not the hour in which I must
   quit the world, I will not grow fond of it. O dear friends, beloved
   ones of my heart, be content that I cleave to you only with a holy
   friendship which may last for ever, why should I cling to you with a
   tie which must needs be broken? I will prepare for the hour of death
   and take every precaution for its peaceful arrival, I will thoroughly
   examine into the state of my conscience, and put in order whatever is
   wanting.

   D) Conclusion

   Thank God for inspiring you with these resolutions: offer them to His
   Majesty: entreat Him anew to grant you a happy death by the Merits of
   His Dear Son's Death. Ask the prayers of the Blessed Virgin and the
   Saints. OUR FATHER, etc.

   Gather a bouquet of myrrh.

   --St. Francis de Sales (Introduction to the Devout Life) (CCEL)

   Wisdom 1:12-16, 2:21-24

   The last hospice patient I ever saw at the hospital was waiting for me
   even though she didn't know me or or know when I was going to see her.
   When I entered her room, she said that she was waiting for me to pray
   with her and that I would be the last person she would ever see. I held
   her hand and prayed with her. After a short while she closed her eyes
   as I continued to pray. There was no movement or sound from her. I
   removed my hand from hers, touched her cheek and left.

   Am I prepared to meet my Lord?

   48. Christ Among the Poor

   (Lord, May I Be Willing To Give Up All To Follow You)

   The poor have no need of our pity. The poor need our help and
   assistance. What they give us is more than we give them. Christ said:
   "I was hungry, and you gave me to eat." He hungered not only for bread
   but for love that makes one understand that one is loved, is known, is
   somebody for someone. He was naked not only in reference to clothing
   but also in reference to human dignity, because of the injustice that
   is done to the poor, who are disdained simply because they are poor.
   Christ knew the abandonment of those in prison, those who are rejected,
   those who are not wanted, those who walk through the world devoid of
   all help.

   --Mother Teresa of Calcutta (Quoted in Teresa of Calcutta: A Pencil in
   God's Hand)(JTG)

   Luke 18:18-23

   This gospel reading makes me nervous. While I am not rich, I have more
   than enough to live on. If Jesus came to me and said "Sell your
   retirement savings, give it to the poor and follow me," I would flinch
   and I am not totally sure that I could do it. It's not that I expect to
   live like a king when I retire. I expect I will volunteer a great deal
   of time to charity. It's just that I want some control over the
   situation. I do not want to be on the "needy" side of the ledger. I
   want to be a giver. But, as Mother Teresa says: What we get from the
   poor is more than we give them. I know that giving feeds my ego life in
   some ways.

   How can I learn to be a gracious receiver as well as a giver?

   49. Trust in the Darkness

   (With God, All Things Are Possible)

   The times of desolation and dryness is the best for gaining merit. A
   soul that seeks God easily bears this state and rises above all that
   passes before the imagination and in the interior part of the soul
   where consolation is mostly to be found. It does not cease to love God,
   to humble itself, and to accept this state even forever. There is
   nothing so dangerous and so much to be suspected as sweetness.
   Sometimes we attach ourselves to it, and when it is past we find we
   have less instead of more fervor in doing good. It is a real
   consolation for me to think that in the midst of aridity and temptation
   my heart is free and that it is only by my heart (that is, my will)
   that I can merit or demerit, that I can neither please nor displease
   God by things which are beyond my control, such as sensible sweetness
   and importunate thoughts which come into my mind in spite of myself.

   Therefore during this time of suffering and desolation I say to God: My
   Lord, let the world and even the devil take for themselves what I
   cannot prevent them having, but they shall never have anything to do
   with my heart, my will that thou hast left in my possession-this
   belongs to thee: take it, it is thine, and do what thou wilt with it. A
   man to whom God has given a real desire to please him need never
   trouble about anything. "Peace to men of good will".

   --St. Claude de la Colombiere, Retreat Notes, 1674 (JTG)

   Luke 18:24-27

   I am currently recovering from a 1 year bout with depression. Why am
   I depressed? I have received many consolations in recent years
   regarding the use of my talents for the glory of God (as I see it). I
   went to college for a degree in Social Work to do God's work (as I see
   it) and burned out in the process. I feel I have nothing left to give.
   What I thought I had, I'm no longer sure that I have. St. Claude notes
   that there is nothing so dangerous and to be suspected as "sweetness"
   (spiritual consolations, feelings). If one attaches himself to them
   (the consolations), when they pass one may end up with less instead of
   more fervor to do good. This is evidently what happened to me. When
   Jesus says "How difficult it is for the rich to enter the Kingdom of
   Heaven," He may not just be talking about money. He may also be talking
   about those that are rich in spiritual consolations. St. Claude
   indicates that it is only by the will that one can merit or demerit. I
   must continue to will to do God's will in spite of spiritual dryness
   and desolation.

   In what ways does my ego get involved with and dependent upon spiritual
   consolations? In what ways can I still grow in holiness even when the
   joy is gone?

   50. God Leads the Soul

   (The Lord is My Shepherd...I Shall Not Want)

   If God intends to lead the soul on, He does not put it in this dark
   night of spirit immediately after its going out from the aridities and
   trials of the first purgation and night of sense. Instead, after having
   emerged from the state of beginners, it usually spends many years
   exercising itself in the state of proficients. In this new state, as
   one liberated from a cramped prison cell, the soul goes about the
   things of God with much more freedom and satisfaction of spirit and
   with more abundant interior delight than it did in the beginning before
   entering the night of sense. Its imagination and faculties are no
   longer bound to discursive meditation and spiritual solicitude, as was
   their custom. The soul readily finds in its spirit, without the work of
   meditation, a very serene, loving contemplation and spiritual delight.
   Nonetheless, since the purgation of the soul is not complete (the
   purgation of the principal part, that of the spirit, is lacking, and
   without it the sensory purgation, however strong it may have been, is
   incomplete because of a communication existing between the two parts of
   the soul which form only one suppositum), certain needs, aridities,
   darkness, and conflicts are felt. These are sometimes far more intense
   than those of the past and are like omens or messengers of the coming
   night of the spirit.

   --St. John of the Cross (The Dark Night, Book 2, Chapter 1) (JTG)

   Luke 4:1-13

   I am mystified and filled with wonder and fear when I read St. John of
   the Cross. His lucid first hand descriptions of the spiritual journey
   through the dark nights of the senses and soul are far beyond anything
   I can comprehend as are the experiences of Jesus in the desert. My only
   literal wilderness experiences of this type are from long periods of
   hiking and camping in the barren areas of the national parks. I have
   had pieces of songs or pieces of conversations torture me for days at a
   time. I know that it is because my mind craves distractions which it so
   readily finds in civilization. Not finding it, it repeats things over
   and over. Many times I felt I was losing my sanity and had to sing the
   Lord' Prayer to break the pattern. I've learned from these experiences
   and I am sure that God leads me through these as he lead St. John and
   Jesus. The important point is that God is leading the soul to growth.

   In what ways have I had miniature "dark nights" of various kinds?
     __________________________________________________________________

   51. The Third Point of Preparation: Representing the Mystery to be
   Meditated to Your Imagination

   (Lord, May I Only Experience According To Your Will)

   Following upon these two ordinary points, there is a third, which is
   not necessary to all meditation, called by some the local
   representation, and by others the interior picture. It is simply
   kindling a vivid picture of the mystery to be meditated within your
   imagination, even as though you were actually beholding it. For
   instance, if you wish to meditate upon our Lord on His Cross, you will
   place yourself in imagination on Mt. Calvary, as though you saw and
   heard all that occurred there during the Passion; or you can imagine to
   yourself all that the Evangelists describe as taking place where you
   are.

   When it is a question of such mysteries as God's Greatness, His
   Attributes, the end of our creation, or other invisible things, you
   cannot make this use of your imagination. At most you may employ
   certain comparisons and similitudes, but these are not always
   opportune, and I would have you follow a very simple method, and not
   weary your mind with striving after new inventions. Still, often this
   use of the imagination tends to concentrate the mind on the mystery we
   wish to meditate, and to prevent our thoughts from wandering hither and
   thither.....

   -St. Francis de Sale (Introduction to the Devout Life) (CCEL)

   Matthew 17:1-8

   What would it have been like to be at the Transfiguration? (My God!!)
   Was it "visionary" or was it "in this world?" (I think in this world
   since Jesus said one of His most frequently mentioned commands: Do not
   be afraid.) Would I have been less stunned than Peter, James and John?
   (I'm sure I'd be more stunned; especially if I had to talk to Moses and
   Elijah. What would I say? How do you like the weather?) What would I
   have felt if I were there? (awe, humility, fear for my sanity!)

   52. Being Perfected in Martyrdom

   (May I Learn To Die To Myself)

   Perfection of some kind is to be found in this life, and the martyrs
   achieved it. That's why, as the faithful know, Church custom has it
   that at the place where the names of the martyrs are recited at God's
   alter, we don't pray for them, while we do pray for the other departed
   brothers and sisters who are remembered there. It is insulting, I mean,
   to pray for martyrs, to whose prayers we ought rather to commend
   ourselves. They have tackled sin, after all, to the point of shedding
   their blood. To people on the other hand, who were still imperfect and
   yet partly justified, the apostle says in his letter to the Hebrews:
   "For you have not yet fought to the point of shedding blood, as you
   struggle against sin." So if they hadn't yet shed their blood, there
   can be no doubt that others had. Who had got to the point of shedding
   their blood? The holy martyrs, of course.

   --St. Augustine, Sermon 159 (JTG)

   I hate to say it, but I feel very uncomfortable about the "martyr
   experience" of the Church. In part, this is due to the way I was
   brought up in the 1950's believing that suffering was somehow a good
   thing. To this day, my siblings and I still get angry when we talk at
   our mother who, in spite of all her wonderful qualities, considered
   herself martyred. It has taken me many years to get over this thing
   about the "glory of suffering." Even when I think about St. Peter, I
   think about the fact that he seems to have almost insisted on being
   crucified upside down because he didn't deserve to die like his Lord.
   He needed to add to his suffering to amend for his betrayal of Jesus.

   Now that I've said this, I can also say that I know that Jesus didn't
   just suffer for the sake of suffering but to prove the love of God for
   man. I also had to learn to embrace necessary suffering in order to
   grow out of various ego traits such as codependency and chemical
   addiction. It's not that I love pain. It's that I evidently needed the
   "refining fire" of suffering to grow out of deeply entrenched behavior.
   I am growing healthier as I learn the difference between "martyrdom"
   and "legitimate suffering."

   In what ways is suffering necessary for my growth as a human being? In
   what way is suffering in my life a pathological problem?

   53. On Conversion

   (Lord, May You Search For and Find Me)

   Conversion is love in action between God and the soul. The principle
   obstacle to conversion is sin. That is why the tenderness of God's love
   is so great that he gave us Jesus to wash away all of our sins. He does
   this in confession through the merits of his Precious Blood. For that
   reason we go to confession and we become sinners without sin. This is
   true conversion: the love of God in the vivifying action of tender and
   merciful love. The pure of heart can see God in every person. Then
   naturally such a person will want to share the joy of love with one's
   own family and neighbors, especially those who have done us harm or
   those whom we have harmed. This is truly the fruit of authentic
   conversion, because where there is love, there is God.

   --Mother Teresa, Letter to the Eucharistic Congress at Seoul, S. Korea,
   10/89 (JTG)

   Luke 15:4-10

   These sayings of Jesus have always taken me aback. If I had 100 sheep
   and lost one or had 100 coins and lost one, I would not think it
   practical or reasonable to search for the one lost sheep at the expense
   of the other 99 (not worth the money) or spend a large amount of time
   searching for one coin (not worth the time). Jesus, however, said these
   things as if it were completely understood by his audience and very
   reasonable. Either people have changed radically or Jesus was trying to
   jolt his listeners out of complacency. Mother Teresa says that the pure
   of heart can see God in every person and that they naturally want to
   share the joy of love with those who have done us harm or those whom we
   have harmed. Mother Teresa's thought is like Jesus'. In no way would I
   find it comfortable to search out the person who has hurt me or who I
   have hurt and to reconcile with them. I would much rather hold a grudge
   or retain my guilt even if I were mostly hurting myself!

   Am I grateful that God is willing to search for me even if I believe
   that I am not worth the effort? Who are the lost sheep in my life that
   I should pursue?

   54. Every Virtuous Life Leads to God

   (Lord, I Offer You All That I Am and Do)

   When God the Creator made all things, he commanded the plants to bring
   forth fruit each according to its own kind, he has likewise commanded
   Christians, who are the living plants of his Church, to bring forth the
   fruits of devotion, each one in accord with his character, his station,
   and his calling.

   I say that devotion must be practiced in different ways by the nobleman
   and by the working man, by the servant and by the prince, by the widow,
   by the unmarried girl, and by the married woman. But even this
   distinction is not sufficient; for the practice of devotion must be
   adapted to the strength, to the occupation, and to the duties of each
   one in particular.

   Moreover, just as every sort of gem, cast in honey, becomes brighter
   and more sparkling, each according to its color, so each person becomes
   more acceptable and fitting in his own vocation when he sets his
   vocation in the context of devotion. Through devotion, your family
   cares become more peaceful, mutual love between husband and wife
   becomes more sincere, the service we owe to the prince becomes more
   faithful, and our work, no matter what it is, becomes more pleasant and
   agreeable.

   It is therefore an error and even a heresy to wish to exclude the
   exercise of devotion from military divisions, from the artisan's shops,
   from the courts of princes, from family households. I acknowledge
   ...that the type of devotion which is purely contemplative, monastic
   and religion can certainly not be exercised in these sorts of stations
   and occupations, but besides this threefold type of devotion, there are
   many others fit for perfecting those who live in a secular state.

   Therefore, in whatever situations we happen to be, we can and we must
   aspire to the life of perfection.

   --St. Francis de Sales, The Introduction to the Devout Life (JTG)

   Luke 3:10-14

   The more I read about St. Francis de Salle and his "Introduction to the
   Devout Life," the more I am impressed by his relevance and timeliness.
   He is one of the very few 16th century saints that speak most clearly
   to me in the early 21st century on how to live a holy life in a secular
   society. His writing in this selection reminds me of St. John the
   Baptist and his advice to soldiers, tax collectors and other
   "nonreligious" types on how to welcome the Kingdom of God.

   How can I add devotion and holiness to my life as an engineer, a
   husband, a grandfather, etc.?

   55. Why Do We Fritter Away Our Lives?

   (Lord, May I Bare Fruit For Your Kingdom)

   Let us attend to ourselves, brothers, let us learn self-control while
   we have time. Why do we neglect ourselves? Let us be doing something
   good all the time so that we may find help in the time of trial. Why do
   we fritter away our lives? We are always hearing a great deal about the
   spiritual life and we don't care about it; we even despise it. We see
   our brothers snatched away from our midst and we don't abstain (from
   passion and excess) even when we know that in a little while we too
   shall be near death. Look!! Since the time we sat down at this
   conference, we have used up two or three hours of our time and got that
   much nearer to death. Yet we take care to exclude time from our
   thoughts and we have no fear. Why do we not remember that saying of the
   Senior that ,"If a man lose gold and silver, he can always find more to
   replace it. Time once lost cannot be found again by living in idleness
   and negligence. No matter how hard we try to regain one hour of this
   time, we shall never find it." How many desire to hear the word of God
   and find no one to expound it, while we hear and despise it and are not
   stirred up by it. God knows, I am frightened by our imperviousness. We
   who can be saved, and do not even desire it. For we can cut off our
   unruly desires when they are newly born and we don't think about it, we
   allow them to grow up and harden against us, so that we make the last
   evil greater than the first. For, as I often tell you, it is one thing
   to uproot a blade of grass and another to uproot a great tree....If we
   neglect them as mere trifles they harden, and the more they harden, the
   more labor is needed to get rid of them. But if they grow to any degree
   of maturity inside us, we shall no longer be able to remove them from
   ourselves no matter how we labor unless we have the help of the saints
   interceding for us with God.

   --St. Dorotheos of Gaza (4^th cent. desert father, Discourses and
   Sayings) (JTG)

   2 Thessalonians 3:6-15

   I can cut off my unruly desires when they are newly born, but if I
   neglect them, they harden. The more they harden, the more labor will be
   required to uproot them. If I let them mature, no amount of labor will
   uproot them. St. Paul says that being busy tending my own garden
   (working on my own spiritual growth), and not being a busybody, is the
   best way to avoid disorderly behavior and will insure that my
   well-disciplined life will be an example to others.

   In what ways is my life undisciplined and disorganized? How can I
   uproot this chaotic behavior?

   56. The Bond of Charity

   (Lord, May I Love As You Do)

   Do not think of the poor as only those with no money. Look at each
   person's needs. Perhaps you are well off in something when someone else
   is in need of just that. Perhaps you give someone a helping hand -and
   that is far more important than money. You may give advice without toil
   or loss, but you have given an alms.

   Friends, since we are teaching, it is as if you, the congregation, are
   the poor, because God has given us what we can bestow on you. But we
   all receive everything from Him who alone is rich. This is how the
   Church, the Body of Christ, maintains itself. We the members are held
   together and are made one in charity and in the bond of peace when each
   one gives what he has to the one who lacks it. It is what you have that
   makes you rich: it is what you lack that makes you poor. In this way we
   can all be truly affectionate to one another and to all around us who
   are in need.

   --St. Augustine, Sermon on Psalm 125,(JTG)

   James 2:1-13

   St. James said it quite succinctly: Mercy triumphs over judgment.
   According to St. Augustine, mercifully supplying someone' needs (it
   need not be money), is how the Church, the Body of Christ, maintains
   itself. By meeting the needs of those around me and allowing others to
   help me meet my own needs, I am reducing my tendencies toward being
   judgmental. This means that I, myself, will be judged less severely by
   God.

   How am I reducing my tendency toward being judgmental of others by
   learning to receive graciously the gifts that others have to offer?

   57. Prayer of Someone Fallen Into Sin

   (Lord, May I Forgive As You Do)

   O my Jesus! What a sight it is when You through Your mercy return to
   offer Your hand and raise up a soul that has fallen in sin after having
   reached this stage! How such a soul knows the multitude of Your
   grandeurs and mercies and its own misery! In this state it is in truth
   consumed and knows Your splendors. Here it doesn't dare raise its eyes,
   and here it raises them up so as to know what it owes You. Here it
   becomes a devotee of the Queen of heaven so that she might appease You;
   here it invokes the help of the saints that fell after having been
   called by You. Here it seems that everything You give it is undeserved
   because it sees that it doesn't merit the ground on which it treads.
   Here, in approaching the sacraments, it has the living faith to see the
   power that God has placed in them/ it praises You because You have let
   such a medicine and ointment for our wounds and because this medicine
   not only covers these wounds but also takes them away completely. It is
   amazed by all of this. And who, Lord of my soul, wouldn't be amazed by
   so much mercy and a favor so large for a betrayal so ugly and
   abominable? I don't know why my heart doesn't break as I write this!
   For I am a wretched person!

   --St. Teresa of Avila (Life, Chapter 19) (JTG)

   Matthew 16:24-26

   Whenever I feel uncomfortable about a reading from the saints, I better
   examine myself and understand why I feel this discomfort. Although
   there is no indication of what the nature of St. Teresa's sin was, this
   is one of those readings where it sounds like she is being over
   scrupulous (like St. Augustine and his stealing of pears). I almost
   want to turn up my nose and scoff at such self flagellation!

   Then I remember what Jesus said: If any man will come after Me, let him
   deny himself and follow Me. Whoever will save his life will lose it but
   whoever loses his life for My sake will save it. What gain is there if
   a man gains the whole world and loses his soul in the process. What can
   a man give in exchange for his life?

   The deeper lesson is that as the grace of Christ encourages changes in
   my life, if I am to cooperate with that grace, I must examine my
   behavior. While I may not have stolen the life savings of some poor,
   elderly person, are my mind set and behavior free from the tendency
   towards robbery; or am I still stealing pears?

   When some saints' writings seem ludicrous to me, am I sure that my
   feelings are not self-serving? Am I willing to examine my life to
   understand these feelings?

   58. Spiritual Principle

   (Jesus, Teach Me To Give Up What Is Not For My Growth In Your Kingdom)

   Man is created to praise, reverence, and serve God our Lord, and by
   this means to save his soul. And the other things on the face of the
   earth are created for man and that they may help him in prosecuting the
   end for which he was created. From this it follows that man is to use
   them as much as they help him on to his end, and ought to rid himself
   of them so far as they hinder him as to it.

   For this it is necessary to make ourselves indifferent to all created
   things in all that is allowed to the choice of our free will and is not
   prohibited to it, so that, on our part, we want not health rather than
   sickness, riches rather than poverty, honor rather than dishonor, long
   rather than short life, and so in all the rest; desiring and choosing
   only what is most conducive for us to the end for which we are created.

   --St. Ignatius of Loyola, The Spiritual Exercises (CCEL)

   Romans 8:1-13

   These writings of St. Paul and St. Ignatius of Loyola hit me with the
   power of a left hook. It appears that everything that I want from a
   human (bodily) perspective (health, riches, honor, long life) are
   anathemas to the real reason for which I was created: to praise,
   reverence and serve God ,and by this means, to save my soul. St. Paul
   says: If I live according to the flesh, I will die, but if by the
   spirit I put to death the deeds (desires?) of the body, I will live.

   How can I change my thinking about why I am here and learn to live
   accordingly?

   59. Unity

   (May We Be One)

   Ignatius, who is also called Theophorus, to the Church which is at
   Ephesus, in Asia, deservedly most happy, being blessed in the greatness
   and fullness of God the Father, and predestined before the beginning of
   time, that it should be always for an enduring and unchangeable glory,
   being united and elected through the true passion by the will of the
   Father, and Jesus Christ, our Goal; Abundant happiness through Jesus
   Christ, and his undefiled grace.

   I do not issue orders to you , as if I were some great person. For
   though I am bound for the name (of Christ), I am not yet perfect in
   Jesus Christ. For now I begin to be a disciple, and I speak to you as
   fellow-disciples with me. For it was needful of me to have been stirred
   up by you in faith, exhortation, patience, and long-suffering. But
   inasmuch as love suffers me not to be silent in regard to you, I have
   therefore taken upon me first to exhort you that ye would all run
   together in accordance with the will of God. For even Jesus Christ, our
   inseparable life, is the (manifest) will of the Father, as also
   bishops, settled everywhere to the utmost bounds (of the earth), are so
   by the will of Jesus Christ.

   Take heed, then, often to come together to give thanks to God, and show
   forth His praise. For when ye come frequently together in the same
   place, the powers of Satan are destroyed, and the destruction at which
   he aims is prevented by the unity of your faith. Nothing is more
   precious than peace, by which all war, both in heaven and earth, is
   brought to an end. My soul be for yours and theirs whom, for the honor
   of God, ye have sent to Smyrna; whence also I write to you, giving
   thanks unto the Lord, and loving Polycarp even as I do you. Remember
   me, as Jesus Christ also remembered you. Pray ye for the Church which
   is in Syria, whence I am led bound to Rome, being the last of the
   faithful who are there, even as I have been thought worthy to be chosen
   to show forth the honor of God. Farewell in God the Father, and in
   Jesus Christ, our common hope, and in the Holy Ghost. Fare ye well.
   Amen. Grace (be with you).

   -Ignatius of Antioch, (pupil of St. John) Epistle to the Ephesians
   (CCEL)

   1 Timothy 3:14-16

   Ignatius talks much about unity, unity in the Church hierarchy through
   its bishops and priests; and unity of the faith through the frequent
   coming together in the Eucharist. Behind these unities are the unity
   with Jesus Christ with God which is learned, in addition to the above,
   through the Scriptures. "All scripture is given by inspiration of God
   and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction and for
   instruction in righteousness."

   Do I build my faith on Scripture or do I try to "go beyond" scripture?

   60. Lectio Divena

   (Lord, Make Me Holy)

   Our father, St. Dominic, had yet another manner of praying at once
   beautiful, devout, and pleasing, which he practiced after the canonical
   hours and the thanksgiving following meals. He was then zealous and
   filled with the spirit of devotion which he drew from the divine words
   which had been sung in the choir or refectory. Our father quickly
   withdrew to some solitary place, to his cell or elsewhere, and
   recollected himself in the presence of God. He would sit quietly, and
   after the sign of the cross, began to read from a book opened before
   him. His spirit would then be sweetly aroused as if he heard Our Lord
   speaking.....As if disputing with a companion he would at first appear
   somewhat impatient in his thought and words. At the next moment he
   would become a quiet listener, then again seem to discuss and contend.
   He seemed almost to laugh and weep at the same time, and then,
   attentively and submissively, would murmur to himself and strike his
   breast.

   Should some curious person have desired to watch our holy father
   Dominic, he would have appeared to him like Moses....who there beheld
   the burning bush and heard the Lord speaking to him as he was bowed
   down in the divine presence. This holy custom of our father seems, as
   it were, to resemble the prophetic mountain of the Lord inasmuch as he
   quickly passed upwards from reading to prayer, from prayer to
   meditation, and from meditation to contemplation.

   -- St. Dominic (The Nine Ways of Prayer of St. Dominic) (CCEL)

   Philippines 4:4-9

   As I picture St. Dominic passing from spiritual reading, to thoughtful
   reflection on the readings, to prayer to contemplation on the Lord, I
   think of the words of St. Paul: Be careful for nothing, but by prayer
   and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known
   unto God. Whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of
   good report; think on these things.

   Are my times with God joyful and full of growth? What can I do to
   improve my contacts with God?

   61. All for God

   (May I Have Ears to Hear, Eyes to See)

   Vouchsafe, O gracious and holy Father, to bestow upon me intellect to
   understand Thee, perception to perceive Thee, reason to discern Thee,
   diligence to seek Thee, wisdom to find Thee, a spirit to know Thee, a
   heart to meditate upon Thee, ears to hear Thee, eyes to behold Thee, a
   tongue to proclaim Thee, a conversation pleasing to Thee, patience to
   wait for Thee, and perseverance to look for Thee. Grant me a perfect
   end, Thy holy presence, a blessed resurrection, and Thy recompense,
   everlasting life.

   --St. Benedict (P&M)

   Matthew 6:22-23, 13:9

   As a person who has partial eyesight and hearing, passages like this
   one can make me feel like I'm behind the "eight ball" when it comes to
   receiving and passing messages from God. But then I realize that
   sometimes having eyesight that is too sensitive or hearing that is too
   acute can make it difficult to sort out important information from
   background "noise." In addition, I recognize that many of the qualities
   described by St. Benedict are interior qualities: understanding,
   perception, discernment, diligence, wisdom, knowledge, a willing
   spirit, a gentle heart, an ability to meditate, ears to hear
   spiritually, eyes to behold spiritually, a tongue to proclaim truth,
   soothing conversation, patience, and perseverance.

   Are any "disabilities" that I have been spiritually incapacitating? Can
   some of these disabilities have a positive spiritual effect?

   62. God's Will and Faith

   (Thank you for faith)

   O God, if only our wills be right toward Thine, do to us whatever it
   may please Thee. If it be Thy will that we should be in light, be Thou
   blessed; if it be Thy will that we should be in darkness, be Thou also
   blessed; if Thou vouchsafe to comfort us, be Thou blessed; if Thou
   afflict us, be Thou also blessed. We cheerfully receive whatsoever Thou
   dost appoint, and for all that befalls us, we give thanks.

   --Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ (P&M)

   Denial 3:13-18

   The readings indicate that while God's will may not seem like
   light/comfort, they may even seem like darkness/affliction (to the
   point of being thrown into a fiery furnace!), obeying Him will result
   in our highest good. The ultimate faith in God's goodness ad love is a
   great gift to be thankful for.

   When and how have I been tested? Can I be thankful, even when God's
   will is painful?

   63. Pleasing God Through Service

   (Make Me An Instrument of Your Peace)

   Teach us, good Lord, to serve Thee as Thou deserved; to give and not to
   count the cost; to fight and not to heed the wounds; to toil and not to
   seek for rest; to labor and not to ask for any reward, save that of
   knowing that we do Thy will.

   --St. Ignatius of Loyola (T&M)

   O Lord, Grant me prudently to study, rightly to understand, and
   perfectly to fulfill that which is pleasing to You, to the praise and
   glory of Your name. Amen

   --St. Thomas Achaeans, God At Every Turn, LF

   1 Corinthians 12:4-11

   Serving and pleasing God by serving others with our gifts is at the
   heart of the Christian message. But what are our gifts? I'm sure that
   while Paul talked about specific spiritual gifts (tongues,
   interpretation, discernment, etc.) , this was not all that he was
   referring to. Paul was a tent maker-not very prestigious or
   exciting-but it allowed him to pursue his real spiritual mission
   without burdening others since a laborer is worth his wage. In the last
   several years, I've recognized that God is allowing me to use my
   technical skills to earn resources to pursue my more relevant spiritual
   work, whether that is social work, volunteer work, writing or a
   combination of these.

   Is God calling me to use my more technical gifts to pursue a more
   spiritual course of action?

   64. Branches and Vessels

   (You Are the Vine, I-the Branch)

   Make me, O Lord, an instrument of thy peace. Where there is hatred, let
   me sow love; where there is injury, pardon; where there is doubt,
   faith; where there is despair, hope; where there is sadness, joy; where
   there is darkness, light.

   O divine Master, grant that I may not so much seek to be consoled as to
   console; not so much to be understood as to understand; not so much to
   be loved as to love. For it is in giving that we receive; it is in
   pardoning that we are pardoned; it is in dying that we are born again
   into eternal life.

   --St. Francis of Assisi (T&M)

   John 15:4-5

   This is my favorite prayer. At this stage in my life, I recognize that
   being God's "vessel" or "branch" is the greatest of blessings. To
   experience God using me to heal others is worth more than money, power,
   or prestige. Every day I ask God not to let me build my life on false
   Gods (jobs, relationships, skills/talents, security) because these are
   all gifts from God to me. I do not want to build my life on my
   insatiable ego fears or desires either. I ask that I may only build my
   life on my relationship with God and His will for me.

   Do I recognize that being God's "vessel" or "branch" is among the
   greatest of blessings?

   65. Searching Without End

   (Lord, Where Do You Live)

   It is a great good to seek God; the soul knows no greater blessing. It
   is the first gift of the soul as well as the final stage in its
   progress. This gift is inferior to none, and yields place to none. What
   could be superior to it, when nothing has a higher place?

   What virtue can be attributed to anyone who does not seek God? What
   boundary can be set for anyone who does seek Him? The psalmist says:
   "Seek his face always". This seeking is never fulfilled, for even when
   it has found God, it will not cease to seek.

   Not with steps of the feet is God sought but with the desire of the
   heart. When the soul happily finds Him, its desire is not quenched but
   kindled...there will be a fullness of joy, but there will be no end to
   desire, and therefore no end to the search.

   Think of this eagerness to see God as not caused by His absence, for
   God is always present, and think of the desire for God as without fear
   of failure, for grace is abundantly present.

   --St. Barnard of Clairvaux, Love Without Measure, (LF)

   John 1:35-39

   My eagerness to seek God is not caused by His absence from my life but
   by His nearness to and love for my soul. John and Andrew recognized
   this in Jesus and followed Him, asking where He lived so that they
   could spend time with Him. The other disciples obviously did the same
   shortly thereafter. This thirsting for God, this desire of the heart,
   leads to all good things. I must recognize where this longing comes
   from and not be distracted by the things of the flesh and the world
   which will never satisfy this longing.

   Do I go to "broken cisterns" to quench my spiritual thirst? Do I
   recognize where my thirst really comes form?

   66. Accepting My Weakness

   (Only Say the Word and I Will Be Healed)

   If Christ submitted Himself to human misery so that He might not simply
   know of it, but experience it as well, how much more ought you not (try
   to deny) your human condition, but pay attention to what you are,
   because you are truly full of misery. This is the only way to respond,
   if you are to become merciful. If you have eyes for the shortcomings of
   your neighbor and not for your own, no feeling of mercy will arise in
   you but rather indignation.

   You will be more ready to judge than to help, to crush in the spirit of
   anger than to instruct in the spirit of genteelness....You should treat
   an ailing brother or sister with the same spirit of genteelness with
   which you would like to be treated yourself in your weakness.

   --St. Barnard of Clairvaux, Love Without Measure, (LF)

   Matthew 9:9-13

   This remarkable reading of St. Barnard sounds like modern psychology.
   Unless I deal with my own issues/shortcomings, I will externalize them
   into others and then act harshly toward these other even when they are
   mostly mirrors of me. Jesus will then have to respond to me as he
   responded to the Pharisees when asked why he hung around with
   "sinners": I have not come to call the (self) righteous but sinners
   (those who recognize that they need healing.)

   Do I understand that unless I treat others with the same gentleness
   that I would like to be treated, I am judging myself? Do I recognize my
   need for healing?

   67. Names for God

   (Yahweh, I Know You Are Near)

   Thee, O brightness of the glory of the Eternal Father, who was revealed
   in the body of our manhood, and dist. enlighten our darkness by Thy
   light, we confess and bless and glorify at all times. Glory be to the
   eternal mercy, which sent Thee unto us O Christ, Light of the world.

   O Wisdom that calmest out of the mouth of the Most High reaching from
   one end to another mightily and sweetly ordering all things, come and
   teach us the way of understanding. O dayspring, splendor of the Eternal
   Light and Sun of Righteousness, come and enlighten those who sit in
   darkness and the shadow of death.

   --Liturgy of the Nestorians, Roman Breviary (P&M)

   John 6:35, 10:11, 1:29, 11:25, 4:42, 10:36, 14:6

   These two writings from ancient liturgies and the verses from St. John
   give many names for Jesus: Bread of Life, Good Shepherd, Son of God,
   Lamb of God, Resurrection and Life, Savior of the World, the Way, Truth
   and Life, Glory of the Eternal Father, Christ, Wisdom, Dayspring,
   Eternal Light, Son of Righteousness, etc.

   In addition, there are many more obscure animal metaphoric names for
   Jesus. For example a plain chant from medieval Germany indicates the
   following;

   The Unicorn is taken captive and brought to the court of kings in the
   snare of the hunters A Snake is lifted upon a pole, He who was wounded
   is healed by the Serpent's presence.

   By the Pelican's wounds, life returns to those laid low for their sin
   in wretched death.

   The light of the Phoenix is burnt out and with it, all the wrongs of
   the whole world.

   The water snake enters the Crocodile, tears out his entrails and kills
   him-He comes back alive.

   The Lion slept three days and then the raging serpent restored him.

   What metaphoric names do I use for Jesus?

   68. Light = Truth

   (God Is Light)

   Lord Jesus Christ, who for the redemption of the world did ascend the
   wood of the Cross, that You might enlighten the whole world which lay
   in darkness; pour that light, we pray You, into our souls and bodies,
   whereby we may be enabled to attain to the light eternal; who, with the
   Father and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns, One God, world without
   end.

   We beseech You, O Lord, let our hearts be graciously enlightened by the
   holy radiance of Your Son's incarnation, that so we may escape the
   darkness of this world, and by His guidance, attain to the country of
   eternal brightness.

   --Sarum Missal, Sarum based on Galasian (P&M)

   1 John 1:5-10

   As an engineer, I often need clear equations to understand reality. It
   helps to give me light!

   Light = Truth,

   Truth = Separation from God is sin,

   Acceptance of Truth = Cleansing from Sin - Attaining eternal
   brightness,

   Darkness = Falsehood,

   Falsehood = I have not sinned or separated myself from God,

   Acceptance of Falsehood = God's word has no place in my heart.

   Do I accept the truth about God's Son? Do I accept the truth about
   myself?

   69. Renewing Our Minds

   (Renew Me, O Holy Spirit)

   O God, who in Thy eternal wisdom, did make man when as yet he was not,
   and in Thy mercy did restore him when he was lost; grant we beseech
   Thee, to those souls of ours, so made and so restored, that, by Thine
   inspiration, we may love Thee with all of our minds , and turn unto
   Thee with all of Thy hearts.

   Grant to us, O Lord, not to mind earthly things, but rather to love
   heavenly things; and while all things around us pass away, we may ever
   fast hold on to those things which abide for evermore.

   --Gallican Liturgy of Alcuin, Leonine Liturgy (P&M0

   Romans 12:1-2

   "Do not model your behavior on the contemporary world, but let the
   renewing of your mind transform you, so that you may discern for
   yourself what is the will of God..." How? This is done by cooperating
   with God's inspiration to love heavenly things including God Himself.
   By modeling my behavior on that of Jesus, I will not be overcome by
   this world.

   What in my life needs transformation? In what ways am I free of the
   lure of this world?

   70. Forgiveness of Sins Brings Love In Action

   (Your Sins Are Forgiven)

   Those who really love God love all good, seek all good, help forwards
   all good, praise all good, and invariably join forces with good men and
   help and defend them. They love only truth and things worthy of love.
   Do you think it possible that anyone who really and truly loves God,
   can love vanities, riches, worldly pleasures or honors? Can he engage
   in strife or feel envy? No: for his only desire is to please the
   Beloved. Such persons die with longing for Him to love them and so they
   will give their lives to learn how to love Him better. Will they hide
   their love? No: if their love for God is genuine they cannot...There
   are degrees of love for God which shows itself in proportion to its
   strength. If there is little of it, it shows itself but little; if
   there is much, it shows itself a great deal. But it always shows
   itself, whether little or much, provided it is real love for God.

   --St. Teresa of Avila, The Way of Perfection

   Luke 7:36-48

   To convert theoretical love for God (love on the "inside")into actual
   love for God (love on the "outside") requires forgiveness. This
   forgiveness is the result of my willingness to be forgiven by
   recognizing my need for forgiveness. Jesus says: "Her many sins have
   been forgiven hence she has shown great love. But the one to whom
   little is forgiven, loves little." St. Teresa says: "There are degrees
   of love for God...If there is little, it shows itself but little, if
   there is much it shows itself a great deal."

   Do my actions suggest that I love God and that my sins have been
   forgiven? Do I believe God is withholding this forgiveness, therefore,
   I cannot act with greater love? What do I need to do on the "inside" to
   act with greater love on the "outside"?

   71. The Love of a Father

   (Father, Accept Me Home)

   It must be realized...that these two things--surrendering our will to
   God and forgiving others--apply to all. True, some practice them more
   and some less as has been said: those who are perfect will surrender
   their wills like the perfect souls they are and will forgive others
   with the perfection that has been described. For our own part, sisters,
   we will do what we can, and the Lord will accept it all. It is as if He
   were to make a kind of agreement on our behalf with His Eternal Father,
   and to say: Do this, Lord, and my brethren will do that." It is certain
   that He for His own part will not fail us. Oh, how well He pays us and
   how limitless are His rewards!

   --St. Teresa of Avila, The Way of Perfection

   Luke 15:11-32

   These readings from St. Teresa and the parable of the Prodigal Son
   bring tears to my eyes this morning. God, my Father, is willing to
   accept my best even when it is not very good (although He will keep
   nudging me to the dreaded "P" word: Perfection) and He is always
   scanning the horizons waiting eagerly for my return home so that He can
   celebrate His love for me! All I need to do is accept His gift (His
   will) and act on it through the forgiveness of others. This is so much
   more beautiful than the fear and isolation I felt in growing up around
   my alcoholic father. It is also much more lenient than the angry,
   punishing Father God I was raised to believe in.

   How has my image of God changed since my youth? Do I still equate
   images of God with my earthly father?

   72. Advice for Husbands!

   (I Value Your Love)

   Whenever you give your wife advice, always begin by telling her how
   much you love her. Nothing will persuade her so well to admit the
   wisdom of your words as your assurance that you are speaking to her
   with sincere affection. Say to her: "Our time here is brief and
   fleeting, but if we are pleasing to God, we can exchange this life for
   the kingdom to come. Then we will be perfectly one both with Christ and
   each other, and our pleasure will know no bounds. I value your love
   above all things, and nothing would be so bitter or painful to me as
   our being at odds with each other. Even if I lose everything, any
   affliction is tolerable if you will be true to me." Show her that you
   value her company, and prefer being at home to being out. Esteem her in
   the presence of your friends and children. Praise and show admiration
   for her good acts; and if she ever does anything foolish, advise her
   patiently.

   Pray together at home and go to Church; when you come back home, let
   each ask the other the meaning of the readings and the prayers. If you
   are overtaken by poverty...remind one another that nothing in life is
   to be feared, except offending God. If your marriage is like this, your
   perfection will rival the holiest of monks.

   --St. John Chrysostom, Sermon on Ephesians (JTG)

   Joshua 24:15

   These readings raise a tough issue: Which relationship is most
   important and should take precedence in my life-relationship with
   myself, my spouse, my children or God? In this self-centered "me"
   period of history, the answer seems clear, but does it work? The large
   number of broken homes and marriages indicates that it does not. Should
   my children rule my life? I wouldn't want a three-year-old driving my
   car or making my financial decisions. It appears that if my household
   serves the Lord, if my relationship with Jesus is primary, every other
   relationship falls into place in the long run.

   Who or what rules my life? Does it work?

   73. Practicing The Presence of God

   (Lord, Be My Brother and Friend)

   Dear Friend: I write because you want to hear from me so badly about
   how I arrived at the habitual sense of God's presence. This sense is
   God's gift... I sought for no more than how to be God's and God's
   alone. I renounced-because I loved Him so much- everything not of God.
   Now I began to live as if He and I were the only ones alive in the
   world....Sometimes I thought of Him as my Father. Always I worshiped
   Him as often as I could, keeping my mind in His holy presence. When I
   wandered, I brought Him back to my mind. This was a painful exercise,
   but I persisted, even through all difficulties. But never did I trouble
   or disquiet my mind when my thoughts wandered involuntarily. I made
   practicing His presence my business as much right through the day as at
   the appointed times of prayer. .... Though I have practiced His
   presence very imperfectly, I have greatly benefitted from what I have
   done. The benefits...all come from God-His mercy and goodness-because
   we can do nothing without Him.... But when we stand firm to keep
   ourselves in His holy presence and to make Him absolutely central in
   our lives, this not only hinders us from offending Him...it also gives
   rise to freedom...and ...a familiarity with God that makes possible
   asking and receiving the graces we need..

   To summarize: Repeating these acts often translates them into habit,
   then the presence of God becomes...natural to us. Please join me in
   giving Him thanks for His great goodness to me; I can never wonder
   enough at the many favors He has done for so miserable a sinner as I! I
   want the whole world , material things included, to praise Him. Amen

   -Brother Lawrence of the Resurrection, Practice of the Presence of God
   (JTG)

   2 Corinthians 12:7-10

   Both St. Paul and Brother Lawrence talk of a personal relationship with
   God. Brother Lawrence indicates that this relationship gives him
   freedom and familiarity with God (remember Jeremiah?) that makes it
   possible to ask for and receive the grace he needs. But, as Paul
   indicates, God can and will say "?no' to specific requests that are not
   for our highest spiritual good.

   Am I willing to accept my "thorns of the flesh" that teach me humility
   and dependence on God? How would I describe my relationship with God?

   74. Testing the Spirits

   (He Who Is In Me Is Greater Than He Who Is In The World)

   The most important work in spiritual struggle is to enter the heart and
   there to wage war with Satan; to hate Satan and to fight him by
   opposing his thoughts. If a man outwardly keeps his body free from
   lusts and corruption, and yet inwardly commits adultery before God by
   fornication in his thoughts, then is there no profit whatever in
   keeping the body pure. There is adultery committed by the body and
   there is adultery of the soul, communing with Satan.

   --St. Macarius the Great, Philokalia: On the Prayer of the Heart

   1 John 4:1-4

   I rarely think of my spiritual battle as one against Satan. I see it
   mostly as a battle against my own lusts (the flesh) and the attitudes
   of society (the world). I suspect that since Satan is a defeated enemy
   (he has lost the war but still tries to do some skirmishing), he relies
   more on the flesh and the world to do his work than his own presence.
   His presence may only be felt when his other two allies fail. Perhaps
   this is why the desert fathers of the early Church mention him so much:
   they had given up the world, they were constantly working on their
   fleshly issues. The "general of darkness" had to become involved.

   Do the "spirits" of society and the flesh that I listen to acknowledge
   Jesus? How comfortable am I when my "guiding principles" do not
   acknowledge God?

   75. The Stairway To Heaven Is Also the Door to My Soul (Knock And the
   Door Will Open)

   Try to enter your inner treasure-house and you will see the
   treasure-house of heaven. For both the one and the other are the same,
   and one and the same entrance reveals them both. The ladder leading to
   the Kingdom is concealed within you, that is, in your soul. Wash
   yourself from sin and you will see the rungs of the ladder by which you
   can ascend thither.

   --St. Isaac of Syria, Philokalia: On the Prayer of the Heart

   Much labor and effort are needed in prayer to attain to an untroubled
   state of thought; that other heaven of the heart where, according to
   the Apostle, Christ dwells: Know ye not your own selves; how that Jesus
   Christ is in you, except ye fail the test? (2 Cor. 13:5)

   --St. John of Karpothos, Philokalia: On the Prayer of the Heart

   Genesis 28:10-19

   Jesus said (in one translation): The Kingdom of God is within you. The
   door or ladder to the Kingdom of Heaven is planted in my own soul!
   Jacob saw it in a dream and thought it was a characteristic of the
   "place" where he slept, not realizing he was looking through a window
   into his own soul. How do I learn to recognize this ladder or door? I
   must purify myself from sin and attain a calm mind through prayer and
   meditation.

   Am I willing to continue the process of purification and prayer so as
   to cooperate fully with God's grace to enter His Kingdom?

   76. The Cleansing of Mental Clutter

   (Jesus....Mercy)

   If...you do not succeed in entering into the realm of the heart...do
   what I shall now tell you and, with God's help, you will find what you
   seek. You know that in every man inner talking is in the breast. For,
   when our lips are silent, it is in the breast that we talk and
   discourse with ourselves, pray and sing psalms, and do other things.
   Thus, having banished every thought from this inner talking..., give it
   the following short prayer: "Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy
   upon me!"--and force it, instead of all other thought, to have only
   this one constant cry within. If you continue to do this constantly,
   with your whole attention, then in time this will open for you the way
   to the heart which I have described. There can be no doubt about this,
   for we have proved it ourselves by experience. If you do this with
   strong desire and attention, ...a whole host of virtues will come to
   you...

   --Nicephorus the Solitary, Philokalia; On Prayer of the Heart

   Psalm 136

   "Lord Jesus, have mercy on me....for Your love endures forever." What
   the mind dwells on it becomes. If it dwells on undisciplined and random
   thoughts, it will become chaotic. If it concentrates on beauty and
   simplicity, it becomes calm and clear. The Jesus Prayer and
   responsorial psalms can both be used to calm the mind and open it to
   devotion.

   Am I committed to practicing centering prayer that will lead to the
   prayer of silence? What are my favorite centering prayers?

   77. Purity and Passionlessness

   (Jesus...Jesus)

   True reason, such as man had in the beginning, cannot be had or
   acquired by any man, who has not first been purified and become
   passionless. Of purity we are deprived by unreasoning tendencies of the
   senses, and of passionlessness--by the corrupted state of the flesh.

   True reason belongs only to those who have become saints through
   acquiring purity. None who are wise in words have ever had pure reason,
   because, from birth, they let their reasoning powers be corrupted by
   unseemly thoughts. The sensory and prolix spirit of the wisdom of this
   age, so rich in words, which create the illusion of great knowledge but
   actually fills one with the wildest thoughts, has its stronghold in
   this prolixity, which deprives man of essential wisdom, true
   contemplation, and the knowledge of the one and indivisible.

   --St. Gregory of Sinai, Philokalia; On Prayer of the Heart

   Psalm 19:1-6, 1 Peter 1:13-15

   The readings indicate the importance of the prayer of silence. "The
   spirit of this age, rich in words, deprives me of true contemplation
   and knowledge which goes forth throughout the world with no word or
   sound...." This "silence" is the hardest thing for me to achieve. I
   must continue to make the time to practice silence.

   How do I avoid discouragement with my imperfect attempts at silent
   prayer and meditation?

   78. Awakening to True Life

   (Love...Joy...Peace)

   Holy Spirit,

   give life to all life,

   moving all creatures,

   root of all things,

   washing them clean,

   wiping out their mistakes,

   healing their wounds,

   you are our true life,

   luminous, wonderful,

   awakening the heart

   from its ancient sleep.

   --St. Hildegarde of Bingen (EH)

   Galatians 5:22-25

   May the Holy Spirit awaken me from my slumber to be what I was created
   to be: a Son of God. Teach me, Holy Spirit, to both live in You and
   follow You by cultivating Your fruits of love, joy and peace. Amen.

   How will I know if I am "awake"? How can I cooperate with the Holy
   Spirit to awaken?

   79. Canticle of the Sun

   (Lord, How Majestic Your Name)

   Most high, all powerful, sweet Lord,

   yours is the praise, the glory, and the honor

   and every blessing.

   Be praised, my Lord,

   for all your creatures,

   and first for brother sun,

   who makes the day bright and luminous.

   And he is beautiful and radiant with great splendor,

   he is the image of you, Most High.

   Be praised, my Lord,

   for sister moon and the stars,

   in the sky you have made them brilliant and precious and beautiful.

   Be praised, my Lord, for brother wind,

   and for the air both cloudy and serene and every kind of weather,

   through which you give nourishment to your creatures.

   Be praised, my Lord, for sister water,

   who is very useful and humble and precious and chaste.

   Be praised, my Lord, for brother fire,

   through whom you illuminate the night.

   And he is beautiful, and joyous, and robust, and strong.

   Be praised, my Lord, for our sister, mother earth,

   who nourishes us and watches over us,

   and brings forth various fruits with colored flowers and herbs.

   Be praised, my Lord, for those who forgive through Your love,

   and bare sickness and tribulation;

   blessed are those who endure in peace,

   for they will be crowned by you, Most High.

   Be praised, my Lord, for our sister, bodily death,

   from whom no living thing can escape.

   Blessed are those whom she finds doing your holy will,

   for the second death cannot harm them.

   Praise and bless my Lord,

   and give thanks to Him and serve Him with great humility.

   --St. Francis of Assisi (EH)

   Psalm 8

   The beauty and diversity of the natural world always fill me with joy
   and awe, especially when I'm in the back country of our national parks.
   God has made us the conscious witnesses to His artistry. He has created
   us as little less than "gods", angels in training, perhaps. What a
   shame and loss if I do not take the time to be conscious of this
   beauty. By not doing so I may trivialize creation and myself. This can
   lead to destruction of the natural world, including ourselves, and
   reduce our respect for the importance of humankind's place in creation.

   Do I make enough time to leave man's creation and return to God's
   creation?

   80. Awakening In Christ

   (The Body of Christ, Amen)

   We awaken in Christ's body as Christ awakens our bodies,

   and my poor hand is Christ, He enters my foot and is infinitely me.

   I move my hand, and wonderfully my hand becomes Christ

   becomes all of Him (for God is indivisibly whole, seamless in His
   Godhood).

   I move my foot, and at once He appears like a flash of lightening.

   Do my words seem blasphemous?-- Then open your heart to Him and let
   yourself receive the one who is opening to you so deeply.

   For if we genuinely love Him, we wake up inside Christ's body, where
   all our body, all over, every most hidden part of it, is realized as
   joy in Him, and He makes us, utterly, real and everything that is hurt,
   everything that seemed to us dark, harsh, shameful, maimed, ugly,
   irreparably damaged, is in Him transformed and recognized as whole, as
   lovely, and radiant in His light we awaken as the Beloved in every last
   part of our body.

   --St. Symeon the New Theologian (EH)

   1 Corinthians 12:18-27

   What part of Christ's Body am I? As I ponder this, no specific part
   comes to mind. While I cannot imagine myself as an "eye" given my poor
   eyesight, I can imagine being a part of Christ's spiritual
   eye--consciously watching the world. The same can be said for the other
   body parts. I suspect that ultimately I am meant to be a mirror image
   of Christ in all aspects.

   How am I becoming a mirror image of Jesus?

   81. The Saints Are United With Us

   (Hail Mary....The Lord Is With You)

   Inasmuch as God continually sends us inspirations by means of His
   Angels, we may fitly send back our aspirations through the same
   channel. The souls of the holy dead, resting in Paradise, who are, as
   our Lord Himself has told us, "as the Angels in Heaven," are also
   united to us in their prayers. My child, let us gladly join our hearts
   with these heavenly blessed ones; for even as the newly-fledged
   nightingale learns to sing from the elder birds, so by our sacred
   communing with the Saints we shall learn better to pray and sing the
   praises of the Lord.

   Honor, revere and respect the Blessed Virgin Mary with a very special
   love, she is the Mother of our Sovereign Lord, and so we are her
   children. Let us think of her with all the love and confidence of
   affectionate children, let us desire her love and strive with true
   filial hearts to imitate her graces.

   Seek to be familiar with the Angels; learn to realize that they are
   continually present, although invisible. Specially love and revere the
   Guardian Angel of the Diocese in which you live, those of the friends
   who surround you, and your own. Commune with them frequently, join in
   their songs of praise, and seek their protection and help in all you
   do, spiritual or temporal.

   --St. Francis de Sales, An Introduction to the Devout Life (CCEL)

   Ephesians 2:19:22

   We are fellow citizens with the saints and members of God's household.
   Before my mother died, she said that she would pray for us if she could
   when she entered Heaven and that we should all place rosaries in her
   casket. To this day, seventeen years after her death, I can still feel
   her presence at times, knowing that she is praying for me as much as
   she did when she was in the world. While I do not know if the angels
   and saints need our prayers, I do know that as members of a loving and
   extended family, they love us and long for our good.

   What does the "communion of saints" mean to me?

   82. How to Hear and Read God's Word

   (The Law of the Lord Is Perfect)

   Cultivate a special devotion to God's Word, whether studied privately
   or in public; always listen to it with attention and reverence , strive
   to profit by it, and do not let it fall to the ground, but receive it
   within your heart as a precious balm, thereby imitating the Blessed
   Virgin, who "kept all these sayings in her heart." Remember that our
   Lord receives our words of prayer according to the way in which we
   receive His word s in teaching.

   You should always have some good, devout book at hand, such as the
   writings of Saints Bonaventura, Gerson, Denis the Carthusian, Blosius,
   Grenada, Stella, Arias, Pinella, Da Ponte, Avilla, the Spiritual
   Bombat, the Confessions of St. Augustine, St. Jerome's Epistles, or the
   like, and daily read some small portion attentively, as though you were
   reading letters sent by the Saints from Paradise to teach you the way
   thither, and encourage you to follow them. Read the Lives of the Saints
   too, which are as a mirror to you of Christian life, and try to imitate
   their actions according to your circumstances; for although many things
   which the Saints did may not be practicable for those who live in the
   world, they may be followed, more or less. Thus, in our spiritual
   retreats we imitate the solitude of the first hermit Saint Paul, in the
   practice of poverty of St. Francis, and so on. Of course some Lives
   throw much more light upon our daily course than others, such as the
   Life of St. Theresa, the first Jesuits, St. Charles Borronomeo, St.
   Louis, St. Bernard, St. Francis, and such like. Others are more the
   subjects of our admiring wonder than of imitation such as St. Mary of
   Egypt, St. Simeon Stylites, St. Catherine of Genoa, and St. Catherine
   of Sienna, St. Angela, etc., although these should tend to kindle a
   great love of God in our hearts.

   --St. Francis de Sales, An introduction to the Devout Life, (CCEL)

   Psalm 19:7-14

   "The precepts of the Lord are right. By them your servant is formed."
   While I've read scripture for the last thirty years, I have only
   recently begun to read the writings of the Saints and the early Church
   fathers. (A wonderful source of such writings can be found at
   www.ccel.org) Along with Scripture, other meditative sources and more
   recent writings, I am encouraged to live a holy life. Overall, I spend
   at least one hour each day in spiritual reading.

   Do I spend enough time with spiritual reading? How can I create more
   time for this?

   83. Converting Evil Into Good

   (Jesus, Be My Light)

   Jesus said, "If you bring forth what is inside you, what you bring
   forth will save you. If you don't bring forth what is inside you, what
   you don't bring forth will destroy you.

   Jesus said: "Blessed are those who have chosen their solitude, for they
   will find the Kingdom of Heaven."

   --The Gospel of Thomas (EM)

   Matthew 6:22-23

   These short readings are from one of the uncanonical Gnostic gospels
   from the first century. They warn me to take the time for silent
   self-examination to ensure that the light in me (my reason, my spirit),
   is not actually in darkness (fear based). Until the last twelve years,
   I was often afraid to examine myself. I thought I would find the devil.
   Instead, I found a wounded and lonely child that would act out to get
   love and attention. I needed to help this part of me "grow up" or it
   would ultimately destroy me.

   How do I take ownership of the darkness within me?

   84. Speaking By Example

   (I Am To Be A Light of the World)

   While he was staying in Siena, he was visited by a Doctor of Theology
   from the Order of Preachers, a man who was both humble and sincerely
   spiritual. When he had discussed the words of our Lord with blessed
   Francis for some while, this Doctor asked him about the passage in
   Ezekiel: "When I threaten the sinner with doom of death, it is for thee
   to give him word and warn him."

   And he said, "Good Father, I know many people who are in mortal sin,
   and do not warn them of their wickedness. Will their souls be required
   at my hand?" Blessed Francis humbly answered that he was no scholar ,
   so that it would be more profitable for him to receive instruction from
   his questioner than to offer his own opinion on Scripture. The humble
   Doctor then added, " Brother, although I have heard this passage
   expounded by various learned men, I would be glad to know how you
   interpret it." So blessed Francis said, "If the passage is to be
   understood in general terms, I take it to mean that a servant of God
   should burn and shine in such a way by his own life and holiness that
   he rebukes all wicked people by the light of his example and the
   devoutness of his conversation; in this way the brightness of his life
   and the fragrance of his reputation will make all men aware of their
   own wickedness."

   Greatly edified, the Doctor went away, and said to the companions of
   blessed Francis, "My brothers, this man's theology is grounded on
   purity and contemplation, and resembles a flying eagle, but our
   knowledge crawls about the ground on its belly."

   --St. Francis, Mirror of Perfection (JTG)

   Matthew 5:14-16

   "(I) am the light of the world and my light must shine before others so
   that they may see my good deeds and give glory to God." This reading
   teaches me that while I grow in holiness for my own joy and salvation,
   the living of the holy life is also the greatest of teachers to others
   and silently shouts volumes to others, much more than an ability to
   quote Scripture, chapter and verse.

   How does my life proclaim the Gospel?

   85. The Holy Discipleship of Marriage

   (I Am Part of Christ's Bride)

   Both celibacy and marriage have their own different forms of service
   and ministry to the Lord; I have in mind the caring for one's wife and
   children. For it seems that the particular characteristic of the
   married state is that it gives the man who desires a perfect marriage
   an opportunity to take responsibility for everything in the home which
   he shares with his wife. The apostle says that one should appoint
   bishops who by their oversight over their own house have learned to be
   in charge of the whole church. Let each man therefore fulfill his
   ministry by the work in which he was called, that he may be free in
   Christ and receive the proper reward of his ministry.

   In general all the epistles of the apostle Paul teach self-control and
   continence and contain numerous instructions about marriage, begetting
   children, and domestic life. But they nowhere rule out self-controlled
   marriage. Rather they preserve the harmony of the law and the gospel
   and approve both the man who with thanks to God enters upon marriage
   with sobriety and the man who in accordance with the Lord's will lives
   as a celibate, even as each individual is called, making his choice
   without blemish and in perfection...

   Paul says that the unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, but he
   who is married how he can please his wife. What then? Is it not lawful
   also for those who wish to please their wives according to the will of
   God to give thanks to God? Is it not allowable for both the married man
   and his wife to care for things of the Lord together? But just as the
   unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy
   both in body and spirit, so also the married woman cares in the Lord
   for the things of her husband and the things of the Lord, the one as a
   wife, the other as a virgin.

   --St. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies (JTG)

   Ephesians 5:29-32

   As a married man with no children, I pray daily that the Lord will heal
   my wife and me of all our weakness and problems so that we may more
   fully use the gifts we have been given for God's glory and our joy. I
   pray that we may be used as healing vessels to a greater extent as a
   couple than we could if we were single. In a way, Christ is meant to be
   the third partner in our marriage, which makes us a little church.

   In what ways can I make the Lord an increasingly important part of my
   marriage?

   86. Ready To Leave

   (Love Never Dies)

   I am now ready to leave. I have my passport for Heaven, and it is my
   dear father who has obtained this grace for me. On the 29^th he gave me
   the assurance that I would soon go to join him.......

   I have to tell you, little brother, that we don't understand Heaven in
   the same way. You think that, once I share in the justice and holiness
   of God, I won't be able to excuse your faults as I did when I was on
   earth. Are you forgetting that I shall also share in the infinite mercy
   of the Lord? I believe that the Blessed in Heaven have great compassion
   for our miseries. They remember that when they were weak and mortal
   like us, they committed the same faults themselves and went through the
   same struggles, and their fraternal tenderness becomes still greater
   then it ever was on earth. It's on account of this that they never stop
   watching over us and praying for us....

   A Dieu, dear little brother, may God give us the grace to love Him and
   to save our souls for Him. This is the wish of your unworthy little
   Sister Therese of the Child Jesus and of the Holy Face.

   --St. Therese of Lisieux, Letter to Maurice Belliere, seminarian for
   the diocese of Baeux (JTG)

   2 Maccabees 15:11-16

   The earliest written example of the intercession of the saints in
   Judaism occurs in the Book of Maccabees from the second century before
   Christ. It relates a dream in which Jeremiah, the beloved prophet of
   Israel, is still praying and interceding for Israel out of love several
   hundred years after his death. St. Theresa, 2,000 years later, also
   indicates how much the saints love us and share in the infinite mercy
   of God (not just His holiness and justice). I take comfort in this
   belief that love never dies, and neither does the power of prayer!

   Do I pray for others every day, even when I don't feel moved to do so?

   87. The Manifestation of Christ

   (Lord, Bid Me Come)

   God Himself, who is almighty, the Creator of all things, and invisible
   has sent from heaven, and placed among men, Him who is the truth, and
   the holy and incomprehensible Word, and has firmly established Him in
   their hearts. This messenger He sent to them. Was it then, as one might
   conceive, for the purpose of exercising tyranny, or of inspiring fear
   and terror? By no means, but under the influence of clemency and
   meekness. As a king sends his son, who is also a king, so sent He Him,
   as God He sent Him, as to men He sent Him, as a Savior He sent Him, and
   as seeking to persuade, not to compel us, for violence has no place in
   the character of God. As calling us He sent Him, not as vengefully
   pursuing us, as loving us He sent Him, not as judging us. For He will
   yet send Him to judge us , and who shall endure His appearing?

   -Epistle of Mathetes to Diognetus, (early 2nd century) (CCEL)

   Matthew 11:28-30

   "Take my yoke and learn of me and you will find rest for your souls for
   I am meek and humble of heart." Jesus never inspired terror or fear,
   was never violent or vengeful, and always acted with love and clemency.
   Even the cleansing fire of His judgment doesn't inspire fear in me
   anymore. Although it is painful at times to experience His judgment, it
   is the pain of healing at the hands of One who loves me and wants my
   highest good.

   Do I fear the judgment of Christ or do I try to cooperate with His
   judgment as a part of my healing and growth? Do I believe that God
   would ever do anything to "hurt" me? How and why?

   88. The Relations of Christians to the World

   (My Weakness Invites God's Strength)

   To sum up all in one word- what the soul is in the body, that are
   Christians in the world. The soul is dispersed through all the members
   of the body, and Christians are scattered through all the cities of the
   world. The soul dwells in the body, yet is not of the body, and
   Christians dwell in the world but are not of the world. The invisible
   soul is guarded by the visible body, and Christians are known indeed to
   be in the world, but their godliness remains invisible. The flesh hates
   the soul, and wars against it though itself suffering no injury,
   because it is prevented from enjoying pleasures, the world also hates
   Christians, though in nowise injured, because they abjure pleasures.
   The soul loves the flesh that hates it..., Christians likewise love
   those that hate them. The soul is imprisoned in the body, yet preserves
   that very body, and Christians are confined in the world as in a
   prison, and yet they are the preservers of the world. The immortal soul
   dwells in a mortal tabernacle, and Christians dwell as sojourners in
   corruptible bodies, looking for an incorruptible dwelling in the
   heavens. The soul, when but ill provided with food and drink, becomes
   better, in like manner, the Christians, though subjected day by day to
   punishment, increase the more in number. God has assigned them this
   illustrious position, which it were unlawful for them to forsake.

   --Epistle of Mathetes to Diognetus, (early 2ond century) (CCEL)

   1 Corinthians 1:26-29

   God has chosen those who feel a need for Him to carry His message. This
   feeling of need requires humility borne of weakness, poverty, and other
   qualities that the world shuns as meaningless, foolish, and
   contemptible. Our own flesh may agree with this opinion of the world at
   the same time we are being transformed into the Body of Christ! Yet we,
   and our growth experience, are vitally important. The soul is
   imprisoned in the body, yet preserves that very body, and Christians
   are confined in the world, as in a prison, and yet they are the
   preservers of the world.

   In what ways does my life help to preserve the world? Do I feel like a
   prisoner in this world? Do I feel like a prisoner in this body?

   89. Plunging Into the Vision of God

   (Jesus, May I Feel Your Presence)

   When a man walks into the sea up to his knees or waist, he can see the
   water all around him. But when he dives into the water, he can no
   longer see anything outside, and he knows only that his whole body is
   in the water. This is what happens to those who plunge into the vision
   of God.

   The more a man enters the light of understanding, the more aware he is
   of his own ignorance. And when the light reveals itself fully and
   unites with him and draws him into itself, so that he finds himself
   alone in a sea of light, then he is emptied of all knowledge and
   immersed in absolute unknowing.

   Our mind is pure and simple. When it is emptied of thought, it enters
   the pure and simple light of God, and finds nothing but the light.

   --St. Symeon the New Theologian (EM)

   2 Corinthians 12:1-4

   This reading says something very important. At some point, head
   knowledge becomes a hindrance to spiritual experience. While I may not
   have experiences like those of St. Paul or St. Symeon, I am meant to
   know God, not just know about God. I am meant to be in a relationship
   with God, not just acquiring facts about God. Relationships of all
   types, including with God, require time or there is no relationship.

   Do I intellectualize my relationship with God too much? How can I avoid
   this?

   90. Answering the Call

   (May Your Thoughts Become My Thoughts)

   O most merciful God, we pray that You would enter into our souls which
   You prepared for Your reception by the desire which You Yourself
   inspired. For before we called upon You, You had called us, and had
   sought us, that we might seek You. Give us then thyself, O our God.

   --St. Augustine (P&M0

   Isaiah 55:3, 6, 8-9

   "Seek out the Lord while He is still to be found, call to Him while He
   is still near." The Lord is always available to be found, He is nearer
   than my skin or my breath. I move away from Him, not He from me. The
   Lord is always calling me, knocking on the door of my soul and wanting
   to stay with me. Will I let Him in?

   How do I shut out the Lord? How do I break down the barriers?

   91. God Cannot Resist His Own Nature

   (Faith Equals Healing)

   God must act and pour Himself into you the moment he finds you ready.
   Don't imagine that God can be compared to an earthly carpenter, who
   acts or doesn't act, as he wishes: who can will to do something or
   leave it undone, according to His pleasure. It is not that way with
   God: where and when God finds you ready, He must act and overflow into
   you, just as when the air is clear and pure, the sun must overflow into
   it and cannot refrain from doing that.

   --Meister Johannes Eckhart (1260-1327), (EM)

   Luke 8:40-48

   "Your faith has saved you." This is what Jesus told the woman with the
   hemorrhage after she was healed without His conscious knowledge. Her
   faith removed a blockage that allowed the power of God to fill her with
   healing. He faith, a gift from God as well as something in her own
   control, made the difference.

   What are the blocks to my faith? How can they be removed?

   92. Nothing Defeats the Will of God

   (I Was Created Good)

   You might ask, "How can I know if something is God's will?" My answer
   is, "If it were not God's will, it wouldn't exist even for an instant;
   so if something happens, it must be His will." If you truly enjoyed
   God's will, you would feel exactly as though you were in the kingdom of
   heaven, whatever happened to you or didn't happen to you.

   --Meister Johannes Eckhart, (12-60-1327), (EM)

   Genesis 1:26-31

   Everything God created is good and everything that happens, God allows.
   This implies one of two things: (1) The things that I may consider evil
   that happen to me are in fact a good for me if I have the right
   attitude toward them; and (2) At the deepest level of reality
   (eternity), things that seem to be happening are not happening at
   all--almost like dreaming. The truth may be a mixture of the two.

   How can I change my attitude about the "evil" that happens to me or in
   the world? What if the life I experience is a kind of "dream" from
   which I must awaken?

   93. The Second Appearance of the Sacred Heart

   (I Am Saved By the Blood of Christ)

   I saw this divine Heart as on a throne of flames, more brilliant than
   the sun and transparent as crystal. It had it's adorable wound and was
   encircled with a crown of thorns, which signified the pricks our sins
   caused Him. It was surmounted by a cross which signified that, from the
   first moment of His Incarnation, ...the cross was planted in It; that
   it was filled....with all the bitterness, humiliation, poverty, sorrow
   and contempt His sacred humanity would have to suffer during the whole
   course of His life and during His holy Passion.

   He made me understand that the ardent desire He had of being loved by
   men and drawing them from the path of perdition into which Satan was
   hurrying them in great numbers had caused Him to fix upon this plan of
   manifesting His Heart to men, together with all it's treasures of love,
   mercy, grace, sanctification, and salvation. This He did in order that
   those who were willing to do all in their power to render and to
   procure for Him honor, love and glory might be enriched abundantly...
   with these divine treasures of the Heart of God...It must be honored
   under the symbol of the Heart of flesh, Whose image He wished to be
   publicly exposed. He wanted me to carry it ...over my heart, that He
   might imprint His love there, fill my heart with all the gifts with
   which His own is filled, and destroy all inordinate affection. Wherever
   this sacred image would be exposed for veneration He would pour fourth
   His graces and blessings. This devotion was as a last effort of His
   love which was to favor men in these last centuries with this loving
   redemption, in order to withdraw them from the empire of Satan, which
   He intended to destroy, and in order to put us under the sweet liberty
   of the empire of His love. This He would establish in the hearts of all
   those who would embrace this devotion.

   --St. Margaret Mary Alacoque, Letters, (JTG)

   Numbers 21:4-9 Ezekiel 1:1-28

   "Whenever the sacred image would be exposed for veneration, He would
   pour forth His grace and blessings." "Make a bronze serpent and mount
   it on a pole, and if anyone who has been bitten looks upon it, he will
   recover." When I read the account of Ezekiel's mystical vision and the
   case of God healing under the symbol of a bronze snake, I don't find it
   unusual for God to continue to work in a similar manner today.

   Am I grateful for God's special revelations of love? Or do I doubt?

   94. Total Surrender

   (May I Love Through Service)

   Our Call-- He has chosen us; we have not first chosen Him. But we must
   respond by making our society something beautiful for God--something
   very beautiful. For this we must give all--our utmost. We must cling to
   Jesus, grasp Him, have a grip on Him, and never let go for anything. We
   must fall in love with Jesus.

   Our Response-- The spirit of our society is one of total surrender,
   loving trust and cheerfulness as lived by Jesus and Mary in the Gospel.

   Our Way of Life-- Just as the seed is meant to be a tree, we are meant
   to grow into Jesus. Each of us will accept: to live the life of poverty
   in cheerful trust, to imitate the charity of Mary...and to offer
   cheerful obedience in inward joy.

   Our Life of Prayer and Contemplation-- Jesus has drawn us to be souls
   of prayer. Jesus is our prayer and He is also the answer to all our
   prayer. He has chosen to be Himself in us the living song of love,
   praise, adoration, thanksgiving, intercession, and reparation to the
   Father in the name of the whole creation, especially the poorest of the
   poor and those who do not pray, who do not know how to pray, who do not
   dare and do not want to pray.

   Our Life of Service and Evangelization-- Faith in Action is Love, Love
   in Action is Service. We need to be pure of heart to see Jesus in the
   person of the poorest of the poor. Therefore the more repugnant the
   work, or the more disfigured or deformed the image of God in the
   person, the greater will be our faith and loving devotion in seeking
   the face of Jesus, and lovingly ministering to Him in the distressing
   disguise.

   --Mother Teresa of Calcutta, Total Surrender

   Acts 2:42-47

   Mother Teresa and her community took their faith and works very
   seriously, just like the early Church as described in Acts. The main
   difference is that the lay-people of the early Church were expected to
   act like a "kingdom of priests" even though they were not clergy. While
   it is clear that a community like Mother Teresa's could not be
   lay-people, it is also true that the lay-people of today fall far short
   in their faith and actions when compared with those of the early
   Church.

   In what ways can my life as a layman be made similar to the laymen of
   the early Church?

   95. Transforming Union

   (Jesus, Make Me Transparent to Your Grace)

   The center of the soul is God. When the soul shall have reached Him,
   according to its essence, and according to the power of its operations,
   it will then have attained to its ultimate and deepest center in God.
   This will be when the soul shall love Him, comprehend Him, and enjoy
   Him with all its strength. When, however, the soul has not attained to
   this state...it is not in the deepest center, because there is still
   room for it to advance...But if the soul shall have attained to the
   highest degree of love, the love of God will then wound it in its
   utmost depth or center, and the soul will be transformed and
   enlightened in the highest degree of its substance, faculties, and
   strength, until it shall become most like unto God. The soul in this
   state may be compared to crystal, lucid and pure, the greater the light
   thrown upon it, the more luminous it becomes by the concentration
   thereof, until at last it seems to be all light and indistinguishable
   from it; it being then so illumined, and to the utmost extent, that it
   seems to be one with the light itself.

   --St. John of the Cross, The Living Flame of Love , (JTG)

   Daniel 10:5-6 Exodus 34:29-35

   St. John talks about what is, evidently, a process of deification of
   the soul through a "wounding" of love. The soul is gradually
   transformed into light; the image of God. The radiance of Moses after
   talking with the Lord is evidently one of the early stages of this
   process as is the Transfiguration of Jesus. The reading from Daniel
   seems to indicate a phase beyond the physical, human level. By the
   later phase, the recognition of the "being" as human and an individual
   is almost lost.

   When in the presence of God, do I feel the beginning of a
   transformation? Am I slowly losing the hold of my ego so that I can be
   more Christ-like?

   96. The Chain of Degradation

   (Lord, May I Be Fruitful In Your Knowledge)

   Take note that before thoughts, stand their causes; before
   imagination-thoughts; before passions-imagination; before the
   demons-passions, forming a kind of graded chain of degraded spirits
   holding on to one another. But nothing here comes to pass without the
   demons: neither does imagination paint images, nor does passion act
   without their hidden power. All the same, what gives them power over us
   is mostly our own carelessness.

   --St. Gregory of Sinai, Philokalia: On Prayer of the Heart

   2 Peter 1:3-9

   I can take the chain of causation either up (toward God and my
   spiritual nature) or down (toward the demons and my earthy nature). Up,
   by empowering my faith with virtue, knowledge, self-control, endurance,
   devotion, mutual affection and love (God). Down, by my natural
   tendencies/actions which are empowered by my thoughts, imagination,
   passions (demons). As St. Gregory says, my own carelessness can break
   me while my own carefulness can help to save me.

   In what ways am I careless in developing my faith? In what ways do I
   let my passions control me?

   97. A Touch of the Angelic

   (Lord, May I Minister Unto You)

   It is said that in the life to come the angels and saints shall never
   cease to progress in increasing their gifts, striving for greater and
   ever greater blessings. No slackening or change from virtue to sin is
   admitted in that life.

   In the future life (or in heaven) the saints hold inner converse with
   one another, the Holy Spirit speaking in them.

   Minds equal unto the angels in freedom from corruption and deification,
   will be

   those saints that are the children of the resurrection.

   If we do not learn what we were created by God, we shall not know what
   we have become through sin.

   --St. Gregory of Sinai, Philokalia: on Prayer of the Heart

   John 1:51 Matthew 4:11

   The angels ministered to the Son of God after the temptation in the
   desert, in the garden of Gethsemane and other times when needed. I find
   the idea very comforting that, after death, we continue to grow in
   spiritual maturity and are to be of service to Jesus in His quest for
   souls. The future looks joyful!

   How can I help prepare myself now to be a servant of Jesus in the
   afterlife?

   98. The Stigmata of St. Francis

   (May I Bare Your Marks, Lord Jesus)

   On a certain morning about the Feast of Exaltation of the Cross, while
   Francis was praying on the mountainside, he saw a Seraph with six fiery
   and shining wings descend from the height of heaven...There appeared
   between the wings the figure of a man crucified, with his hands and
   feet extended in the form of a cross and fastened to a cross. When
   Francis saw this he was overwhelmed, and his heart was flooded with a
   mixture of joy and sorrow. He rejoiced because of the gracious way
   Christ looked upon him under the appearance of the Seraph, but the fact
   that he was fastened to a cross pierced his soul with a sword of
   compassionate sorrow.

   Eventually, he understood by a revelation from the Lord...that, as
   Christ's lover he might learn in advance that he was to be totally
   transformed into the likeness of Christ crucified, nit by the martyrdom
   of the flesh, but by the fire of his love consuming his soul.

   Aft the vision disappeared, it left in his heart a marvelous ardor and
   imprinted on his body markings...Immediately the marks of nails began
   to appear in his hands and feet...His hands and feet seemed to be
   pierced through the center by nails, with the heads of the nails
   appearing on the inner side of the hands and the upper side of the feet
   and their points on the opposite side. The heads of the nails in his
   hands and his feet were round and black; their points were oblong and
   bent as if driven back with a hammer, and they emerged from the flesh
   and stuck out beyond it. Also his right side, as if pierced with a
   lance, was marked with a red wound from which his sacred blood often
   flowed, moistening his tunic and underwear.

   When Christ's servant realized that he could not conceal from his
   intimate companions the stigmata that had been so visibly imprinted on
   his flesh, he feared to make public the Lord's secret...He then with
   much fear recounted the vision in detail, adding that the one who had
   appeared to him had told him some things which he would never disclose
   to any man as long as he lived.

   --St. Bonaventure, The Life of St. Francis of Assisi (JTG)

   Galatians 6:17, 2 Kings 13:20-21

   The transformation of the soul into the likeness of God evidently has a
   powerful effect on our physical, human nature. It may be being marked
   with the stigmata of Christ as happened to St. Francis, Padre Pio and,
   perhaps, St. Paul. It may be an ability to raise the dead (even after
   the transformed person has died!) like Elisha the Prophet. All manner
   of these manifestations were present in Jesus. In some cases, these
   manifestations seem to be graces and at other times, curses. In any
   event, these manifestations are distributed as God wills--just like the
   gifts of the Holy Spirit. The important thing is that my spiritual
   transformation should have an impact on my physical nature, however
   modest.

   Are my actions becoming more Christ-like as a result of my spiritual
   growth?

   99. The Example of Daily Resurrections

   (Lord, May I Always Be With You)

   Let us consider, beloved, how the Lord continually proves to us that
   there shall be a future resurrection, of which He has rendered the Lord
   Jesus Christ, the first fruits by raising Him from the dead. Let us
   contemplate, beloved, the resurrection which is at all times taking
   place. Day and night declare to us a resurrection. The night sinks to
   sleep, and the day arises; the day again departs, and the night comes
   on. Let us behold the fruits of the earth, how the sowing of grain
   takes place. The sower goes forth, and casts it into the ground, and
   the seed being thus scattered, though dry and naked when it fell upon
   the earth, is gradually dissolved. Then out of its dissolution the
   mighty power of the providence of the Lord raises it up again, and from
   one seed many arise and bring forth fruit.

   Do we deem it any great and wonderful thing for the Maker of all things
   to raise up again those that have piously served Him in the assurance
   of a good faith?..

   --St. Clement of Rome (friend of St. Paul and St. Luke) Epistle to the
   Corinthians (CCEL)

   1 Thessalonians 4:13-18

   In addition to the teaching of Jesus, the daily resurrections I see
   give me hope for a blessed afterlife. While Jesus looked different
   after His resurrection and the grain of wheat certainly looks different
   when it sprouts, the essential character of each is still there. Maybe
   I won't look like myself, but I know that I will be.

   How can I study nature to nurture my hope in the resurrection?

   100. A Godly Love

   (May I Love and Do Rightly, O God)

   Let him who has love in Christ keep the commandments of Christ. Who can
   describe the blessed bond of the love of God? What man is able to tell
   the excellence of its beauty, as it ought to be told? The height to
   which love exalts is unspeakable. Love unites us to God. Love covers a
   multitude of sins. Love bears all things, is long suffering in all
   things. There is nothing base, nothing arrogant in love. Love admits of
   no schisms; love gives rise to no seditions; love does all things in
   harmony. By love have all the elect of God been made perfect; without
   love nothing is well pleasing to God. In love has the Lord taken us to
   Himself. On account of the Love he bore us, Jesus Christ our Lord gave
   His blood for us by the will of God, His flesh for our flesh, and His
   soul for our souls.

   You see, beloved, how great and wonderful a thing is love, and that
   there is no declaring its perfection. Who is fit to be found in it,
   except such as God has vouchsafed to render so? Let us pray, therefore,
   and implore of His mercy, that we may live blameless in love, free from
   human partialities for one above another. All the generations from Adam
   even unto this day have passed away; but those who, through the grace
   of God, have been made perfect in love, now possess a place among the
   godly, and shall be made manifest at the revelation of the kingdom of
   Christ.

   --St. Clement of Rome (friend of St. Paul and St. Luke) Epistle to the
   Corinthians, CCEL

   Micah 6:6-8

   Without love, nothing is well-pleasing to God. And what does God
   require if I am to love Him? Simply, to do what is right, love loyalty
   and walk humbly with Him. Sacrifice is not required. Let us pray for
   the grace to love God like this.

   In what ways do I still believe that God wants "sacrifices" from me?
   How can I improve my "walk" with God?
     __________________________________________________________________

   101. Humility vs. Vainglory

   (May I Walk Humbly With Jesus)

   Elisha bade the poor widow "borrow vessels, even empty vessels not a
   few, and pour oil into all those vessels," and so in order to receive
   God's Grace in our hearts, they must be as empty vessels-not filled
   with self-esteem. The swallow with its sharp cry and keen glance has
   the power of frightening away birds of prey, and for that reason the
   dove prefers it to all other birds, and lives surely beside it,-even so
   humility drives Satan away, and cherishes the gifts and graces of the
   Holy Spirit within us, and for that reason all the Saints-and
   especially the King of Saints and His Blessed Mother-have always
   esteemed the grace of humility above all other virtues.

   We call that vainglory which men take to themselves, either for what is
   not in them, or which being in them is not their own, or which being in
   them and their own yet is not worthy of their self-satisfaction....

   You may test real worth as we test balm, which is tried by being
   distilled in water, and if it is precipitated to the bottom, it is
   known to be pure and precious. So if you want to know whether a man is
   really wise, learned, generous, or noble, see if his life is molded by
   humility, modesty and submission. If so, his gifts are genuine; but if
   they are only surface and showy, you may be sure that in proportion to
   their demonstrativeness so is their unreality. Those pearls which are
   formed amid tempest and storm have only an outward shell, and are
   hollow within; and so when a man's good qualities are fed by pride,
   vanity and boasting.

   --St. Francis de Sales, Introduction to the Devout Life, (CCEL)

   Luke 18:11-14 Ecclesiastes 1:2

   Humility, modesty and submission are needed; not pride, vanity and
   boasting. Every morning for more than ten years I pray that God removes
   my self-will and pride (the king of sins). As long as I can honestly
   pray "Lord, have mercy on me, a sinner," I am not likely to stray far
   from the narrow path.

   How genuine is my humility? To what extent is it only a surface quality
   and showy?

   102. An Important Step: Becoming Entirely Ready

   (What Profit If I Gain the World and Lose My Soul?)

   Oh love! How I would want to say this word everywhere because love
   alone is that which can dare say with the bride, I am my Beloved's. He
   gives us permission to think that He, this true Lover, my Spouse and my
   Good, needs us. Since He gives us permission, let us repeat, daughters,
   my Beloved is mine and I am my Beloved's. You are mine Lord? If You
   come to me, why do I doubt that I will be able to serve You? From here
   on Lord, I want to forget myself and look only at how I can serve You
   and have no other desire than to do Your will.

   But my desire is not powerful, my God; You are the powerful One. What I
   can do is be determined; thus from this moment I am determined to serve
   You through deeds.

   --St. Teresa of Avila, Meditation on the Song of Songs, (JTG)

   Mark 8:34-37

   St. Teresa sounds like she is making a sixth-step in a 12-Step recovery
   program. She is becoming entirely ready to have God remove her
   self-will and to serve Jesus with deeds. This willingness is necessary
   before she can ask for God's help to change. What is to encourage her?
   The words of Jesus: What if I gain the whole world and lose my soul in
   the process? What can I give in exchange for my soul? Is my self-will
   worth it?

   Have I become "entirely ready" to ask Jesus to help me follow Him?

   103. Obedience is the Key

   (Obedience, Not Sacrifice)

   Perfection is founded entirely on the love of God ...and perfect love
   of God means complete union of our will with God's. It follows then,
   that the more one unites his will with the divine will, the greater
   will be his love of God. Mortification, meditation, receiving Holy
   Communion, acts of fraternal charity are all certainly pleasing to
   God--but only when they are in accordance with His will. When they do
   not accord with God's will, He not only finds no pleasure in them but
   He even rejects them utterly and punishes them.

   Why should we perform actions for God's glory if they are not going to
   be acceptable to Him? God does not want sacrifices...but He does want
   obedience to His will. The man who follows his own will independently
   of God's is guilty of a kind of idolatry. Instead of adoring God's
   will...he adores his own.

   In prosperity, even sinners find it easy to unite themselves to the
   divine will; but it takes saints to unite themselves to God's will when
   things go wrong and are painful to self-love.

   We must unite ourselves to God's will not only in things that come to
   us directly from his hands, such as sickness, desolation, poverty,
   death of relatives, but likewise in those we suffer from man...On these
   occasions we must remember that while God does not will the sin, he
   does will our humiliation, our poverty, or our mortification, as the
   case may be. It is certain and of faith, that whatever happens, happens
   by the will of God. We call adversities evil; actually they are good
   and meritorious, when we receive them as coming from God's hands.

   --St. Alphonsus de Ligouri, Uniformity With God's Will, CCEL

   1 Samuel 15:4-23, Judges 11:29-40

   These are very difficult readings for me. When I read them, it helps me
   to understand why the Gnostics of the early Christian centuries did not
   believe that Yahweh was the king of Gods. It seems like He has a
   decidedly nasty human streak. I would rather believe that this
   "nastiness" had more to do with the writers and interpreters of this
   history than God Himself. Saul is rejected as King of Israel by God
   because he does not utterly destroy his enemy-including cattle! A
   warrior of Israel makes a stupid pledge and believes that he is forced,
   by his oath, to offer his young daughter as a burnt offering to Yahweh!
   St. Alphonsus notes that mortification, meditation, receiving Holy
   Communion, and acts of fraternal charity will be rejected by God and
   punished if not in accord with His will!

   What does this all mean? I suspect that St. Alphonsus may have meant
   that, for example, if I am a family man, I cannot spend my whole day in
   prayer and charitable acts-it is not appropriate for my station in
   life. I wouldn't be surprised if the story from the Judges is what
   prompted Jesus to preach against making oaths ("Let your yes be yes and
   your no be no-everything else is from the evil one"). In addition to
   the importance of doing God's will, the story about Saul may have had
   to do with ulterior motives regarding the spoils of war.

   Am I willing to struggle with and learn from the difficulties I have
   with the earlier salvation history?

   104. First Experience of Divine Love

   (Lord, May Your Gifts Not Make Me Proud)

   I cannot tell you how astonished I was when I felt my heart grow warm
   for the first time. It was a real warmth, too, not an imaginary one: I
   seemed kindled with a fire that I could feel with my senses. I was
   astonished by the way this heat broke out in my soul, bringing with it
   a rich consolation that I had never experienced before. I kept feeling
   my chest over and over again to see if this burning sensation had a
   physical cause. But when I realized that it came entirely from within
   myself and that this fire of love had no sensual or sinful origin but
   was a gift from my Creator, I melted with joy and wanted my love to
   increase still more, especially because of the pleasurable sensations
   of interior sweetness that poured into my soul with this spiritual
   flame. Before my heart had been flooded by this devotion, which was
   more comforting than any other I had experienced, I did not think it
   was possible to feel such divine warmth during this exile of ours. It
   set my soul ablaze, as though a real fire was burning there.

   --St. Richard Rolle of Hampole, The Fire of Love, VOG

   1 Samuel 19:19-24

   The experience of St. Richard reminded me, though much less dramatic,
   of the ecstatic frenzy experienced by early Old Testament prophets and
   those who came into their presence. I guess that it can only be
   described as a kind of divine spiritual fire that is sometimes out of
   control. God may give these experiences as a gift to someone for their
   growth if it is His will. However, these spiritual experiences are not
   things that I would strive for as ends in themselves since there can be
   much of the ego in them that may result in pride. I believe that this
   can be true as well of more common spiritual gifts such as speaking in
   tongues. The gifts can also become a kind of spiritual thrill-seeking
   that becomes more emotional than spiritual.

   Are spiritual experiences more important to me than the basics of
   faith, hope and love? In what ways?

   105. Dealing With Distractions

   (I Will Submit To God)

   Once you feel that you have done everything you can to put your life
   straight according to the laws and judgments of Holy Church, you must
   immediately put yourself to work. (If memories and other distractions
   come) . . . try to cover them with a thick cloud of forgetting as
   though these things never happened or occurred to you or anybody else.
   If they persist...there are special methods, techniques and spiritual
   strategies that you can use to get rid of these distractions.

   Do everything in your power to behave as though you were unaware of
   these distractions .....Try to look over their shoulders...as though
   you were looking for something else: that "something"...is God who is
   enclosed in the cloud of unknowing. If this technique is properly
   understood, I believe that it is simply a yearning and desire for God,
   a longing to experience and see Him as clearly as we can in this life.

   Here is another technique you can try if you wish. When you feel that
   thee is no way that you can suppress these distractions, cower beneath
   them as though you were a prisoner or coward defeated in battle. Tell
   yourself that it is pure stupidity to contend with them any longer;
   thus you will give yourself up to God, while you are in the hands of
   your enemies and feel that you have been permanently destroyed. Please
   give this method your full consideration, because if you try to put it
   into practice you are bound to fade away completely, and indeed it
   seems clear to me that if this technique is properly understood it is
   simply an accurate understanding and experience of yourself as you
   really are: a filthy wretch who is worse than nothing. This experience
   and perception is humility, which will always succeed in forcing God
   Himself to come down...to take revenge on your enemies, to raise you up
   and to wipe the tears lovingly from the eyes of your soul, just as a
   father does when his child is about to die...

   --The Cloud of Unknowing, Chapters 31-32, VOG

   James 4:6-10

   Another way of dealing with distractions is to let them swirl around me
   like a stream around a stone, or to step lightly out of their way,
   letting them come and go, like birds flying overhead. Not contending,
   not fighting with my own power, is a form of humility.

   What methods of dealing with distractions work best for me? Do I humbly
   acknowledge to God the need for His help in dealing with distractions?

   106. Salvation For All Creation

   (God Will Sum Up All Things In Christ)

   All men who are going to be saved must rely upon this communion of
   Christians. For, in my view, God is everything that is good and He has
   made the whole of creation and He loves what He has made. Anybody who
   loves his fellow Christians for God's sake, loves everything that
   exists. For everything is included in that portion of humanity who are
   going to be saved--by that I mean the whole of creation and the Maker
   of everything too! For God is in man and God is everything. And I hope,
   by God's grace, that anyone who looks at it like this will be
   instructed correctly and get whatever consolation he needs.

   --St. Julian of Norwich, Revelations of Divine Love, Chapter 9, VOG

   Ephesians 1:7-10

   "He has made known to us the mystery of His will: to sum up all things
   in Christ, in heaven and on earth." In some way, the destiny of
   Christians (i.e., the Church) is tied up with the salvation of the
   world and all of creation. What a destiny!! Can anything be more
   profound? Thanks be to God for the grace He has bestowed upon us
   ,through Jesus, to be a part of so wonderful a plan of love!

   Can I recognize how important my holiness is to the plans of God? How
   much must God love us to want us to be a part of His plan of salvation
   for all creation?

   107. Types of Prayer

   (The Lord Trains Whom He Loves)

   You must understand that there are three kinds of prayer; the first
   consists of words that God has composed Himself, like the Lord's Prayer
   and those that have been prescribed for everybody by Holy Church. There
   are also those that have been composed by holy men that have been
   addressed to our Lord, our Lady, and the saints. This kind of prayer is
   especially helpful to somebody who has just embarked on the spiritual
   life, and it is better than any other kind of spiritual exercise.

   The next kind of prayer also uses words but does not consist of any
   definite or particular utterances. This happens when a man or woman
   experiences the grace of fervor as a special gift from God and during
   this experience speaks to Him as though He were actually present, using
   those words that come from his mind to express the feeling in his heart
   after he has counted his sins and realized his wretchedness, perceived
   the malice and wiles

   of the enemy or experienced the goodness or mercy of God.

   The third kind of prayer arises only in the heart. It comes softly,
   using no words, together with great peace and quiet of body and soul.
   Anybody who has ambitions to pray like this must have a pure heart,
   because it comes to those men and women who have achieved peace of soul
   either after a long struggle of soul and body or by the sharp blows of
   love that I have just mentioned. Their passions have been transformed
   into a taste for spiritual things that enable them to pray without
   ceasing in their hearts and to love and praise God....

   --St. Walter Hilton, The Ladder of Perfection (14th century), VOG

   Proverbs 3:11-12

   "After a long struggle of soul and body, the passions have been
   transformed into a taste for spiritual things." This long struggle may
   be experienced as a correcting or training by God in the same way that
   parents guide and correct their children. If I accept the corrections
   as an act of love, for my own good, my unruly, natural passions will
   lead me closer to God and His will for me.

   How are my painful experiences considered acts of training and love? Am
   I willing to accept the discipline and correction?

   108. Death of the Ego

   (Lord, Make Me Perfect As You Are Perfect)

   Everybody has a special reason for grief, but the person who has a deep
   experience of himself existing far apart from God feels the most acute
   sorrow. Any other grief seems trivial in comparison.

   If this sorrow is genuine, it is full of holy longing. Otherwise,
   nobody could bear it. Unless a soul is nourished from time to time with
   some of the consolations of contemplations, he would never endure this
   knowledge or experience of his nature. Whenever he longs to have a true
   experience of God in purity of heart...,inevitably he finds that he
   experiences instead this foul, putrid, lump of self, which he must
   entirely reject and forsake if he would be a true disciple as God
   himself taught... Thus, he is doomed to become almost mad with grief,
   so much so that he weeps and wails, struggles, curses and reviles
   himself, and,....it seems that the burden of self is so insupportable
   that he doesn't care what happens to him as long as God's will be done.
   And yet...he never wants to stop living, because that would be an
   insanity inspired by the devil and a rejection of God Himself. Rather,
   he wants to go on living and he is fully determined to be grateful to
   God for the great gift of His creation, even though he longs
   ceaselessly to loose all sense of his own existence.

   --Cloud of Unknowing, Chapter 44, VOG

   Luke 17:9-10 Matthew 5:48

   "Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect." When I read these
   words, I used to feel hopeless and futile. I will never be perfect.
   Thinking like this only makes me neurotic. I've come to believe that
   while God wants my ultimate perfection, He accepts me where I am and is
   happy with my improvements over time. My experiences with ego death
   during periods of depression have taught me that God only wants me to
   release the diseased parts of my character. While this felt like a fire
   and death, I've come through and did not die. I've changed in ways that
   lead slowly toward Perfection. While I don't like depression, I've
   learned that if I embrace it with the right attitude and with lots of
   God's grace, it can help to purify my character more quickly than
   almost anything I can imagine.

   What parts of my character need to be "killed"?

   109. Meditation: Seeing the Truth About Myself
   (Temptation...Desire...Sin...Death)

   There are three established ways of achieving contemplation: the study
   of scripture and doctrine, spiritual meditation and constant and devout
   prayer. You are not really able to read the scriptures for yourself, so
   you must rely on prayer and meditation. By meditation, you will come to
   appreciate how weak you are in virtue, and prayer will help you to
   acquire it. In meditation you will see what a poor creature you are and
   discover your sins and failings--pride, covetousness, gluttony, and
   lust, the wicked emotions of envy, anger, hatred, gloom, irritability,
   bitterness, laziness, and irrational depression. You will also realize
   that your heart is full of false regrets and fears that spring from a
   worldly, carnal outlook. All these emotions will well up from your
   heart as water flows constantly from the spring of a polluted well and
   they will block your spiritual vision so that you can neither see nor
   experience the pure love of Jesus Christ.

   --St. Walter Hilton, The Ladder of Perfection, Chapter 15, VOG

   Matthew 5:21-22 James 1:12-15

   "By meditation, I will come to appreciate how weak I am in virtue but
   prayer will help me acquire it." Unless I sit still and become aware of
   my "inner environment," I have little idea how noisy and chaotic I am.
   It does seem like "demons" are rummaging around my head, but, it is
   mostly my own undisciplined mind which is creating the trouble. While I
   must be determined to organize this clutter, I am powerless to do it
   without God's help. I ask for this help by prayer; asking God to
   empower my feeble efforts at self-discipline. Slowly over time, some
   semblance of clarity emerges--like the clearing of a turbid stream.

   Am I willing to work consistently at calming and clarifying my turbid
   and disorganized mind? How will I do this?

   110. God Does Everything

   (God Is My Light And Salvation: Who Do I Fear?)

   A man regards some things as well done and others as evil, but our Lord
   does not regard them like that. For as all natural things have really
   been performed by God, so everything that has been done has somehow
   been done by God...All this is due to the plan that God ordained from
   all eternity. He is the only one who acts.

   And he revealed all this to me and filled me with happiness. It is as
   though He were saying: Look! I am God! Look! I am in all things. Look!
   I do everything. Look! I do everything. I hold my work always in my
   hands and I will never let them fall. Look! I am guiding everything to
   the end I ordained for it from before the beginning of time, with the
   same wisdom, power and love with which I created it! So how can
   anything be amiss?

   --St. Julian of Norwich, Revelations of Divine Love, Chapter 11, VOG

   Psalm 27:1,5 Hebrews 11:1-40

   In some mysterious way, all things ultimately work out according to
   God's plan. I read salvation history as recorded in the Bible and I am
   amazed that anything good has come out of that torturous process. But
   God's will plays out in spite of man's stupidity, greed, pride, envy,
   lust and every other undesirable trait.

   So, the Lord are my light and salvation....what need I fear?

   111. The Acid Test of Spirituality

   (Lord, Grant Me What Is Best For My Soul)

   Many times it will happen that proper medical attention or effective
   remedies will be lacking, or even that the doctor will not rightly
   diagnose our case. In such instances, we must unite ourselves to the
   divine will which thus disposes of our physical health. The story is
   told of a client of St. Thomas of Canterbury, who being sick, went to
   the saint's tomb to obtain a cure. He returned home cured. But then he
   thought to himself: "Suppose it would be better for my soul's salvation
   if I remained sick, what point then is there in being well?" In this
   frame of mind he went back and asked the saint to intercede with God
   that he would grant what would be best for his eternal salvation. His
   illness returned and he was perfectly content with the turn things had
   taken, being fully persuaded that God had thus disposed of him for his
   own good.

   Sickness is the acid test of spirituality, because it discloses whether
   are virtue is real or sham.

   --St. Alphonsus de Ligouri, Uniformity of God's Will, Chapter 5, CCEL

   2 Corinthians 12:8-10

   I've often wondered what I would be like if I had normal eyesight.
   Would I be more worldly and less caring? Would an ability to drive a
   car allow me to be more useful? Since I never had normal eyesight, I
   don't miss it. A dozen years ago, when I nearly lost my remaining sight
   virtually overnight for a period of three years, I was stunned and
   unhappy. From this, I assume that what I am and what God has given me
   is best for my spiritual growth, including the times when I nearly lost
   it all.

   Would I pray for ill-health if that were best for my spiritual growth?

   112. Christ Is All

   (Jesus Is The First And Last)

   Christ be with me, Christ within me,

   Christ behind me, Christ before me,

   Christ beside me, Christ to win me,

   Christ to comfort and restore me,

   Christ beneath me, Christ above me,

   Christ in quiet, Christ in danger,

   Christ in hearts of all that love me,

   Christ in mouth of friend and stranger.

   --St. Patrick, The Shield of St. Patrick, CCEL

   Revelations 1:17-18 Colossians 2:9-10

   All things are summed up in Jesus. He is the Alpha and Omega, the
   Beginning and the End. He is within everyone and all things, including
   me! This is one of the reasons why meditation and knowing myself is so
   important. I can know nothing better than I know myself. My soul is
   made in the image of God.

   Are there pieces of me that I am still afraid of knowing?

   113. Conversing With God

   (I Have Strength Through Him Who Empowers Me)

   The devout Fr. John Tauler relates this personal experience: For years
   he had prayed God to send him someone who would teach him the real
   spiritual life. One day, at prayer, he heard a voice saying: "Go to
   such and such a church and you will have the answer to your prayers."
   He went and at the door of the church he found a beggar, barefooted and
   in rags. He greeted the mendicant saying: "Good day, my friend."

   "Thank you, sir, for your kind wishes, but I do not recall ever having
   had a bad day."

   "Then God has certainly given you a very happy life."

   "That is very true, sir, I have never been unhappy. In saying this I am
   not making any rash statement either. This is the reason: When I have
   nothing to eat, I give thanks to God; when it rains or snows, I bless
   God's providence; when someone insults me, drives me away, or otherwise
   mistreats me, I give glory to God. I've said I never had an unhappy
   day, and it's the truth, because I am accustomed to will unreservedly
   what God wills. Whatever happens to me, sweet or bitter, I gladly
   receive from his hands as what is best for me. Hence my unvarying
   happiness."

   "Where did you find God?"

   "I found him where I left creatures."

   "Who are you anyway?"

   "I am a king."

   "And where is your kingdom?"

   "In my soul, where everything is in good order, where the passions obey
   reason and the reason obeys God."

   "How have you come to such a state of perfection?"

   "By silence, I practice silence towards men, while I cultivate the
   habit of speaking with God. Conversing with God is the way I found and
   maintain my peace of soul."

   Union with God brought this poor beggar to the very heights of
   perfection. In his poverty he was richer than the mightiest monarch; in
   his sufferings, he was vastly happier than worldlings amid their
   worldly delights.

   --St. Alphonsus de Ligouri, Uniformity With God's Will, Chapter 3, CCEL

   Philippians 4:6-7, 11-13 Jeremiah 12:1-3a

   My Lord Jesus, though I don't talk to You directly often enough as
   friends would talk, I thank You for Your daily companionship and
   guidance whenever I remember You. I trust You Lord, in Your love, that
   You will not allow anything to happen to me that is not for my highest
   good. I ask Lord that You remove from me my self-indulgent will and
   allow me to be a healing vessel for Your glory and my joy! I praise You
   my God, Friend, Lord, and Brother. Amen.

   How much conversation do I have with God? As much as I would have with
   a friend? Do I suspect that I would not have a friend-relationship with
   someone with whom I communicate as little as I talk to God?

   114. Call To A Missionary

   (Lord, Hear Us)

   And again after a few years I was in Britain with my people, who
   received me as their son, and sincerely besought me that now at last,
   having suffered so many hardships, I should not leave then and go
   elsewhere.

   And there I saw in the night the vision of a man, whose name was
   Victoricus, coming as it were from Ireland, with countless letters. And
   he gave me of them, and I read the opening words of the letter, which
   were, "The voice of the Irish", and as I read the beginning of the
   letter I thought that at the same moment I heard their voice-they were
   those beside the Wood of Voclut, which is near the Western Sea-and thus
   did they cry out as with one mouth: "We ask thee, boy, come and walk
   among us once more."

   And I was quite broken in heart, and could read no further, and so I
   woke up. Thanks be to God, after may years the Lord gave to them
   according to their cry.

   --St. Patrick, The Confessions, CCEL

   Acts 16:6-10

   While I may not be called to minister to the Macedonians as were Saints
   Paul and Luke, nor to the Irish as was St. Patrick, I am called to
   minister to my family, friends, co-workers and community. This ministry
   may not be formal preaching or religiously oriented at all. It may be
   offering a compassionate ear to a co-worker with a very sick daughter,
   attending a city council meeting, hosting a dinner for single friends,
   inviting some lonely individuals to Christmas or Thanksgiving dinner,
   offering a young neighbor a job to help pay for a trip or babysitting a
   grandchild. While I may not have visions of whole peoples calling me to
   minister, the individual voices are all around me?

   Am I willing to listen to the voices of those around me who need a
   little time, talent or treasure? How do I fulfill my ministry?

   115. Thanksgiving Of A Missionary

   (I Am With You Always)

   Hence, then, I give unwearied thanks to God, who kept me faithful in
   the day of my temptation, so that today I can confidently offer Him my
   soul as a living sacrifice- to Christ, my Lord, who saved me out of all
   my troubles.....So indeed I must accept with equanimity whatever
   befalls me, be it good or evil, and always give thanks to God, who
   taught me to trust in Him always without hesitation, and who must have
   heard my prayer so that I, however ignorant I was, in the last days
   dared to undertake such a holy and wonderful work-thus imitating
   somehow those who, as the Lord once foretold, would reach His Gospel
   for a testimony to all nations before the end of the world. So we have
   seen it, and so it has been fulfilled: indeed, we are witnesses that
   the Gospel has been preached unto those parts beyond which there lives
   nobody.

   --St. Patrick, The Confessions, CCEL

   Matthew 28:16-20 Mark 16:14-15

   "I must accept with equanimity whatever befalls me, be it good or evil,
   and always give thanks to God, who taught me to trust in Him always
   without hesitation.." The joy and faith contained in St. Patrick's
   Confession can be felt. He learned to trust God and, at the end of his
   days, he saw all the good that God accomplished through him. Would he
   have been so happy or have had such an inspiring life if he had not
   immediately heeded the Call?

   Do I immediately answer God's call whether convenient or not? Am I
   thankful when I do whether or not I feel so at first?

   116. All Revelation Is Complete In Christ

   (The Lord Has Placed All Things Under Jesus'Feet)

   Any person questioning God or desiring some vision or revelation would
   not only be guilty of foolish behavior but also of offending Him, by
   not fixing his eyes entirely upon Christ and by living with the desire
   for some other novelty.

   God could respond as follows: If I have already told you all things in
   My Word, My Son, and if I have no other word, what answer or revelation
   can I now make that would surpass this? Fasten your eyes on Him alone,
   because in Him I have spoken and revealed all, and in Him you shall
   discover even more than you ask for and desire.....

   If you desire Me to answer with a word of comfort, behold My Son,
   subject to Me and to others out of love for Me, and you will see how
   much He answers. If you desire Me to declare some secret truths or
   events to you, fix your eyes on Him, and you will discern hidden in Him
   the most secret mysteries, and wisdom, and the wonders of God, as My
   Apostle proclaims: In whom are hidden all the treasures of the wisdom
   and knowledge of God (Col. 2:3).

   --St. John of the Cross, The Ascent of Mount Carmel, Book 2, Chapter
   22, JTG

   Ephesians :17-23

   Jesus "is enthroned far above every power or any other name that can be
   named, not only in this age but in the age to come." If I "fix my eyes
   upon Him, I will discover in Him the most secret mysteries, wisdom and
   wonders of God." When I think I need more spiritual excitement, or new
   knowledge, or flashy experience, these readings get me back to the
   basics. I need to fix my eyes on Jesus.

   In what ways am I still spiritually thrill-seeking? When I crave
   something new, will I focus on Jesus and trust what I receive from Him?

   117. The Need For Spiritual Reading

   (The Scriptures Teach Salvation Through Faith In Jesus)

   I am always encouraging you, and I am not going to stop encouraging
   you, to pay attention not only to what is said here in church, but
   also, when you are at home, to continue constantly in the practice of
   reading the divine Scriptures...Let not anyone say to me those silly,
   contemptible words, "I'm stuck in the courthouse all day". "I'm tied up
   with political affairs."..."I've got a wife." "I'm raising kids." "I'm
   responsible for a household." "I'm a businessman." "Reading the Bible
   isn't my thing. That's for those who are set apart, for those who have
   made the mountaintops their home, who have a way of life without
   interruptions." What are you saying, man? It's not your business to pay
   attention to the Bible because you are distracted by thousands of
   concerns? Then Bible reading belongs more to you than to the
   monks!...You are always standing in the line of battle and are
   constantly being hit, so you need more medicine...Numerous powerful
   inducements to anger and anxiety, to discouragement and grief, to
   vanity and loss of sense surround us on every side. ...And so we
   constantly need the whole range of equipment supplied by Scripture...

   --St. John Chrysostom, Sermon on Lazarus 3, JTG

   2 Timothy 3:14-17 Nehemiah 8:1-12

   "All Scripture is inspired by God and useful for refuting error, for
   guiding people's lives, and training them to be upright." In addition
   to Scripture, I also study the lives and writings of the saints; those
   whose lives have been transformed through the study and meditation on
   the Scriptures. These are the "medicine" and "equipment" needed to
   stand on the firing line of the spiritual battle. If the inducements to
   give up this battle were powerful in the second century, how much worse
   are they today?

   How can I add more spiritual reading to my daily routine?

   118. Prayer to the Shepherd

   (The Lord Is My Shepherd, I Lack Nothing)

   Come therefore, Lord Jesus, to look for your servant, to search for the
   tired sheep. Come, O Shepherd, and look for me....Your sheep has gone
   astray while you dwelt in the mountains. Leave there the ninety-nine
   other sheep, and come after the one who strayed away. Come without the
   dogs, without the bad workers, without the hirelings to uncouth to
   enter through the door. Come without help and without being announced:
   long have I waited for your arrival. I know that you will come....
   Come, not with a whip but with charity and gentleness of heart. Come to
   me for I am disturbed by the incursions of the ravening wolves. Come to
   me, for I have been cast out of Paradise...I have wondered far from the
   herd grazing on the heights...You have placed me there, but the wolf
   roaming by night drove me away from the fold. Come to look for me, for
   I am seeking You. Search for me, find me, gather me to You, carry me.
   You can find the one You seek: deign to welcome the one You find, and
   to place him on Your shoulders...Come yourself to look for your sheep,
   rather than send servants or hirelings to do the searching. Draw me to
   You in this flesh which failed in Adam, draw me to You, not from
   Sarah... but from Mary. Carry me to Your cross which is the salvation
   of the lost and the only rest of the weary, to Your cross by which
   whoever dies can live again.

   --St. Ambrose, Reading Scripture With The Church Fathers, JTG

   Psalm 23

   As I hike in the Smoky Mt. National Park, the words of Psalm 23 come to
   mind: "In grassy meadows He lets me lie...by tranquil streams He leads
   me...to restore my spirit and sooth me." Nature is one of the ways that
   God calls to and searches for His "tired sheep" that have "gone astray
   while (the Lord) dwelt in the mountains." It is on such trips that God
   has often "come to look for me, find me, gather me and carry me" to my
   next needed life experience.

   When I am tired, do I find God calling me to the mountains and streams
   of His beautiful creation? Do I respond often enough?

   119. Human vs. Spiritual

   (The Word Is The Real Light)

   Now the more the mind is concerned about thinking and dealing with what
   is merely lower and human, the more it is separated from the experience
   in the intimacy of devotion of what is higher and heavenly, while the
   more fervently the memory, desire and intellect is withdrawn from what
   is below to what is above, the more perfect will be our prayer, and the
   purer our contemplation, since the two directions of our interest
   cannot both be perfect at the same time, being as different as light
   and darkness. He who cleaves to God is indeed translated into the
   light, while he who clings to the world is in the dark. So the supreme
   perfection of man in this life is to be so united to God that all his
   soul with all its faculties and powers are so gathered into the Lord
   God that he becomes one spirit with him, and remembers nothing but God,
   but with all his desires unified by the joy of love, he rests
   contentedly in the enjoyment of his Maker alone.

   --St. Albert the Great, On Cleaving To God, CCEL

   John 1:1-5, 9-14 Wisdom 9:13-18

   "Who could ever have known (God's) will, had (God0 not given wisdom,
   and sent (His) Holy Spirit from above." Thus: "His Word was made
   flesh." "The supreme perfection of man in this life is to be so united
   to the (Word) that all his desires unified by the joy of love, he rests
   contentedly in the enjoyment of his Maker alone." Jesus teaches me how
   to be both fully human and God-like.

   In what ways is my thinking still too absorbed with the world?

   120. Detachment

   (Who Will Rescue Me From This Body Doomed To Death? ""God..)

   Above all, therefore, it is necessary that things heard, seen, done and
   said, and other such things, must be received without adding things
   from the imagination, without mental associations and without emotional
   involvement, and one should not let past or future associations,
   implications or constructs of the imagination form and grow. For when
   constructs of the imagination are not allowed to enter the memory and
   mind, a man is not hindered, whether he be engaged in prayer,
   meditation, ire reciting psalms, or in any other practice or spiritual
   exercise, nor will they recur again. So commit yourself confidently and
   without hesitation, all that you are, and everything else, individually
   and in general, to the unfailing and totally reliable providence of
   God, in silence and in peace, and he will fight for you. He will
   liberate you and comfort you more fully, more effectively and
   satisfactorily then if you were to dream about it all the time, night
   and day, and were to cast around frantically all over the place with
   the futile and confused thoughts of your mind in bondage, nor will you
   wear out your mind and body, wasting your time, and stupidly and
   pointlessly exhausting your strength.

   --St. Albert the Great, On Cleaving To God, JTG

   Romans 7:14-25 1 John 2:15-17

   "What a wretched man I am! Who will rescue me from this body doomed to
   death? God""thanks be to Him""through Jesus Christ our Lord." No less a
   person than St. Paul had trouble with detachment in fighting off those
   mental associations and emotional attachments that bind us to worldly
   things and events. But, as St. Albert has indicated, if I commit myself
   confidently to the providence of God, He will fight for me and liberate
   me. He will do for me what I cannot do for myself. Praise His Name!

   In what ways am I a prisoner ...attached to the outcome of events and
   owned by the things that I own?

   121. Free Will

   (I Will Choose Life)

   If our free will is in truth preserved with innumerable inclinations
   towards virtue or vice , toward either duty or its opposite, its future
   must like other things have been known by God , before coming to pass,
   from the world's creation and foundation ; and in all things
   prearranged by God in accordance with what He has seen of each act of
   our free wills. He has with due regard to each movement of our free
   wills prearranged what also is at once to occur in His providence and
   to take place according to the train of future events. God's
   foreknowledge is not the cause of all future events including those
   that are to have their efficient cause in our freewill guided by
   impulse.

   --St. Origen, On Prayer, CCEL

   Deuteronomy 30:15-20 Ezekiel 14:12-20

   "Look! I am offering you life and prosperity or death and disaster.
   Choose life." Human free will is powerful. Just look at the World Trade
   Center/Pentagon disaster that just took place. Some deliberately choose
   death. While free-will is real, St. Origen has noted a cause for hope,
   even in the midst of intentional calamity: "(God) has with due regard
   to each movement of our free wills prearranged what also is at once to
   occur in His providence and to take place according to the train of
   future events." God's grace and providence will always move in the
   direction of life, love and healing and this movement will be stronger
   than death and hate as proved by the resurrection of Jesus.

   How convinced am I that good will ultimately come from evil according
   to God's providence? In what ways do I tend to choose death?

   122. Particular and Daily Examen

   (The Harvest Of The Spirit Is Eternal Life)

   It contains in it three times and two to examine oneself.

   The first time is in the morning, immediately on rising when one ought
   to propose to guard himself with diligence against that particular sin
   or defect which he wants to correct or amend.

   The second time is after dinner, when one is to ask of God our Lord
   what one wants, namely , grace to remember how many times he has fallen
   into that particular sin or defect, and to amend himself in the future.
   Then let him make the first Examen, asking account of his soul of that
   particular thing proposed, which he wants to correct and amend. Let him
   go over hour by hour , or period by period, commencing at the hour he
   rose, and continuing up to the hour and instant of the present examen ,
   and let him make (note of as many) times he has fallen into that
   particular sin or defect. Then let him resolve anew to amend himself up
   to the second Examen which he will make.

   third time: After supper, the second examen will be made, in the same
   way, hour by hour, commencing at the first Examen and continuing up to
   the present (second) one, and let him make (note again of the) times he
   has fallen into that particular sin or defect.

   --St. Ignatius of Loyola, The Spiritual Exercises, CCEL

   Galatians 6:1-5, 7-9 Sirrah 22:27-23:6

   "Bear one another's burdens and you will fulfill the law of Christ."
   While each of us is responsible for our own behavior, St. Paul
   indicates that we can help each other through loving correction. We can
   ask for help in performing our daily examination of conscience.

   How often do I examine my conscience? Is it possible to find a friend
   and do some "fifth step" work? (Admit to God, myself and another human
   being the exact nature of my wrongs.)

   123. On Gentleness Toward Ourselves

   (I Will Admonish Myself Gently As I Would My Child)

   One important direction in which to exercise gentleness , is with
   respect to ourselves, never growing irritated with one's self or one's
   imperfections, for although it is but reasonable that we should be
   displeased and grieved at our own faults, yet ought we to guard against
   a bitter, angry, or peevish feeling towards them. Many people fall into
   the error of being angry because they have been angry, vexed because
   they have given way to vexation, thus keeping up a chronic state of
   irritation, which adds to the evil of what is past, and prepares the
   way for a fresh fall on the first occasion. Moreover, all this anger
   and irritation against one's self fosters pride and springs entirely
   from self-love, which is disturbed and fretted by its own imperfection.
   What we want is a quiet, steady, firm displeasure at our own faults.
   (Problems) arise solely because men do not judge themselves by the
   light of reason, but under the influence of passions.

   Believe me....as a parent's tender affectionate remonstrance has far
   more weight with his child than anger and sternness, so, when we judge
   our own heart guilty, if we treat it gently, rather in a spirit of pity
   than anger, encouraging it to amendment, its repentance will be much
   deeper and more lasting than if stirred up in vehemence and wrath.

   If anyone does not find this gentle dealing sufficient, let him use
   sterner self-rebuke and admonition, provided only, that whatever
   indignation he arouses against himself, he finally works it all up to a
   tender, loving trust in God ....

   So then, when you have fallen, lift up your heart in quietness,
   humbling yourself deeply before God by reason of your frailty, without
   marveling that you fell""there is no reason to marvel because weakness
   is weak, or infirmity, infirm. Heartily lament that you should have
   offended God, and begin anew to cultivate the lacking grace, with a
   very deep trust in His Mercy, and with a bold, brave heart.

   --St. Francis de Sales, An Introduction to the Devout Life, CCEL

   Matthew 18:1-7 Ephesians 6:4

   "Do not provoke your children so that they will not become
   discouraged." St. Francis de Sales makes a good point: If I train
   myself lovingly, as I would train my child, my repentance will be
   deeper and longer lasting. The results will be real changes in my
   attitude and behavior. In addition, by treating myself gently, I will
   very likely treat others gently regarding their shortcomings.
   Ultimately, harshness begats an unrealistic perfectionism but
   gentleness begats realistic growth.

   How can I be both firm and loving with myself regarding my
   imperfections?

   124. Purity...Clarity...Calm

   (I Will Be An Example By The Way I Speak And Behave)

   If your desire and aim is to reach the destination of the path and home
   of true happiness, of grace and glory, by a straight and safe way then
   earnestly apply your mind to seek constant purity of heart, clarity of
   mind and calm of the senses. Gather up your heart's desire and fix it
   continually on the Lord God above. To do so you must withdraw yourself
   so far as you can from friends and from everyone else, and from the
   activities that hinder you from such a purpose. Grasp every opportunity
   when you can find the place, time and means to devote yourself to
   silence and contemplation, and gathering the secret fruits of silence,
   so that you can escape the shipwreck of this present age and avoid the
   restless agitation of the noisy world. For this reason apply yourself
   at all times to purity, clarity, and peace of heart above all things,
   so that, so far as possible, you can keep the doors of your heart
   resolutely barred to the forms and images of the physical senses and
   worldly imaginations by shutting off the doors of the physical senses
   and turning within yourself. After all, purity of heart is recognized
   as the most important thing among all spiritual practices, as its final
   aim, and the reward for all the labors that a spiritual-minded person
   and true religious may undertake in this life.

   --St. Albert the Great, On Cleaving To God, CCEL

   1 Timothy 4:12-16 2 Timothy 4:1-5

   "Be an example to all the believers in the ways you speak and behave,
   and in your love, your faith and your purity." Purity of heart comes by
   fixing your eyes on the Lord. Clarity of mind comes by reading the
   Scriptures. Calmness of the senses come by silence and contemplation.
   "Be conscientious about what you do and teach, persevere in this, and
   in this way you will save both yourself and those that listen to you."

   In what ways can I purify my heart?....Clarify my mind?....Calm my
   senses?

   125. The Saints: The Army of Christ

   (If I Persevere, I Will Reign With Christ)

   We depict Christ as our King and Lord, then, and do not strip Him of
   His army. For the saints are the Lord's army... For if the saints are
   heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ, they will also share in the
   divine glory and dominion. If they have partaken in Christ's suffering,
   and are His friends, shall they not receive a share of glory from the
   Church on earth?

   Therefore, since they are truly gods, not by nature, but because they
   partake of the divine nature, they are to be venerated, not because
   they deserve it on their own account, but because they bear in
   themselves Him who is by nature worshipful. We do not back away and
   refuse to touch red-hot iron because of the nature of iron, but because
   it has partaken of what is hot by nature. The saints are to be
   venerated because God has glorified them, and through Him they have
   become fearful to the enemy, and are benefactors for the faithful. They
   are not gods and benefactors by their own nature, but because they were
   loving servants and ministers of God, they have been endowed with
   boldness before Him. Therefore we venerate them, because the king is
   given honor through the worship given to his beloved servants. They are
   obedient servants and favored friends, but they are not the King
   Himself. When someone prays with faith, offering his petition in the
   name of such a favored friend, the King receives it, through the
   intercession of the faithful servant, because He accepts the honor and
   faith which the petitioner has shown to His servant. Thus, those who
   approach God through the apostles enjoyed healing, for the shadow of
   the apostles, or even handkerchiefs and aprons touched to them, gushed
   with cures.

   --St. John of Damascus, On The Divine Images, JTG

   2 Timothy 2:11-13 Sirrah 44:1-15

   "If we die with Him, we shall live with Him. If we persevere, we shall
   reign with Him." What does St. Paul mean? "The saints are to be
   venerated because God has glorified them...they bear in themselves Him
   who is worshipful." God, by His own authority, has delegated His power
   to the saints both living and dead. As Jesus indicated: Those with
   faith will do as (He) did; even more.

   Am I ready to perform the work that Jesus delegates to me both now and
   in the next life?

   126. Imitating Christ

   (Jesus Went About Doing Good...I Will Do The Same)

   "He who follows me walks not in darkness" says the Lord (John 8:12). By
   these words of Christ we are advised to imitate His life and habits, if
   we wish to be truly enlightened and free from all blindness of heart.
   Let our chief effort, therefore, be to study the life of Jesus Christ.

   The teaching of Christ is more excellent than all the advice of the
   saints, and he who has His spirit will find in it a hidden manna. Now,
   there are many who hear the Gospel often but care little for it because
   they have not the spirit of Christ. Yet whoever wishes to understand
   fully the words of Christ must try to pattern his whole life on that of
   Christ.

   What good does it do to speak learnedly about the Trinity if, lacking
   humility, you displease the Trinity? Indeed it is not learning that
   makes a man holy and just, but a virtuous life makes him pleasing to
   God. I would rather feel contrition than know how to define it. For
   what would it profit us to know the whole Bible by heart and the
   principles of all the philosophers if we live without grace and the
   love of God? Vanity of vanities and all is vanity, except to love God
   and serve Him alone.

   --Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, CCEL

   Mark 1:31-39 Acts 10:36-42

   Jesus went about doing good; therefore, my chief effort must be to
   study His life and pattern my whole life on His. What did Jesus do? He
   taught, He healed, He prayed, He gave His life for those He loved. It
   would be helpful to ask in any situation in which I find myself: What
   would a true disciple of Jesus do in this situation?

   what ways can I more fully pattern my life on Jesus'?

   127. Spiritual Preliminaries

   (Faith Calls Froth Grace)

   All things are possible to one who believes, even more to one who
   hopes, and still more to one who loves; but all things are even more
   possible to one who practices these three virtues and perseveres in
   them. All who are baptized believers have made the first step on the
   road that leads to perfection, and will be perfect providing they
   persevere in the practice of the following guides to their conduct:

   First: We must always keep our eyes on God and His glory in all we do,
   say or undertake.

   ...Resolve firmly to overcome, by the grace of God, all the
   difficulties found in the spiritual life.

   Second: When we undertake the spiritual life we must consider in depth
   who we are, and we will find ourselves worth of all scorn, unworthy of
   the name of Christian, and subject to all sorts of afflictions and
   countless misfortunes... We will find ourselves among those whom God
   chooses to make humble through an abundance of suffering and travails,
   both within and without..

   Third: We must believe beyond any doubt that it is to our advantage to
   sacrifice ourselves to God and that He is pleased by our sacrifice....
   Without this submission of heart and spirit to the will of God, there
   can be no devotion or going on to perfection.

   Fourth: A soul is all the more dependent on grace as it aspires to
   higher perfection, and the help and assistance of God are all the more
   necessary to us every moment because without Him the soul can do
   nothing. The world, the flesh and the devil all combine to make such a
   strong and continual war against the soul that without the very present
   help of God and our humble and necessary dependence upon Him, they
   would carry it away in spite of itself. To our nature this seems harsh,
   but grace takes pleasure in being dependent upon God and finds its rest
   in Him.

   -Brother Lawrence of the Resurrection, The Practice of the Presence of
   God, The Spiritual Maxims, RJE

   Romans 3:21-27 Philipians 1:6

   "All are justified by the free gift of (God's) grace through being set
   free through Christ Jesus." It is this grace, through faith, that
   protects us from the flesh, the world and the devil. Without faith and
   the grace that it calls forth, I would not be able to resolve to
   overcome the difficulties that may be necessary to fulfill God's will
   for me.

   How can I increase my faith? How can I more fully cooperate with God's
   grace?

   128. Bearing With the Faults of Others

   (Testing Of Faith Produces Perseverance)

   Until God ordains otherwise, a man ought to bear patiently whatever he
   cannot correct in himself and in others. Consider it better thus-
   perhaps to try your patience and to test you, for without such patience
   and trial your merits are of little account. Nevertheless, under such
   difficulties you should pray that God will consent to help you bear
   them calmly.

   If, after being admonished once or twice a person does not amend, do
   not argue with him but commit the whole matter to God that His will and
   honor may be furthered in all His servants, for God knows well how to
   turn evil to God. Try to bear patiently with the defects and
   infirmities of others, whatever they may be, because you may also have
   a fault which others must endure.

   If all were perfect, what should we have to suffer from others for
   God's sake? But God has so ordained, that we may learn to bear with one
   another's burdens, for there is no man without fault, no man without
   burden, no man sufficient to himself or wise enough. Hence we must
   support one another, console one another, mutually help, counsel, and
   advise, for the measure of every man's virtuous best revealed in time
   of adversity--adversity that does not weaken a man but rather shows
   what he is.

   --Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, CCEL

   James 1:2-4 Job 5:17-18

   "Try to bear patiently with the defects and infirmities of others
   because you also may have a fault which others must endure." It is odd
   to consider that my shortcomings may be a spiritual good to others by
   giving them practice with the virtues of patience and perseverance! Of
   course, I need to work on eliminating these faults but it is comforting
   to know that God can create blessings from my not-so-holy
   characteristics. Much depends on my attitude and that of those around
   me.

   In what ways am I patient with others because I know that they need to
   be patient with me? Do I remember that those around me act much like
   mirrors by reflecting back my own unpleasant characteristics?

   129. The Call: Adoring and Loving God

   (Lord, Work With Me)

   -Thou knowest well that it is not Thy gifts that I look for and
   desire...but it is Thyself and I can be content with nothing less.

   -Believe and count as lost all the time that is not spent in living
   God.

   -This sums up our entire call and duty: to adore God and to love Him,
   without worrying about the rest.

   -My God, since You are with me, and since it is Your will that I should
   apply my mind to these outward things, I pray that you will give me the
   grace to remain with You and keep company with You. But so that my work
   may be better, Lord, work with me, receive my work and possess all my
   affections. Amen.

   -Brother Lawrence of the Resurrection, The Practice of the Presence of
   God, RJE

   2 Theselonians 3:7-9 Colossians 3:23

   "Whatever you do, do from the heart, as for the Lord and not for
   others." "Imitate us for we did not act in a disorderly way among you."
   Brother Lawrence asks God to work with him so that his work will be
   better. St Paul indicates that one should work for the Lord and not to
   please others. For my part, I pray every work morning that God will be
   my supervisor by guiding and directing me in my daily tasks. While this
   doesn't ensure that I will do the right thing, it does give my work a
   greater sense of meaning at a higher level.

   In what ways would having Jesus as my supervisor influence my attitude
   and behaviors surrounding work?

   130. Thoughts on Death

   (I Will Seek What Is Above, For I Have Died With Christ)

   Very soon your life here will end, consider, then, what may be in store
   for you elsewhere. Today we live, tomorrow we die and are quickly
   forgotten. Oh, the dullness and hardness of a heart which looks only to
   the present instead of preparing for that which is to come!

   Therefore, in every deed and every thought, act as though you were to
   die this very day. If you had a good conscience you would not fear
   death very much. It is better to avoid sin than to fear death. If you
   are not prepared today, how will you be prepared tomorrow? Tomorrow is
   an uncertain day; how do you know you will have a tomorrow?

   How happy and prudent is he who tries now in life to be what he wants
   to be found in death. Perfect contempt of the world, a lively desire to
   advance in virtue, a love for discipline, the works of penance,
   readiness to obey, self-denial, and the endurance of every hardship for
   the love of Christ, these will give a man great expectations of a happy
   death.

   The present is very precious; these are the days of salvation; now is
   the acceptable time. How sad that you do not spend the time in which
   you might purchase everlasting life in a better way. The time will come
   when you will want just one day , just one hour in which to make
   amends, and do you know whether you will obtain it?

   Ah, foolish man, why do you plan to live long when you are not sure of
   living even a day? How many have been deceived and suddenly snatched
   away? How often have you heard of people being killed by drownings, by
   fatal falls from high places, of persons dying at meals, at play, in
   fires, by the sword, in pestilence, or at the hands of robbers! Death
   is the end of everyone and the life of man quickly passes away like a
   shadow.

   Keep yourself as a stranger here on earth, a pilgrim whom its affairs
   do not concern at all. Keep your heart free and raise it up to God, for
   you have not here a lasting home. To Him direct your daily prayers,
   your sighs and tears, that your soul may merit after death to pass in
   happiness to the Lord.

   --Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, CCEL

   Colossians 3:1-3 Romans 8:10

   I was walking into the hospice room expecting to see a ghastly sight--
   a 75-year old woman with terminal cancer near the end of its course. I
   was amazed when I saw her! She was beautiful. She had bright blue eyes,
   and translucent skin that seemed to glow from within. She had a calm
   and peaceful disposition. She told me that she was a woman of faith all
   of her life and that her daughter was a minister. The woman was not
   afraid of death. She was flushed with a youth that hinted of eternity.
   I knew I was seeing parts of her that would continue on into the
   afterlife.

   How am I living my life as if this were my last day? In what ways would
   my life be different if I knew I were to die in one year?

   131. What Causes a Loss of Virtue?

   (Uprightness Is My Master)

   The multitude then having erroneous opinions imagine that there are
   many different things which ruin our virtue: some say it is poverty,
   others bodily disease, others loss of property, others calumny, others
   death; and they are perpetually bewailing and lamenting these; and
   while they are commiserating the sufferers and shedding tears they
   excitedly say to one another "What a calamity has befallen such and
   such a man!"

   Let us determine what is the virtue of man, and let us regard that
   alone as an injury which is destructive to it. What then is the virtue
   of a man? Not riches that he should fear poverty ;nor health of body
   that he should dread sickness, nor the opinion of the public, that he
   should view an evil reputation with alarm, nor life simply for its own
   sake, that death should be terrible to him; nor liberty that he should
   avoid servitude, but carefulness in holding true doctrine, and
   rectitude in life. Of these things not even the devil himself will be
   able to rob a man, if he who possesses them guards them with the
   needful carefulness-: and that most malicious and ferocious demon is
   aware of this.

   --St. John Chrysistom, A Treatise To Prove That N0o One Can Harm The
   Man Who Does Not Injure Himself, CCEL

   Romans 6:15-19

   "Once you were a slave to sin...(but now) you took uprightness as your
   master." "What is the virtue of a man?...holding true doctrine and
   rectitude of life." These readings remind me that I can't blame my poor
   behavior on circumstances. I always have the freedom to act uprightly
   and believe correctly. The choice is mine.

   In what ways do I blame my behavior on my circumstances? In what ways
   can I change my thinking so as to believe correctly?

   132. Spiritual Chemotherapy

   (May My Spirit Be Saved)

   It should be known that the onset of prelest has three main causes:
   pride, the envy of demons and permission for punishment. Of these, the
   cause of pride is vain heedlessness (or vanity); of envy--desire of
   success; of permission for punishment-sinful life. Prelest coming from
   envy and proud conceit is quickly cured, especially if one humbles
   oneself. But the prelest due to punishment-deliverance to Satan through
   sin-God often permits, by forsaking a man, to last until death. It
   happens sometimes that even the innocent are delivered to the torment
   of demons for the sake of their salvation. It should be known that the
   spirit of proud conceit himself prophesies in those who do not keep
   careful attention on the heart.

   --St. Gregory of Sinai, Philokalia: On Prayer of the Heart

   1 Corinthians 5:1-5 1 Timothy 1:18-20

   This is one of the most startling concepts, to me, in the New
   Testament; being turned over to Satan for physical destruction to save
   my soul! Wow! It does sound like spiritual chemotherapy where the cure
   may be physically as destructive as the disease itself. There is one
   difference, however. The purpose of this cure is to save the soul, an
   infinitely greater good than the body. And, as with chemotherapy, it is
   only used if the alternative is death; in one case physical and the
   other spiritual.

   Do I recognize that my soul is more important than my body? In what
   ways do I live as if I believe this?

   133. Jesus Christ: The Way

   (In Will Arise And Walk Toward Jesus)

   "I am the way and the truth and the life" (John 14:16). Every man
   desires truth and life, but not every man finds the way. That God is
   life eternal, immutable, intelligible, intelligent, wise, and bestowing
   His wisdom, even some philosophers of this world have seen. They saw,
   indeed, but from afar, the fixed, settled, unwavering truth in which
   are all the governing principles of all created things. They saw, but
   they were in error and hence did not find the way to reach so great and
   ineffable and beatific a possession.

   But Christ, who is with the Father, is the truth and the life...As we
   had no way to go to the truth, the Son of God, who is in the Father and
   ever the truth and the life, became the way for us by assuming man's
   nature. Walk by Him the man, and you will come to God. You go by Him,
   and you go to Him. Do not look for any way to come to Him except by
   Himself. For if He had not deigned to be the way, we would have always
   gone astray. Therefore He became the way by which you could come to
   Him. In do not tell you, look for the way. The way itself has come to
   you. Arise and walk.

   --St. Augustine, Sermon 141, JTG

   Mark 2:9-11

   Jesus commands that I arise and walk toward Him and to give up my
   spiritual crippledness. He wants me to arise and walk toward Him for
   forgiveness, for salvation, for meaning in life, for healing, for
   guidance, for love and for anything else I can think of.

   At this moment, what does I need to walk toward Jesus to receive?

   134. The Power of Baptism

   (Jesus, May You Wash Away My Blindness)

   Once I lay in darkness and in the depths of night and was tossed to and
   fro in the waves of the turbulent world, uncertain of the correct way
   to go, ignorant of my true life, and a stranger to the light of truth.
   At that time and on account of the life In then led, it seemed
   difficult to believe what divine mercy promised for my salvation,
   namely, that someone could be born again and to a new life by being
   immersed in the healing water of Baptism. It was difficult to believe
   that though I would remains the same man in bodily form, my heart and
   mind would be transformed.

   But after the life-giving water of Baptism came to my rescue and washed
   away the stain of my former years and poured into my cleansed and
   purified heart the light which comes from above, and after In had drunk
   in the heavenly Spirit and was made a new man by a second birth, then
   amazingly what In had previously doubted became clear to me. What had
   been hidden was revealed. What had been dark became light. What
   previously had seemed impossible now seemed possible. What was in me of
   the guilty flesh now confessed it was earthly. What was made alive in
   me by the Holy Spirit was now quickened by God.

   --St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, Born to New Life, JTG

   Acts 19:1-7

   When St. Cyprian was baptized, it seems like the waters washed away a
   spiritual blindness and he became enabled to see in more than the
   physical sense. When St. Paul baptized the group of men at Ephesus,
   they began to speak in tongues and to prophesy. Baptism is more than a
   symbol. It is a sacrament of power that is dependent upon the action of
   the Holy Spirit in union with my faith.

   In what ways have my eyes been opened as a result of my faith in Jesus?
   In what ways has my lack of faith hindered the action of the Holy
   Spirit in my life?

   135. The Blessed Name

   (In Will Trust You, Lord)

   Write your blessed Name, O Lord, upon my heart, there to remain so
   indelibly engraved, that no prosperity, no adversity shall ever move me
   from your love. Be to me a strong tower of defense, a comforter in
   tribulation, a deliverer in distress, a very present help in trouble,
   and a guide to heaven through the many temptations and dangers of this
   life. Amen

   -Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, P

   Psalm 27:7-10 Mark 10:23-27

   This prayer of St. Thomas makes an interesting point. Even if it is not
   true, I might feel that God has abandoned me if bad things happen, such
   as, according to the psalmist, if one is abandoned by one's parents.
   St. Thomas brings up the opposite point that no prosperity can remove
   me from the love of God. The implication is that, in good times, I may
   not feel that I need God. God, however, will never abandon me. I will
   grow distant from Him.

   In what ways would prosperity cause me to move away from God? Do I

   understand that what I consider adversity may help me to grow closer to
   God?

   136. In Desire What In Love

   (O God, In Long For You)

   O Lord our God, grant us grace to desire thee with our whole heart, so
   that desiring thee we may seek and find thee; and so finding thee, may
   love thee, and loving thee, may hate those sins which separate us from
   thee, for the sake of Jesus Christ. Amen.

   --St. Anselm, P

   Psalm 63:1-5

   "My heart thirsts for you as a land parched, dreary and waterless."
   Without You, Lord, life, even when it is good, is more dead than the
   most extreme desert. It is survival at best. With You, life, even when
   it doesn't feel good, becomes alive with hope and possibilities. Teach
   me, Lord, to hate those things which may seem to contain life giving
   water but, in fact, are mirages. Amen.

   What are my favorite "mirages"; earthly things that seem to contain
   life but are in fact illusions?

   137. A Steadfast Heart

   (The Lord Will Preserve Me From Evil)

   Grant me O Lord, a steadfast heart, which no unworthy affection may
   drag downwards; give me an unconquered heart, which no tribulation can
   wear out; give me an upright heart, which no unworthy purpose may tempt
   aside.

   Bestow on me also, O Lord my God, understanding to know you, diligence
   to seek you, wisdom to find you, and a faithfulness that may finally
   embrace you, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

   --St. Thomas Aquinas, P

   Psalm 121:1-8

   "The Lord guards my comings and goings, henceforth and forever." The
   Lord offers me not only a steadfast, unconquered and upright heart, but
   wants to bestow on me understanding, diligence, wisdom and
   faithfulness. I need simply to accept and cooperate with God's gifts.

   In what ways can I accept and cooperate with God's gifts which he
   offers me henceforth and forever?

   138. God Is Everywhere

   (In Him We Live, Move, And Have Our Being)

   You know the general principle: that God is everywhere; on the throne
   of his glory among the blessed, indeed, but also throughout the whole
   universe which he fills, governs and preserves, ruling it by his wisdom
   and grace. This we learn in our infancy, as in all of our memory in
   childhood. Yet, in the practice of life, we live along as if we
   scarcely remembered that God sees us.

   God is so infinitely present to us that he is in every part of our life
   and being. Nothing can separate us from him. He is more intimately
   present to us than we are to ourselves, and whatever we do is done in
   him...As birds in changing their places find the air wherever they fly,
   and fish who live in the water are surrounded by that element wherever
   they swim, so wherever we go, we must find God everywhere. He is more
   within us than we are in ourselves.

   --St. Elizabeth Ann Seton, EAS: A Woman of Prayer, LF

   Acts 17:22-28

   God has decreed the times and limits of our habitation in this world so
   that we might seek and find Him. In addition, "He is more within us
   than we are in ourselves." God has given us an awareness of how short
   are the number of our days to give us a sense of urgency to search for
   and determine what is most important in life; union with God. And since
   God is everywhere, including within ourselves, He is leading us to
   examine ourselves and discover our souls.

   Do I recognize how limited my days are and how urgent is the call to
   search for God? In what ways am I aware that God is within me and that
   this is the place where I have the greatest opportunity of finding Him?

   139. Devotion

   (In Will Soar As With Eagle's Wings)

   True devotion presupposes a thorough love of God and therefore it is
   simply true love of God. Inasmuch as divine love adorns the soul, it is
   called grace, which makes us pleasing to his Divine majesty. Insofar as
   it strengthens us to do good, it is called charity.

   When we arrive at that degree of perfection at which it not only makes
   us do good but also do this diligently, frequently and readily, it is
   called devotion.

   Ostriches do not fly; chickens fly in a faltering fashion; but eagles,
   doves and robins fly aloft, swiftly and frequently. Sinners do not fly
   up to God but lie mired in the earth filled with earthly objects. Good
   people who have not as yet achieved devotion fly toward God by their
   works but do so seldom or slowly.

   Devout souls ascend to him promptly, more frequently and go on to lofty
   heights. In fact, devotion is simply that spiritual agility and
   vivacity by which charity works in us or through which we work quickly,
   cheerfully and lovingly.

   --St. Francis de Sales, Introduction To The Devout Life, LF

   Isaiah 40:31 Jeremiah 29:11

   "They that hope in the Lord will renew their strength, they will soar
   as with eagles wings; they will run and not grow weary, walk and not
   grow faint." St Francis de Sales indicates that devout souls ascend to
   God promptly, more frequently, and go on to lofty heights working
   quickly, cheerfully and lovingly. Hoping in the Lord leads to these
   wonderful qualities and gifts.

   Do I become discouraged when things do not turn out the way that I
   would like them to? How can I increase my hope in God's promises and
   plans?

   140. My Vocation Is Love

   (God Is Gracious And Merciful)

   In consideration of my weakness, you found a way to fulfil my
   childhood's ambitions, and you've found a way now to fulfil these other
   ambitions of mine, world-wide in their compass.

   I was still being tormented by this question of unfulfilled longings
   and it was a distraction in my prayer, when In decided to consult St.
   Paul's epistles in the hopes of getting an answer. It was the twelfth
   and thirteenth chapters of First Corinthians that claimed my attention.
   The first of these told me that we can't all be apostles, all of us be
   prophets.....It was a clear enough answer but it didn't satisfy my
   aspirations, didn't set my heart at rest...Reading on to the end of the
   chapter, In met this comforting phrase: "Prize the best gifts of
   heaven. Meanwhile, I can show you a way which is better than any
   other."

   What was it? The Apostle goes on to explain that all the gifts of
   heaven, even the most perfect of them, without love, are absolutely
   nothing; charity is the best way of all, because it leads straight to
   God. Now I was at peace,....charity--that was the key to my vocation.
   Love was the true motive force which enabled the other members of the
   Church to act....Love, in fact, is the vocation which includes all
   others...Besides myself with joy, In cried out: "Jesus, my Love! I've
   found my vocation, and my vocation is love."

   --St. Therese of Lisieux, Autobiography,PWST

   Jonah 3:1-5, 4:1-3,9-11

   I am often concerned about my vocation. Am I doing God's will or my
   own? Am I wasting my time? How important are feelings in a vocation?
   How important is it to be constantly busy? How important are results?
   Am I more like St. Theresa, ecstatic with joy that love is my vocation
   regardless of the actual tasks I am called to do, or, am I more like
   the reluctant prophet Jonah, running away from the divine call to do a
   specific service because it doesn't fit into my self concept or
   conception of God? (Should God really hate sinners?) It is obvious that
   St. Theresa has learned the lesson while Jonah has not.

   Do I accept the fact that love is a legitimate vocation that is more
   important than the specific skills used or tasks accomplished?

   141. The Means of Acquiring the Presence of God

   (In Cannot Serve Two Masters)

   First: The first means is living a very pure life.

   Second: The second is remaining very faithful to the practice of this
   presence and to the interior awareness of God in ourselves.

   Third: We must take care to glance inwardly toward God, even for a
   moment, before proceeding with our outward actions.

   Fourth: It would not be out of place for those who are beginning this
   practice to inwardly form a few words. But those who are beginning
   should be wary lest their minds should stray and return to the creature
   when they should be keeping them on God alone.

   Fifth: Practicing the presence of God is a little difficult in the
   beginning, but when it is done faithfully, it secretly works marvelous
   effects in the soul, bringing a flood of graces from the Lord, and
   leads it without its knowledge to gaze simply and lovingly at God and
   find His presence everywhere.

   Sixth: Please notice that to arrive at this state, we have to mortify
   our senses, since it is impossible for a soul which still has some
   creature-satisfaction, to fully enjoy this divine presence. To be with
   God, one must leave absolutely all created things behind.

   --Brother Lawrence of the Resurrection, Spiritual Maxims, RJE

   John 15:4-7 Matthew 6:24

   Jesus says to remain in Him as He remains in us while Brother Lawrence
   indicates that we should glance inwardly toward God before acting
   outwardly. Jesus says that you cannot serve two masters, while Brother
   Lawrence indicates that, to be with God, we need to leave all created
   things behind. Thus, the essence of practicing the presence of God is
   remaining close to God in all things while reducing our attachments to
   outcomes and worldly things.

   How can I increase my awareness of God in my life? How can I reduce my
   attachment to worldly things?

   142. Not Working For Personal Gain

   (The Lord Knows Every Plan And Thought)

   For the good is not good if it is not rightly done. It is really good
   only if it is not done with the purpose of receiving some reward: as,
   for instance, the search for popularity or glory may be rewarded by
   fame, or by excessive gain, or by something else that is wrong. God is
   not interested in what happens to turn out to be good or in what
   appears to be good. He is interested in the purpose for which a thing
   is done.

   --St. John of Damaskos, On the Virtues and Vices, Philokalia

   He who does something good and expects a reward is serving not God but
   his own will.

   --St. Mark the Ascetic, No Righteousness By Works, Philokalia

   1 Chronicles 38:8-10 Genesis 4:3-8

   "The Lord scrutinizes all hearts and understands whatever plans they
   may devise." "He is interested in the purpose for which a thing is
   done." My motives are always mixed and the honest thing to do is to
   accept this and know that God knows my true motivations. This is true
   even in regard to having this manuscript published. While I am doing it
   for God's glory and my joy, am I also doing it for my own glory? I
   would be lying if I said that it hasn't occurred to me. I suspect that
   my motives will never be truly pure in this life. I know, however, that
   God wants me to strive for this purity of purpose even if I don't
   succeed.

   Am I willing to be honest with God and others regarding my motivations?
   How can I decrease my ulterior motivations?

   143. Experiencing Freedom

   (God's Peace Shall Not Depart)

   Strive to receive a sure, unequivocal pledge of salvation in your
   heart, so that at the time of your death you will not be distraught and
   unexpectedly terrified. You have received such a pledge when your heart
   no longer reproaches you for your failings and your conscience stops
   chiding you because of your fits of anger; when through God's grace
   your bestial passions have been tamed; when you weep tears of solace
   and your intellect prays undistracted and with purity; and when you
   await death, which most people dread and run away from, calmly and with
   a ready heart.

   --St. Theognostos, On the Practice of the Virtues, Philokalia

   Isaiah 54:10 Ecclesiastes 5:19-20

   "My love shall never leave you nor my covenant of peace be shaken, says
   the Lord, who has mercy on you." I will experience God's freedom when I
   accept, unconditionally, in spite of my feelings, that God's love,
   peace and mercy will never leave me. When I accept this, my willingness
   and God's grace will accomplish His work in my life. My
   heart/conscience will no longer plague me, my animal passions will be
   calmed, I will have a tame mind that will pray without distraction, and
   I will not fear physical death when it comes.

   In what ways can I train myself to know, in my heart, that God's love
   and mercy are always with me if I accept them?

   144. Grace

   (God Withholds No Good Thing From Those Who Do What Is Right)

   St. John Chrysostom says: "A man's readiness and commitment are not
   enough if he does not enjoy help from above as well; equally help from
   above is no benefit to us unless there is also commitment and readiness
   on our part. These two facts are proved by Judas and Peter. For
   although Judas enjoyed much help, it was of no benefit to him, since he
   had no desire for it and contributed nothing from himself. But Peter,
   although willing and ready, fell because he enjoyed no help from above.
   So holiness is woven of these two strands. Thus I entreat you neither
   to entrust everything to God and then fall asleep, not to think, when
   you are striving diligently, that you will achieve everything by your
   own efforts.

   --St. Theodor us the Great Ascetic, A Century of Spiritual Texts,
   Fallaciously

   Psalm 84:11 two Corinthians 8:9

   "You know the gracious act of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sake
   He became poor although He was rich, so that by His poverty you might
   become rich." "Thus, I entreat you neither to entrust everything to God
   and then fall asleep, nor to think, when you are striving diligently,
   that you will achieve everything by your own efforts." If I am to
   accomplish anything of value in my life, I must always remember that I
   am God's instrument, to be used by Him when He wishes. My job is to be
   ready to be used through the training that He provides me through my
   daily living. The life of Jesus shows me how to do this.

   How can I become increasingly ready to do God's work? How will I know
   when He is using me?

   145. Distinguishing Ego From True Self

   (Flesh Begets Flesh, Spirit Begets Spirit)

   As Antony, the great servant of God, said: "Holiness is achieved when
   the intellect is in its natural state." And again, he said: "The soul
   realizes its integrity when its intellect is in that state in which it
   was created." And shortly after this he adds: "Let us purify our mind,
   for I believe that when the mind is completely pure and is in its
   natural state, it gains penetrating insight..."

   --St. Hesychios the Priest, On Watchfulness and Holiness, Philokalia

   Everything longs for what is akin to itself: the soul, since it is
   bodiless, desires heavenly goods, while the body, being dust, seeks
   earthly nourishment. So we shall surely come to experience immaterial
   perception if by our labors we refine our material nature.

   --St. Diadochos of Photiki, On Spiritual Knowledge, Philokalia

   John 3:5-8, 19-21

   "Whoever loves the truth comes to the light, so that his works may be
   clearly seen as done in God." "We shall surely come to experience
   immaterial perception if by our labors refine our material nature." The
   "immaterial perception" noted by St. Diadochos is "the light" indicated
   by Jesus. How do we refine our material nature? By choosing to see the
   truth revealed by Jesus; that we our spiritual beings living
   temporarily in material bodies. We can choose to live to develop our
   spiritual powers instead of choosing mere survival and gratification of
   the senses.

   In what ways do I still choose "darkness" (material) over the "light"
   (spiritual)?

   146. Dying and Being Reborn

   (Lord, Give Me A New Heart And Spirit)

   He who loves God consciously in his heart is known by God, for the
   degree that he receives the love of God consciously in his soul, he
   truly enters into God's love. From that time on, such a man never loses
   an intense longing for the illumination of spiritual knowledge, until
   he senses its strength in his bones and no longer knows himself, but is
   completely transformed by the love of God. He is both present in this
   life and not present in it; still dwelling in the body, he yet departs
   from it, as through love he ceaselessly journeys toward God in his
   soul. His heart now burns constantly with the fire of love and clings
   to God with an irresistible longing, since he has once and for all
   transcended self-love in his love for God...

   --St. Diadochos of Photiki, On Spiritual Knowledge, Philokalia

   Romans 10:9-11 Ezekiel 36:26-27

   "One believes with the heart and is so justified, and one confesses
   with the mouth and is so saved." Because of this, "his heart now burns
   constantly with the fire of love since he has once and for all
   transcended his self-love in his love for God." St. Paul indicates a
   modern psychological truth. What one thinks and believes controls ones
   perceptions and life. This is particularly true when one does this
   consciously (confessing with the mouth). If I choose this love of God,
   I will naturally, over time, diminish my self-centered love.

   Am I willing to believe in my heart and confess with my mouth all that
   Jesus teaches? How much fear do I have about losing my self-love?

   147. Forgetting About Preferences

   (The Just Man, Because Of His Faith, Shall Live)

   If you patiently accept what comes, you will always pray with joy.

   --St. Evagrios the Solitary, On Prayer, Philokalia

   He who opposes unpleasant events opposes the command of God.
   Unwittingly. But when someone accepts them with real knowledge, he
   waits patiently for the Lord.

   He who prays with understanding patiently accepts circumstances,
   whereas he who resents them has not yet attained pure prayer.

   ...For patient acceptance of whatever happens kindles the remembrance
   of God, whereas refusal to accept weakens the spiritual purpose of the
   heart and so makes it forgetful.

   --St. Mark the Ascetic, No Righteousness by Works, Philokalia

   Habakkuk 1:2-3, 2:2-4 Psalm 40:1

   "Anyone whose heart is not upright will succumb, but the upright will
   live through faithfulness." "He who opposes unpleasant events opposes
   the command of God but he who patiently accepts what comes will always
   pray with joy." Obviously, patience with and acceptance of what one
   considers to be unpleasant events is very difficult for those in a
   country where so many good things and graces are taken for granted. If
   I live with gratitude, counting my blessings every day, and faith,
   trusting that God will bring the best of outcomes even if it doesn't
   appear that way to me, my life will be filled with joy.

   Start a gratitude list and add one thing each day. What am I
   particularly grateful for today? What am I dealing with that requires
   much faith?

   148. Goodness And Peace In Man

   (Jesus, Give Us Your Gift Of Peace)

   First keep peace with yourself; then you will be able to bring peace to
   others. A peaceful man does more good than a learned man. Whereas a
   passionate man turns even good to evil and is quick to believe evil,
   the peaceful man, being good himself, turns all things to good.

   The man who is at perfect ease is never suspicious, but the disturbed
   and discontented spirit is upset by many a suspicion. He neither rests
   himself nor permits others to do so. He often says what ought not to be
   said and leaves undone what ought to be done. He is concerned with the
   duties of others but neglects his own.

   Direct your zeal, therefore, first upon yourself; then you may with
   justice exercise it upon those about you. You are well versed in
   coloring your own actions with excuses which you will not accept from
   others, though it would be more just to accuse yourself and excuse your
   brother. If you wish men to bear with you, you must bear with them.
   Behold, how far you are from true charity and humility which does not
   know how to be angry with anyone, or to be indignant save only against
   self!

   It is no great thing to associate with the good and gentle, for such
   association is naturally pleasing. Everyone enjoys a peaceful life and
   prefers persons of congenial habits. But to be able to live at peace
   with harsh and perverse men, or with the undisciplined and those who
   irritate us, is a great grace, a praiseworthy and manly thing.

   Some people live at peace with themselves and with their fellow men,
   but others are never at peace with themselves nor do they bring it to
   anyone else. These latter are a burden to everyone, but they are more
   of a burden to themselves. A few, finally, live at peace with
   themselves and try to restore it to others.

   Now, all our peace in this miserable life is found in humbly enduring
   suffering rather than in being free from it. He who knows best how to
   suffer will enjoy the greater peace, because he is the conqueror of
   himself, the master of the world , a friend of Christ, and an heir of
   heaven.

   --St. Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, CCEL

   John 14:27 2 Corinthians 13:11

   "Live in peace, and the God of love and peace will be with you." "All
   of our peace in this life is found in humbly enduring suffering rather
   than in being free from it." "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
   to you." I would dearly love to be at peace and to be able to impart
   this to others. I cultivate this by accepting the Peace of Jesus and
   learning to live in peace. In addition, there is a more mental
   component to this; the acceptance of suffering and having the faith to
   trust in God's outcomes.

   In what ways do I strive for peace in myself and others? Is my concept
   of peace realistic by accepting suffering as a natural part of life and
   growth?

   149. Letting Go Of Thoughts

   (To Be Spiritually Minded Is Life And Peace)

   If we truly wish to please God and to enjoy the grace of His
   friendship, we should present to Him an intellect that is stripped
   bare-not weighted down with anything that belongs to this present
   life...

   --St. John of Karpathos, Texts For the Monks In India, Philokalia

   The intellect cannot dally with any sensible object unless it
   entertains at least some kind of passionate feeling for it.

   --St. Thalassios, On Love, Self-Control and Life in Accordance With the
   Intellect, Philokalia

   You cannot attain pure prayer while entangled in material things and
   agitated by constant cares. For prayer means the shedding of thoughts.

   --St. Evagrios the Solitary, On Prayer, Philokalia

   Romans 8:2-13,37 Mark 4:18-20

   "Those sown among thorns are people who hear the Word, but worldly
   anxiety, the lure of riches, and the craving for other things intrude
   and choke the word, and it bears no fruit." "The intellect cannot dally
   with any sensible objects unless it entertains at least some kind of
   passionate feeling for it." What I concentrate my mind on most in life
   becomes my "god," a substitute to take the place of the real God. Jesus
   makes that really clear. Anxiety, lures and cravings, intensified by my
   thinking, inhibit the work of God in my life. I must reduce my
   attachment to worldly things and outcomes. The mind is the place to
   start.

   What anxieties, lures and cravings most occupy my mind? What steps can
   I take to reduce these tendencies?

   150. Purity of Mind and Unity of Purpose

   (In Will Still My Soul Like A Weaned Child)

   A man is raised from the earth by two wings-simplicity and purity.
   There must be simplicity in his intention and purity in his desires.
   Simplicity leads to God, purity embraces and enjoys Him.

   If your heart is free from ill-ordered affection, no good deed will be
   difficult for you. If you aim at and seek after nothing but the
   pleasure of God and the welfare of your neighbor, you will enjoy
   freedom within.

   If your heart were right, then every created thing would be a mirror of
   life for you and a book of holy teaching, for there is no creature so
   small and worthless that it does not show forth the goodness of God. If
   inwardly you were good and pure, you would see all things clearly and
   understand them rightly, for a pure heart penetrates to heaven and
   hell, and as a man is within, so he judges what is without. If there be
   joy in the world, the pure of heart certainly possess it; and if there
   be anguish and affliction anywhere, an evil conscience knows it too
   well.

   As iron cast into fire loses its rust and becomes glowing white, so he
   who turns completely to God is stripped of his sluggishness and changed
   into a new man. When a man begins to grow lax, he fears a little toil
   and welcomes external comfort, but when he begins perfectly to conquer
   himself and to walk bravely in the ways of God, then he thinks those
   things less difficult which he thought so hard before.

   --St. Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, CCEL

   Psalm 131

   "I hold myself in quiet and silence, like a little child in its
   mother's arms, like a little child, so In keep myself." "A man is
   raised from earth by two wings-simplicity and purity." This simplicity
   and purity come across wonderfully in Psalm 131. The simplicity and
   purity are that of a small baby in its mother's arms! When I watch my
   four-month-old grandson, he is full of delight and wonder. He seems to
   be learning from every little thing he sees and hears. He also seems so
   full of trust. He knows that if he has a need, there are many loving
   arms to help him meet them. Thus, he sleeps in peace.

   In what ways can I simplify my intentions in life and purify my
   desires?
     __________________________________________________________________

   151. Petitionary Prayer

   (Justice Will Be Done)

   Divine providence does not early arrange what effects are to occur; it
   also arranges the causes of these effects and the relationship between
   them...in the case of prayer we do not pray in order to change God's
   plan, but in order to obtain by our prayers those things which God
   planned to bring about by means of prayers, in order, as Gregory says,
   in order that our prayers should entitle us to receive what almighty
   God planned from all eternity to give us...

   God gives us many things out of shear generosity, without being asked.
   The reason why He wants to give us some things in response to our
   petition is that it is profitable for us to acquire a certain
   confidence in running to Him and to recognize that He is the source of
   all that is good for us.

   --St. Thomas Aquinas, Suma II-II, PWTA

   Luke 18:1-8

   God does not need my prayers, I do. Prayer puts me in contact with my
   Source. The greater my contact with God, the more I recognize my need
   for Him and the more the blockages to His grace are removed from me.
   Jesus clearly indicates that the reason for diligent and persistent
   prayer is to increase faith which is the prerequisite for many
   blessings.

   As it asks in Luke 18:8: When Jesus comes for me at the end of this
   life, will He find any faith in me? If my prayers were answered
   quickly, would I pray less often?

   152. Childlike Faith

   (I Will Not Fear Or Loose Heart)

   When Theresa was on her deathbed, her sister Pauline asked her to
   explain what she meant by "remaining a little child before God."
   Theresa replied:

   It is to recognize our nothingness, to expect everything from God as a
   little child expects everything from its father; it is to be disquieted
   about nothing,....having no other occupation but to gather...the
   flowers of love and sacrifice, and offering them to God in order to
   please Him.

   To be little is not attributing to oneself the virtues that one
   practices, believing oneself capable of anything, but to recognize that
   God places this treasure in the hands of His little child to be used
   when necessary; but it remains always God's treasure. Finally, it is
   not to become discouraged over one's faults, for children fall often,
   but they are too little to hurt themselves very much.

   --St. Theresa of Lisieux, Her Last Conversations, PWTL

   2 Chronicles 20:15-17

   St. Theresa lays out three characteristics of a child-like faith:
   expect everything necessary from God, do not attribute to myself the
   virtues I practice, and, do not become discouraged over my faults.
   These were important even in Old Testament times of war, as noted in
   the Bible reading. The army of King Jehososhaphat was to expect God to
   fight for them, not to assume that their fighting skills were their
   own, and not to become discouraged if their faith was not perfect and,
   thus, they felt fear. As long as they acted in accord with God's word
   and showed up for the fight, victory would be theirs---and it was.

   How do I avoid becoming preoccupied with my shortcomings?

   153. The Nature of Desire

   (I Will Store Up Heavenly Treasure)

   For desire is drawn toward three things: the pleasure of the flesh,
   vain self-glory, and the acquisition of material wealth. As a result of
   this senseless appetite it scorns God and His commandments, and forgets
   His generosity; it turns like a savage beast against its neighbor, it
   plunges the intelligence into darkness and prevents it from looking
   towards the truth. He who has acquired a spiritual understanding of
   this truth will share, even here on earth, in the kingdom of heaven and
   will live a blessed life in expectation of the blessedness that awaits
   those who love God.

   --St. John of Damascus, On the Virtues and the Vices, Philokaiia

   Matthew 6:19-21, Acts 12:22-23, 2 Chronicles 10:1-19

   Pleasure of the flesh, self-glory, and material acquisitions are the
   three worldly desires that drive both God and my neighbor out of my
   life. King Rehoboam split the Kingdom of Israel due to his lust for
   power and possession. King Herod lost his life by his pride and
   self-glory. Jesus warns me to store up heavenly treasure, not earthly,
   for where my treasure is, there will my heart be. The choice is truly
   mine.

   Do my desires for worldly things outstrip my actual need for them?
   Which area is my greatest weakness: pleasure, vanity or greed? What
   void in my life is this weakness trying to fill? How can this void be
   truly filled?

   154. Uncreated

   (I Will Not Deceive Myself)

   Be on your guard against the tricks of the demons. While you are
   praying purely and calmly, sometimes they suddenly bring before you
   some strange and alien form, making you imagine in your conceit that
   the Deity is there. They are trying to persuade you that the object
   suddenly disclosed to you is the Deity, whereas the Deity does not
   possess quantity and form.

   --Evagrios the Solitary, On Prayer, Philokalia

   1 Corinthians 3:18

   "Let no one deceive himself. If anyone among you considers himself wise
   in this age, let him become a fool so as to become wise." I do not know
   to what extent the demons try to deceive me. I do know that my own ego,
   self-centeredness and pride are always popping up on my spiritual
   journey. I have had times when I was sure I understood the connection
   of events and people (of course, I was somehow always prominent) only
   to find out later how self-deceived I was. In addition, I've often felt
   a calling or vision to do something which later evaporated like mist.
   In these cases, while I don=t believe that "callings" need to be
   permanent, I suspect that at least some worldly self-delusion is
   involved.

   In what ways am I spiritually self-deceived? Do I have spiritual
   mentors that I can reflect with to reduce these self-deceptions?

   155. The Body of Christ

   (Do This In Remembrance Of Me....)

   Since it was the will of God's only-begotten son that men should share
   in His divinity, He assumed our nature in order that by becoming man He
   might make men gods...He offered His body to God the Father on the
   alter of the cross as a sacrifice for our reconciliation. He shed His
   blood for our ransom and purification...But to ensure that the memory
   of so great a gift would abide with us forever, He left His body as
   food and His blood as drink for the faithful to consume in the form of
   bread and wine. ...Christ Himself, the true God, is set before us as
   our food. What could be more wonderful than this? No other sacrament
   has greater healing power, through it sins are purged away, virtues are
   increased, and the soul is enriched with an abundance of every
   spiritual gift....spiritual delight is tasted at its very source
   and...we renew the memory of that surprising love for us which Christ
   revealed in His passion.

   --St. Thomas Aquinas, PWTA

   Mark 14:22-25

   "Take it. This is my body. This is my blood of the covenant which will
   be shed for many." "Through this gift, sins are purged, virtues are
   increased and the soul is enriched with an abundance of every spiritual
   gift. He assumed our nature in order that by becoming man, He might
   make men gods." Thanks be to God for the love shown in this mystery.

   What does Abeing made into a god@ mean?

   156. Praying the Way You Can

   (God Hears Me)

   What an extraordinary thing it is, the efficiency of prayer! Like a
   queen, it has access at all times to the Royal presence, and can get
   whatever it asks for. And it's a mistake to imagine that your prayer
   wont be answered unless you've something out of a book, some splendid
   formula of words specially devised to meet this emergency. If that were
   true I'm afraid I'd be in a terribly bad position....I just do what
   children have to do before they=ve learned to read; I tell God what I
   want quite simply, without any splendid turns of phrase, and somehow He
   always manages to understand me. For me, prayer means launching out of
   the heart towards God; it means lifting up one's eyes, quite simply, to
   heaven, a cry of grateful love, form the crest of joy or the trough of
   despair; it's a vast supernatural force which opens out my heart, and
   binds me close to Jesus.

   -St. Theresa of Lisieux, Autobiography, PWTOL

   "I can't sleep, I'm suffering too much, so I am praying."

   "And what (her sister Celene asked) are you saying to Jesus?"

   "I say nothing to Him. I love Him."

   -St. Theresa of Lisieux, Her Last Conversations, PWTOL

   1 John 5:14-15

   According to St. John, "...if we ask anything of Him in accordance with
   His will, He hears us....we know that what we have asked Him for is
   ours." St. Theresa would say the same thing whether or not we ask God
   using words. Her loving presence before Jesus was her prayer.

   Must I always pray to God using words? Will I re-dedicate myself to
   meditation;

   just being in Jesus' presence?

   157. Beyond Human Knowledge

   (God's Foolishness Is Wiser Than Human Wisdom)

   Knowledge of created beings is one thing and knowledge of the divine
   truth is another. The second surpasses the first just as the sun
   outshines the moon. Knowledge of created beings increases the more we
   observe the commandments actively; but knowledge of the truth grows the
   more we hope in Christ.

   --St. Mark the Ascetic, No Righteousness By Works, Philokalia

   By spiritual knowledge, I do not mean wisdom, but that unerring
   appreciation of God and of divine realities through which the devout,
   no longer dragged down by the passions, are raised to a divine state by
   the grace of the Spirit.

   --St. Theognostos, On the Practice of the Virtues, Philokalia

   1 Corinthians 1:18-25

   "...the foolishness of God is wiser than human wisdom and the weakness
   of God is stronger than human strength." "Knowledge of the truth grows
   the more we hope in Christ." Unlike worldly knowledge, knowledge of the
   spirit comes not so much from study as from faith and hope in Jesus.
   Some of the knowledge is intuitive and experiential, not logical.
   Studying the teachings of the Church instructs me on how to interpret
   this "knowledge".

   In what ways do I have an appreciation of God and divine realities?

   158. Being Devoted

   (Without Love I Am Nothing)

   When the intellect forgets the purpose of true devotion, then external
   works of virtue bring no profit.

   --St. Mark the Ascetic, No Righteousness By Works, Philakolia

   Fasts and vigils, the Study of Scriptures, renouncing possessions and
   everything worldly, are not in themselves perfection, as we have said;
   they are its tools. For perfection is not to be found in them; it is
   acquired through them. It is useless, therefore, to boast of our
   fasting, vigils, poverty and reading of Scripture when we have not
   achieved the love of God and our fellow men. Whoever has achieved love
   has God within himself and his intellect is always with God.

   --St. John Cassian, On the Holy Fathers of Sketis, Philakolia

   1 Corinthians 13:1-13

   Am I a Pharisee at heart? Do I try to prove my own worthiness through
   my good deeds regardless of my motives, my attitudes and my feelings
   surrounding my actions? Many times, yes. I very often want to "do the
   right thing" even if my inner life is in disarray. Today's readings
   make the strong point that unless my actions are motivated by true love
   of God and neighbor, they are probably motivated by ego-fear, and will
   not profit me spiritually. I must always work on my inner life.

   In what ways are my "good deeds" motivated by fear?

   159. The Kingdom of God

   (Jesus, Thy Kingdom Come)

   We pray "Thy kingdom come" because the kingdom of heaven signifies the
   glory of paradise...This kingdom is most desirable for three reasons:

   a) Its supreme righteousness. Here below the wicked are mingled with
   the good, whereas in heaven there are no wicked and no sinners.

   b) Its perfect liberty. Although all men desire liberty naturally, here
   there is none; but in heaven there is perfect liberty without any trace
   of bondage. In fact, not only will all be free, but all will be kings.
   This is because all shall be of one will with God: whatever the saints
   will, God shall will; and whatever God wills, the saints shall will....

   c) Its wondrous wealth. Take note that whatever man seeks in this
   world, he will find it more perfect and more excellent in God alone.

   --St. Thomas Aquinas, Three Greatest Prayers, PWST

   Mark 4:30-32

   "The Kingdom of God is like a mustard seed...the smallest of
   seeds...but once it is sown it springs up and becomes the largest of
   plants and puts forth large branches, so that the birds of sky can
   dwell in its shade." While it is true, as St. Thomas says, that the
   Kingdom of God is known for its righteousness, liberty and wealth,
   Jesus' parable also indicates that it is known for its universality. I
   cannot imagine that the mustard tree offers shade to some birds but not
   to others. In the same way, the tree does not grab the birds and drag
   them to its shade. The birds want the protection and claim it. The
   Kingdom of God is for all people. They must, however, want it and go
   toward its light.

   In what ways do I refuse admission into the Kingdom of God?

   160. Being Myself

   (I Will Not Bury My Talents)

   Jesus has been gracious enough to teach me a lesson about this mystery,
   simply by holding up to my eyes the book of nature. I realized, then,
   that all the flowers He has made are beautiful; the rose in its glory,
   the lily in its whiteness, don't rob the tiny violet of its sweet
   smell, or the daisy of its charming simplicity. I saw that if all these
   lesser blooms wanted to be roses instead, nature would loose the gaiety
   of her springtime dress--there would be no little flowers to make a
   pattern over the countryside. And so it is with the world of souls,
   which is His garden. He wanted to have great Saints, to be his lilies
   and roses, but He has made lesser Saints as well, and these lesser ones
   must be content to rank as daisies and violets, lying at His feet and
   giving pleasure to His eye like that. Perfection consists simply in
   doing His will, and being just what He wants us to be.

   This, too, was made clear to me--that our Lord's love makes itself seen
   quite as much in the simplest of souls as in the most highly gifted, as
   long as thee is no resistence offered to His grace.

   --St. Theresa of Lisieux, Autobiography, PWTOL

   Matthew 25:14-18

   "To one he gave five talents; to another, two; to a third, one--each
   according to his ability." "Our Lord's love makes itself seen quite as
   much in the simplest of souls as in the most highly gifted, as long as
   there is no resistance to His grace." Jesus and St. Theresa make a
   similar point: even though some have greater gifts, all are necessary
   for the functioning of the Body of Christ in this world. Without the
   variety of gifts, we world all be the poorer. We need only to be open
   to God's grace so that our life expresses the love of God in all of its
   diversity.

   Am I content to be a handsome carnation as opposed to a sickly orchid
   if that is what I am meant to be? Am I in resistance to the gifts and
   talents that God has given me? Am I in rebellion against who and what I
   really am?

   161. Detachment From Worldly Things

   (God Has Made Me Laugh)

   To anyone among you who is oppressed by a sense of worthlessness and
   inability to attain holiness, this is our message: if he attains
   dispassion he can see Jesus, not only in the future, but coming to him
   here and now with power and great glory. Though his soul, like Sarah,
   has grown old in barrenness, it can still bear a holy child, contrary
   to all expectation; like her he can still say: "God has made me
   laugh."--that is, God has granted me great joy after the many years I
   have spent in sorrow, dominated by the passions.

   --St. John Kapathos, Texts For The Monks in India, Philokalia

   Self-control and strenuous effort curb desire; stillness and intense
   longing for God wither it.

   --St. Thalassios, Philokalia

   Genesis 21:1-7

   Discipline and effort coupled with meditation and an intense longing
   for God will help curb worldly passions and give birth to spiritual
   joy. It may feel like childbirth but the resulting spiritual growth
   will make it worth the pain of ego-death. It is important to fight any
   discouragement in attaining holiness. The Lord promises success!

   How do I handle spiritual discouragement?

   162. Redirecting Your Attention

   (I Will Put On The Lord Jesus)

   The Holy Spirit, out of compassion for our weakness, comes to us even
   when we are impure. And if only He finds our intellect truly praying to
   Him, He enters it and puts to flight the whole array of thoughts and
   ideas circling within it, and He arouses it to a longing for spiritual
   prayer.

   --Evagrios the Solitary, On Prayer, Philokalia

   Think nothing and do nothing without a purpose directed to God...

   --St. Mark the Ascetic, On the Spiritual Law, Philokalia

   Romans 13:11-14

   ALet us throw off the works of darkness and put on the armor of light
   ...the Lord Jesus...and make no provision for the desires of the
   flesh.@ A If the Holy Spirit finds our intellect praying to Him, He
   enters it and arouses it to a longing for spiritual prayer.@ Lord
   Jesus, may you empower my feeble efforts at holiness and spiritual
   growth. Amen.

   How can I take steps to think and do nothing without a purpose directed
   towards God?

   163. Teachers

   (I Will Listen To And Teach True Doctrine)

   When Christ Himself spoke to Paul and called him, He could have opened
   his eyes at once and made known to him the way of perfection; instead
   He sent him to Ananias and told him to learn from him the way of truth,
   saying: Arise and go into the city, and there you will be told what you
   must do.@ In this manner, He teaches us to be guided by those who are
   advanced on the way, so that the vision rightly given to Paul should
   not be wrongly interpreted; otherwise it might lead later generations
   presumptuously to suppose that each individual must be initiated in to
   the truth directly by God, as Paul was, and not by the fathers...

   --BSt. John Cassian, On the Holy Fathers of Sketis, Philokalia

   A wise man is one who accepts advice, especially that of a spiritual
   father counseling him in accordance with the will of God.

   --BSt. Thalassios, On Love, Self-Control and Life in Accordance with
   the Intellect, Philokalia

   John 4:21-24 Deuteronomy 6:4-9 Psalm 78:5-6

   As I read these words of the saints of the eastern church, the words of
   Jesus come to mind: "Salvation is from the Jews." While all faiths have
   valid spiritual experiences, how the experiences are interpreted may
   not be so. Other spiritual masters in all world religions have done
   many of the works of Christ. How are they different from Jesus? For one
   thing, many of the non-Christian faiths conceive of God as either an
   impersonal machinery that runs the universe or, in fact, don't
   necessarily believe in a God at all. One of the necessities for Jesus
   to have been born a Jew is to demonstrate that God is a God of love who
   sacrifices for His children out of love.

   How can I increase my readings of the Old Testament and the traditions
   of the early Church?

   164. Does God Talk in Riddles?

   (Jesus, Reveal To Me What Has Lain Hidden)

   Because the letter kills and the Spirit gives life, it is indispensable
   that we enter the interior of spiritual discourse with a quickening
   spirit. We remind ourselves and others that, in the future, the whole
   of Scripture will be our (mental) dress; the old, as well as the new,
   will be the means of allegorical understanding, because as we read in
   the Old Testament: I will open my mouth in parables; I will speak in
   old mysteries (Ps 78:2), or again, as it is written in the New
   Testament, Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the crowds and
   without parables he would not speak to them (Matt 13:34). The heavenly
   talk of the prophets and the apostles is not to be wondered at; it is
   brought forth by prayer, not by the usual way that men write. Much will
   vanish easily if it is gotten readily; great things, which are the true
   thing, held in the interior, will be brought together, that the blessed
   sayings of God will be separated from other writings by their worth and
   type.

   BSt. Eucherius of Lyons, Letter to Veranus, CCEL

   Matthew 13:34-35 Psalm 78:1-2

   I do not believe that Jesus talked in riddles thus trying to hide truth
   from the crowds. He told stories that could be understood at several
   levels and interpreted in various ways depending on where the listener
   was at both spiritually and mentally. As St. Eucherius says, wisdom
   that is brought forth through prayer and meditation on the Scriptures
   will become apparent as God separates the wheat of wisdom from the
   chaff of the story.

   Do I try to understand the parables of Jesus with new eyes each time I
   read them?

   165. Humility: King of the Virtues

   (Lord, Hear My Prayer And Restore Me)

   I shall tell you something strange, but do not be surprised by it.
   Should you fail to attain dispassion because of the predispositions
   dominating you, but at the time of your death be in the depths of
   humility, you will be exalted above the clouds no less than the man who
   is dispassionate. For even if the treasure of those who are
   dispassionate consists of every virtue, the precious stone of humility
   is more valuable than them all: it brings about not only propitiation
   with the Creator, but also entry with the elect into the bridal chamber
   of His kingdom.

   --BSt. Theognostos, On the Practice of the Virtues, Philokalia

   2 Chronicles 33:1-18 Isaiah 57:15

   King Manasseh of Israel had totally rejected the Lord by going so far
   as to have his sons burnt to death in the ritual fire offerings of one
   of the pagan cults. Israel was then conquered by Assyria and Manasseh
   was taken to Babylon in captivity where he learned humility. After
   this, he was restored to Israel and he changed his ways by worshiping
   the Lord alone and abandoning the pagan practices. Why was this so?
   According to St. Theognostos, humility is more valuable than any
   virtue. From humility, all virtues follow.

   In what ways do I humble myself before the Lord? In what ways do I need
   to continue to work at this?

   166. A Night Time Prayer

   (Let Me See Your Face When I Awake)

   Jesus Christ my God, I adore you and thank you for all the graces you
   have given me this day. I offer you my sleep and all the moments of
   this night, and I ask you to keep me from sin. I put myself within your
   sacred side and under the mantle of our Lady. Let your holy angles
   stand about me and keep me in peace. And let your blessings be on me.
   Amen.

   --St. Alphonsus Liguori, LF

   Psalm 17:6-9, 15

   "But I in my uprightness shall see your face and when I awake, I shall
   be filled with the vision of you." St. Alphonsus' lovely little prayer
   echos the Psalm but both, I think, carry the connotation not only of
   regular sleep, but death. The ultimate meaning of this prayer is that
   when I awake from the dream of life, I will be filled with the vision
   of God, including the angels and Saints. May I be ready!

   When I am going to sleep, do I feel prepared to awaken to the
   afterlife? How can I further prepare?

   167. The Benefits of Prayer

   (O Lord, May You Be Attentive To My Prayer)

   Prayer is in its essence the union of the soul with God. Its effects
   and fruits are a pure soul, collection of inner forces, reconciliation
   with God, tears, forgiveness of sins, a bridge that leads us above and
   over temptation, a wall of protection against sorrows. It is the work
   of angels, a food for all spiritual beings, the joy of eternity, a
   divine action, a source of virtues, a treasury of graces; it is
   spiritual progress, the food of the soul, revelation, the exclusion of
   faintheartedness, a prop for our confidence, a comfort in grief.

   --St. John Climacus, P

   Nehemiah 1: 4-11

   While St. John Climacus lists the various benefits of prayer (no less
   than twelve), Nehemiah demonstrates the proper attitude and way to
   pray. Prerequisites include fasting and mourning. The prayer itself
   includes praise of God, profession of sins both individual and
   communal, and petitions in accordance with God's promises. There is
   also great perseverance (praying night and day). While prayer may seem
   like hard work, look at the benefits! They make the effort seem small.

   How many of these benefits of prayer was I aware of? Can I think of
   additional benefits?

   168. Mystery of the Cross

   (The Lord Will Pass Over You)

   We venerate the wood of thy Cross, O thou who lovest mankind, for upon
   it thou, the life of all, was nailed. O Savior, thou hast opened
   paradise to the thief who turned to thee in faith, and thou has counted
   him worthy of blessedness when he confessed to thee crying, "O Lord,
   remember me." Accept us like him, as we cry: We all have sinned. In thy
   merciful kindness, remember us.

   --Eastern Orthodox Service, P

   Leviticus 17:11 Exodus 12:13

   "...the life of the creature is in the blood and I have given it to you
   for performing the rite of expiation on the alter for your lives..."
   "We venerate the wood of the Cross, O Thou who lovest mankind, for upon
   it Thou, the life of all, was nailed." For me, these passages express
   the most difficult mysteries of salvation: why is blood and sacrifice
   (scapegoating) necessary? While in the Old Testament it doesn=t appear
   to have much to do with love (does the sacrificed lamb love those who
   have killed it?), in the New Testament, it is the central point. It is,
   in Jesus, the ultimate expression of love.

   Does the fact that Jesus shed His blood for me make me love Him more
   than if He died in bed of old age?

   169. The Love Of Jesus

   (God Loved Me Before I Was Conceived)

   It is certain that on the tree of the Cross the Heart of Jesus beheld
   your heart and love it. By his love he won every good that you shall
   ever need, that you shall ever have. In God's love and mercy he
   prepared for us all the general and particular means of salvation,
   including our good resolutions.

   Just as an expectant mother prepares cradle, linen, swaddling cloths,
   and perhaps a nurse for the child she expects, so our Lord, knowing you
   before you were even conceived, prepared all that would be necessary
   for your salvation and all else needed for your happiness. Such are the
   things that attract your soul to the devout life and urge you on to
   perfection.

   How deeply must we imprint this on our memory! I have been loved so
   tenderly by my Savior that he thought of me in particular even by the
   little ways that attract me to him. How much, then, must we love Him in
   return?

   --St. Francis de Sales, Introduction To The Devout Life, LF

   Jeremiah 1:5 Galatians 1:15-16

   "Before I formed you in the womb I knew you." It was not only Jeremiah,
   Paul and the other great souls of the Bible that God knew intimately
   before they were born, He also knew me and you. As St Francis de Sale
   says in his own beautiful way, just as a mother prepares everything for
   her child before it is born (maybe even before it is conceived), the
   Lord prepared all that would be necessary for salvation and happiness
   to the smallest detail. How His sacred heart must mourn when one of
   these little souls that He has prepared for so personally and lovingly
   is aborted.

   What are my attitudes about abortion?

   170. A Prayer of Praise in Sickness

   (Lord, Only Say The Word And I Shall Be Healed)

   Christ, give me strength: your servant is not well. The tongue that
   praised you is made silent , struck dumb by the pain of sickness. I
   cannot bear not to sing your praises. O, make me well again, make me
   whole, that I may again proclaim your greatness. Do not forsake me, I
   beseech you. Let me return now to your service.

   --St. Gregory of Nazianzus, P

   Matthew 8:5-11

   I've juxtaposed the prayer for self-healing by St. Gregory with the
   centurion's prayer for his servant's healing to make a point. Faith is
   critical for healing. Both prayers are petitionary but in the case of
   the servant, it is not known if he had faith at all. It was important,
   however, that someone had faith and prayed. Thus, the importance of
   petitionary prayer.

   Do I spend enough time praying or others--whether or not they have
   faith?

   171. A Healing for Depression

   (Lord, Put A New Song In My Mouth)

   Just as day declines to evening, often after some little pleasure my
   heart declines into depression. Everything seems dull, every action
   feels like a burden. If anyone speaks, I scarcely listen. If anyone
   knocks, I scarcely hear. My heart is as hard as flint. Then I go out
   into the fields to meditate, to read the holy Scriptures, and I write
   down my deepest thoughts in a letter to you. And suddenly your grace,
   dear Jesus, shatters the darkness with daylight, lifts the burden,
   relieves the tension. Soon tears follow sighs, and heavenly joy floods
   over me with the tears.

   --Abbot Aelred of Rievaulx, P

   Psalm 40:1-4 Psalm 130:1-8

   Abbot Alred had a surprisingly modern and simple cure for his bouts of
   the blues. Spending time with nature. Praying and meditating. Reading
   Scripture and journaling his feelings. And suddenly, Jesus' grace
   shatters the darkness, draws him out of the pit of destruction and puts
   a new song in his mouth.

   What other spiritual remedies for the blues can I try over and above
   those noted by the Abbot?

   172. Committing Myself to God

   (Lord, Into Your Hands I Commit Myself)

   Into thy hands, O Lord, we commit ourselves this day. give to each one
   of us a watchful, a humble, and a diligent spirit, that we may seek all
   things to know thy will, and when we know it may perform it perfectly
   and gladly, to the honor and glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ
   our Lord.

   --5th Century Sacramentary, P

   Luke 23: 44-46

   The final words that were on Jesus' lips as He died on the Cross can be
   on our lips every day that we live. We commit ourselves to God's loving
   hands and pray that His will be done with us, to us, and through us.
   Like Jesus, we do this with a watchful, humble and diligent spirit.
   Like Jesus, we will know that by doing so, darkness will become light,
   suffering will turn to joy, and death will turn to eternal life.

   When I pray, can I picture myself being held by the eternal arms of
   God?

   173. Extending God's Grace

   (Jesus, Make Me Your Servant)

   O Lord, our Savior, who has warned us that thou will require much of
   those to whom much is given, grant that we whose lot is cast in so
   goodly a heritage may strive together more abundantly by prayer and by
   every other means to extend to others what we so richly enjoy, that as
   we have entered into the labors of other men, we may so labor that
   others in their turn may enter into ours, to the fulfillment of thy
   holy will, and the salvation of all men.

   --4th Century Prayer, P

   Matthew 20:20-28

   Jesus "did not come to be served but to serve and to give His life as a
   ransom for many." I am to extend to those around me the blessings that
   I have received just as others, whether or not I recognize it, have
   extended blessings to me and helped to shape my physical and spiritual
   life and well being. In fact, my prayer life must extend blessings not
   only to humankind but to all of creation. This is the power of prayer
   and our calling!

   In what ways can I pray for all creation? In what ways can I back this
   up with action in accordance with God's will?

   174. The Sorrow of Knowledge

   (My Plea Is For Clear Perception)

   I was vainly puffed up, and increased wisdom; not the wisdom which God
   has given, but that wisdom of which Paul says, "The wisdom of this
   world is foolishness with God." He speaks also of the multitude of
   knowledge, not the knowledge of the Holy Spirit, but that which the
   prince of this world works, and which he conveys to men in order to
   overreach their souls, with officious questions as to the measures of
   heaven, the position of earth, the bounds of the sea. But he says also
   says "He that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow." For they search
   even into things deeper than these- inquiring, for example, what
   necessity there is for fire to go upward, and for water to go downward;
   and when they have learned that it is because the one is light ant the
   other heavy, they do but increase sorrow: for the question still
   remains, Why might it not be the very reverse?

   --St. Dionysius of Alexandria (AD 200-265),A Commentary On the
   Beginning of Ecclesiastes, CCEL

   Ecclesiastes 1:12-18 Proverbs 2:3-11

   "...he who stores up knowledge stores up grief" but, "if you seek
   wisdom...the knowledge of God you will find." If the author of
   Ecclesiastes (3rd century BC) and St. Dionisyus (3rd century AD)
   believed that learned people spent too much time trying to acquire
   esoteric knowledge, how much more so today with knowledge doubling
   every decade or so? How much of it is necessary? We have obviously
   survived without it quite nicely for thousands of years. It is not that
   knowledge is bad but that knowledge just for the sake of
   knowledge--simply to avoid having to look into myself and learn to know
   myself--is a distraction from my real reason for being here.

   In what ways do I like to acquire facts simply to avoid uncomfortable
   feelings or uncomfortable questions about life?

   175. The Pre-Existent Mind of God

   (God Created Heaven And Earth)

   In regard to the making of the universe and the creation of all things
   there have been various opinions, and each person has propounded the
   theory that suited his own taste. For instance, some say that all
   things are self-originated and, so the speak, haphazard. The Epicureans
   are among these; they deny that there is any Mind behind the universe
   at all...Others take the view expressed by Plato, that giant among the
   Greeks. He said that God had made all things out of pre-existent and
   uncreated matter, just as the carpenter makes things only out of wood
   that already exists....Then again, there is the theory of the Gnostics,
   who have invented for themselves an Artificer of all things other than
   the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. These simply shut their eyes to
   the obvious meaning of Scripture.

   Such are the notions which men put forward. But the impiety of their
   foolish talk is plainly declared by the divine teaching of the
   Christian faith. From it we know that, because there is Mind behind the
   universe, it did not originate itself; because God is infinite, not
   finite, it was not made from pre-existent matter, but out of nothing
   and out of non-existence absolute and utter God brought it into being
   through the Word.

   --St. Athanasius, The Incarnation, (AD 297-373), CCEL

   Genesis 1:1-31 John 1:1

   "In the beginning, God created heaven and earth." "In the beginning was
   the Word and the Word was with God." It is interesting to note that
   after all of the theories on the creation of the universe over the last
   two thousand years have been explored, cosmologists are starting to
   sound like theologians. When all is said and done: In the
   beginning...God....

   Do I take comfort that God, through Jesus the Lord, created the
   universe and saw that it was very good?

   176. Greed Wounds

   (Life Without God Is Futile)

   In truth, to those who occupy their minds with the distractions of
   life, life becomes a painful thing, which, as it were, wounds the heart
   with its goads, that is, with the lustful desires of increase. And
   sorrowful also is the solicitude connected with covetousness: it does
   not so much gratify those who are successful in it, as it pains those
   who are unsuccessful; while the day is spent in laborious anxieties,
   and the night puts sleep to flight from the eyes, with the cares of
   making gain. Vain, therefore, is the zeal of the man who looks to these
   things.

   --St. Dionysius of Alexandria, A Commentary on the Beginning of
   Ecclesiastes, CCEL

   Ecclesiastes 2:18-23 Proverbs 21: 25-26

   It is true! My desires for increase do not gratify me even when I am
   successful since I would desire more still. (This is especially true in
   retirement planning!) If I am unsuccessful, the pain is sharper still.
   Greed, in all of its forms, is a curse and an addiction, since I am not
   aware of how the emptiness can be filled so that I can be truly
   satisfied.

   What do I believe will truly satisfy me? What do I desire over and
   above the "basics"?

   177. God Alone Exists

   (I Long To Put On My Heavenly Home)

   For God had made man thus (that is, as an embodied spirit), and had
   willed that he should remain in incorruption. But men, having turned
   from the contemplation of God to evil of their own devising, had come
   inevitably under the law of death. Instead of remaining in the state in
   which God had created them, they were in process of becoming corrupted
   entirely, and death had them completely under its dominion. For the
   transgression of the commandment was making them turn back again
   according to their nature; and as they had at the beginning come into
   being out of non-existence, so they were now on the way to returning,
   through corruption, to non-existence again. The presence and love of
   the Word had called them into being; inevitably, therefore when they
   lost the knowledge of God, they lost existence with it, for it is God
   alone Who exists, evil is non-being, the negation and antithesis of
   good. By nature, of course, man is mortal, since he was made from
   nothing; but he bears also the Likeness of Him Who is and if he
   preserves that Likeness through constant contemplation, then his nature
   is deprived of its power and he remains incorrupt.

   --St. Athanasius, The Incarnation, CCEL

   2 Corinthians 5:1-10

   "We do not wish to be unclothed but to be further clothed so that what
   is mortal may be swallowed up by life." "They were now on the way to
   returning, through corruption, to non-existence again for God alone
   exists." Since I was created out of nothing, without God's sustaining
   power through Jesus, I will return to nothing again. It is only by
   God's grace and love that He clothes me with His Spirit, His Likeness,
   which allows me to exist in His Kingdom for eternity. Praise God!

   How do I feel about becoming non-existent? How do I feel about being
   swallowed up by life?

   178. Christ's Kingdom

   (Saving Justice, Peace, And Joy Are In The Kingdom Of God)

   And when you hear that we look for a kingdom, you suppose, without
   making any inquiry, that we speak of a human kingdom; whereas we speak
   of that which is with God, as appears also from the confession of their
   faith made by those who are charged with being Christians, though they
   know that death is the punishment awarded to him who so confesses. For
   if we look for a human kingdom, we should also deny our Christ, that we
   might not be slain; and we should strive to escape detection, that we
   might obtain what we expect. But since our thoughts are not fixed on
   the present, we are not concerned when men cut us off, since also death
   is a debt which must at all events be paid.

   --BSt. Justin Martyr AD 110-165, First Apology, CCEL

   John 6:14-16 Romans 14: 17-18

   The only time in Scripture that Jesus literally fled to the hills was
   when His followers wanted to make Him an earthly King! Jesus knew that
   His Kingdom was not of this earth and his followers, like St. Justin
   Martyr, understand this well. They were willing to die for their belief
   in the Kingdom of God; a place of righteousness, peace and joy. This is
   something they were not to experience in this world.

   In what ways am I searching for a heaven on earth?

   179. Proof Of The Resurrection

   (Disobedience Brings Death...Obedience, Life)

   For reflect upon the end of each of the preceding kings, how they died
   the death common to all, which, if it issued insensibility, would be a
   godsend to all the wicked. But since sensation remains to all who have
   ever lived, and eternal punishment is laid up, see that ye neglect not
   to be convinced, and to hold as your belief, that these things are
   true. For let even necromancy, and the divinations you practice by
   immaculate children, and the evoking of departed human souls, and those
   who are called among the magi, Dream-senders and Assistant-spirits
   (Familiars), and all that is done by those who are skilled in such
   matters Blet these persuade you that even after death souls are in a
   state of sensation; and those who are seized and cast about by the
   spirits of the dead, whom all call demoniacs or madmen, ....and all
   that has been uttered of a like kind. Such favor as you grant to these,
   grant also to us, who not less but more firmly than they believe in
   God; since we expect to receive again our own bodies, though they be
   dead and cast into the earth, for we maintain that with God nothing is
   impossible.

   --BSt. Justin Martyr, First Apology, CCEL

   1 Samuel 28:8-19

   There is much proof that spirits live after death, even in the pagan
   world. It is constant Christian tradition, however, that one cannot
   contact the dead at will. In the case of Saul, it was God's will that
   Samuel appear to him. The medium only provided the occasion. In any
   case, if souls are sensate after death, why can't they live again if
   that is God's will?

   Why would I even want to contact the dead to learn about the future?

   180. God's Power Can Raise The Dead

   (The Dead Will Come Back To Life)

   Moreover also, that His power is sufficient for the raising of dead
   bodies, is shown by the creation of these same bodies. For if, when
   they did not exist, He made at their first formation the bodies of men
   and their original elements, He will, when they are dissolved, in
   whatever manner that may take place, raise them again with equal ease:
   for this, too, is equally possible to Him. And it is no danger to the
   argument, if some suppose the first beginnings to be from matter, or
   the bodies of men at least to be derived from the elements as the first
   materials, or from seed... (This is) a matter which seems to have
   exceedingly confounded some, even of those admired for wisdom, who, I
   cannot tell why, think those doubts worthy of serious attention which
   are brought forward by the many.

   --BAthenagoras (2ond Century Philosopher/Christian), On the
   Resurrection of the Dead, Chapter III, CCEL

   Ezekiel 37:1-14 Isaiah 26:19

   "O my people, I will put my spirit in you that you may live....I have
   promised and I will do it." Besides the obvious allusions to the
   resurrection of the dead contained in Ezekiel's vision of the dry
   bones, an additional allusion is apparent. God can and does resurrect
   me each and every day by giving me His Spirit. Many days I feel like
   the walking dead with no real life in me, plodding through my routines.
   When I pray to God for life, His Spirit empowers me to live again in
   the joy of His presence.

   When I feel dead emotionally, physically, and spiritually, how do I
   cope? How am I empowered to rise form the dead and go on?

   181. A Midnight Prayer

   (Bless The Lord)

   Having risen from sleep, I offer Thee, O Savior, the midnight song, and
   I fall down and cry unto Thee: grant me not to fall asleep in the death
   of sin, but have compassion on me, O Thou Who wast voluntarily
   crucified, and hasten to raise me who am prostate in idleness, and save
   me in prayer and intercession, and after the night's sleep, bless me
   with a sinless day O Christ, our God, and save me.

   --St. Macarius the Great, Prayer Book

   Daniel 3:52-63

   This portion of a prayer from the Book of Daniel is a mighty, cosmic
   hymn of praise. I think it is the greatest such hymn in the Bible.
   While St. Marcarius prays for blessings, the hymn invites all creation
   to bless the Lord.

   What does this mean? In what ways can I bless the Lord? Why is blessing
   the Lord necessary for my salvation? (Obviously, God doesn=t need it.)

   182. A Prayer of Jesus

   (May We All Be One)

   Whoever you are who approach,..., stop a little and look upon me, who,
   though innocent, suffered for your crime; lay me up in your mind, keep
   me in your breast. I am He who, pitying the bitter misfortunes of men,
   came here as a messenger of offered peace, and as a full atonement for
   the fault of men....Bend your knee, and with lamentation adore the
   venerable wood of the cross, and with lowly countenance stooping to the
   earth, which is wet with innocent blood, sprinkle it with rising tears,
   and at times bear me and my admonitions in your devoted heart. Follow
   the footsteps of my life...If these memorials shall turn away your
   senses, which are devoted to a perishable world, from the fleeing
   shadow of earthly beauty, the result will be, that you will not
   venture, enticed by empty hope, to trust the frail enjoyments of fickle
   fortune, and to place your hope in the fleeting years of life....

   --Lactantius, 4th Century, Poem on the Passion of the Lord, CCEL

   John 17:20-26

   This prayer, from a fourth century Church Father, is the earliest first
   person meditation of Jesus that I have found outside of the Bible. It
   is a predecessor of similar later works like the Imitation of Christ,
   God Calling and A Course of Miracles. I find these first person
   meditations very inspiring. And why shouldn=t such works be considered
   Ainspired@, if they don=t contradict Scripture? Jesus= prayer is that
   we all be one, and a part of His Body. If we are one, He can inspire us
   with His Spirit whether or not this takes the form of actual words.

   Am I ever so inspired by Jesus that I can sense His Spirit and Words?

   183. Bedtime Prayer to the Father

   (Eternal Life Is Knowing God)

   O Eternal God and King of all creation, Who hast granted me to arrive
   at this hour, forgive me the sins that I have committed today in
   thought, word and deed, and cleanse, O Lord, my humble soul from all
   defilement of flesh and spirit. And grant me, O Lord, to pass the sleep
   of this night in peace that when I rise from my bed I may please Thy
   most holy Name all the days of my life and conquer my flesh and the
   fleshless foes that war with me. And deliver me, O Lord, from vain and
   frivolous thoughts, and from evil desires which defile me...

   --St. Marcarius the Great, Prayer Book

   John 17:1-5

   Notice the difference in the prayers to the Father of St. Marcarius and
   Jesus. St. Marcarius prays to the Father to forgive him, cleanse him
   and deliver him while Jesus asks the Father to glorify Him so that He
   may glorify the Father. As one becomes more Christ-like, the nature of
   prayer changes from asking for specific things to glorifying God in all
   things.

   Is the nature of my prayer starting to change?

   184. An Easter Vision

   (I Will Never Forsake You)

   Take away the linen cloths, I pray; leave the napkins in the tomb: Thou
   art sufficient for us and without Thee there is nothing. Release the
   chained shades of the infernal prison, and recall to the upper regions
   whatever sinks to the lowest depths...You rescue an innumerable people
   from the prison of death, and they follow in freedom to the place when
   their leader approaches. The fierce monster in alarm vomits forth the
   multitude whom he had swallowed up, and the Lamb withdraws the sheep
   from the jaws of the wolf.

   --Venantius Fortunatus, 4th century, On Easter, CCEL

   Hebrews 13:5-8

   In this powerful Easter vision, Jesus is seen rescuing countless souls
   from the prison of death and the jaws of Satan. Since in eternity there
   is no time, the power and love of AJesus Christ is the same yesterday,
   today, and forever@.

   Do I take comfort in the fact that Jesus is my Redeemer?

   185. Bedtime Prayer to the Son

   (I Give Thanks To God Through Jesus)

   O All-Ruler, Word of the Father, Jesus Christ, Thou who art perfect,
   never in Thy great mercy leave me, but ever abide in me, Thy servant. O
   Jesus, Good Shepherd, of Thy sheep, deliver me not to the revolt of the
   serpent and leave me not to the will of Satan, for the seed of
   corruption if in me. Lord, adorable God, Holy King, Jesus Christ, guard
   me asleep by the unwaning light, Thy Holy Spirit by Whom Thou didst
   sanctify Thy disciples. O Lord, grant me, Thy unworthy servant, Thy
   salvation on my bed. Enlighten my mind with the light of understanding
   of Thy Holy Gospel. Enlighten my soul with the love of Thy Cross.
   Enlighten my heart with the purity of Thy Word. Enlighten my body with
   Thy passionless Passion. Keep my thoughts in Thy humility. And rouse me
   in good time to glorify Thee, for Thou art supremely glorified, with
   Thy eternal Father, and the most Holy Spirit forever. Amen.

   --St. Antioch, Prayer Book

   Romans 1:8-12

   St. Antioch asks Jesus to enlighten his mind, heart, spirit and body.
   St. Paul indicates that he prays constantly to the Father through
   Jesus. Part of the enlightenment is realizing that the Father is the
   Source of all blessings and Jesus is the Channel through which they are
   accomplished. It is one of the mysteries of our Faith.

   Am I gradually being enabled to accept and be enlightened by spiritual
   truths?

   186. A Case Against the Death Penalty

   (Hate is Murder)

   For it is not the part of a righteous judge to define requital on the
   principle of like for like, but the originator of evil must pay his
   debt with addition, if he is to be made better by punishment and render
   other men wiser by his example. Therefore, since it is ordained that
   Cain pay the penalty of his sin seven fold, he who kills him, it is
   said, will discharge the sentence pronounced against him by the divine
   judgement....Cain supposed that he would be an easy prey to everyone,
   because of their being no safety for him in the earth...and of his
   being deprived of the succor of God...but Scripture proves his error...
   For to men suffering punishment, death is a gain, because it brings
   relief form their pain. But thy life shall be prolonged, that thy
   punishment may be made commensurate with thy sins...

   --St. Basil the Great, Letter CCLX, (CCEL)

   Genesis 4:1-16 1 John 3: 11-18

   St. Basil indicates that the punishment for a crime should be greater
   than the impact of the crime itself, short of the death penalty, for
   the person to be corrected by the incarceration and to be an example to
   others. The goal is correction, not torture and death. The hope is that
   the person will have a change of heart, repent, and have God give the
   person a new life and save his soul in the process. I pray that the al
   Qaeda and Taliban terrorists will be open to having such a change of
   heart!

   What are my feelings on the death penalty?

   187. Bedtime Prayer to the Holy Spirit

   (The Spirit Will Guide Me In All Truth)

   O Lord, Heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit of Truth, have compassion and
   mercy on Thy sinful servant and pardon my unworthiness, and forgive me
   all the sins that I humanly committed today, and not only humanly but
   even worse than a beast--my voluntary sins , known and unknown, from my
   youth and from evil suggestions, and from my brazenness, and from
   boredom....--for I have done all of this and much more--have mercy my
   Lord and Creator, on me Thy wretched and unworthy servant, and absolve
   and forgive and deliver me in Thy goodness and love for men, so that,
   lustful, sinful and wretched as I am, I may lie down and sleep and rest
   in peace. And I shall worship, praise, and glorify Thy most honorable
   Name, with the Father and His only-begotten Son, now and ever, and for
   all ages. Amen.

   --St. Ephrem the Syrian, Prayer Book

   John 16:4b-15

   According to the Gospel of John, the Holy Spirit is called the Spirit
   of Truth because He testifies to the truth about sin (the basic sin is
   refusal to believe in Christ), righteousness ( Jesus returned to the
   Father in spite of his earthly disgrace) and condemnation (Satan has
   been condemned by Jesus= death). St. Ephrem prays to the Spirit to
   guide him to truth abut his own sinful nature.

   Do I truly want to know the truth about myself?

   188. Doubt Isn't Defeat

   (Blessed Are Those Who Hear The Word Of God And Keep It)

   By a sword is meant the word which tries and judges our thoughts, which
   pierces even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit and of the
   joints and marrow, and is a discerner of our thoughts. Now every soul
   in the hour of the Passion was subjected, as it were, to a kind of
   searching...Simeon therefore prophesies about Mary herself, that when
   standing by the cross and beholding what is being done, and hearing the
   voices, after the witness of Gabriel, after her secret knowledge of the
   divine conception, after the great exhibition of miracles, she shall
   feel about her soul a mighty tempest...Even thou (Mary) thyself, who
   hast been taught form on high the things concerning the Lord, shall be
   reached by some doubt. This is the sword....He indicates that after the
   offence at the Cross of Christ a certain swift healing shall come from
   the Lord to the disciples and to Mary herself, confirming their heart
   in faith in Him. In the same way we saw Peter, after he had been
   offended, holding more firmly to his faith in Christ. What was human in
   him was proved unsound, that the power of the Lord might be shown.

   --St. Basil the Great, Letter CCLX, CCEL

   Luke 11:27-28 Luke 2:25-35

   Even the faith of Mary, the mother of Jesus, was tested by what her Son
   endured and what others said about Him. Ultimately, she is not blessed
   primarily because she was the mother of Jesus, but because she "heard
   the word of God and kept it." Her faith, though shaken, was confirmed
   and strengthened. The same was true with St. Peter.

   When I have doubts and my faith is shaken, do I still trust in Jesus'
   words?

   189. Prayer For Forgiveness

   (Return, Rebellious Children, And I Will Heal You)

   O Sovereign Lord Jesus Christ our God, Who alone hast authority to
   forgive men their sins, overlook in Thy goodness and love for men all
   my offences whether committed with knowledge or in ignorance, and make
   me worthy to receive without condemnation Thy divine, glorious,
   spotless, and life-giving Mysteries, not for punishment, nor for an
   increase of sins, but for purification and sanctification and as a
   pledge of the life and kingdom to come, as a protection and help, and
   for the destruction of enemies, and for the blotting out of my many
   transgressions. For Thou art a God of mercy and compassion and love for
   men, and to Thee we send up the glory, with /the Father and the Holy
   Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

   --St. John Damascene, Prayer Book

   Isaiah 1:16-18 Jeremiah 3:22

   While Jesus alone has the authority to forgive sins, as members of His
   Body, as channels for His Spirit, we are also given a share of His
   authority. By my forgiveness of people, events, and the world, I am
   healed. As I am healed, the healing is imparted to all those with whom
   I come into contact and all of those for whom I pray. My salvation is
   not just for me; it is for all.

   What people or events do I still need to forgive? Does knowing that my
   forgiveness not only frees me but also those around me, make it easier
   to forgive?

   190. God's Anger

   (God Nurses NO Lasting Anger)

   I have often observed, Donatus, that many persons hold this opinion,
   which some philosophers have also maintained, that God is not subject
   to anger, since the divine nature is either altogether beneficent, and
   that it is inconsistent with His surpassing and excellent power to do
   injury to anyone; or, at any rate, He takes no notice of us at all, so
   that no advantage comes to us from His goodness, and no evil from His
   ill-will. But the error of these men, because it is very great, and
   tends to overthrow the condition of human life, must be refuted by us,
   lest you yourself should also be deceived, being incited by the
   authority of men who deem themselves wise.

   --Lactontius, On the Anger of God, (CCEL)

   Psalm 103: 8-12

   While I would like to dismiss the Biblical accounts of God's anger as
   the projection of human qualities into God by the authors, it is also
   true that we are created in God's Image and our characteristics have a
   godly counterpart. It appears that anger is an aspect of God's holiness
   and His absolute demand for loyalty. What I interpret as God's anger is
   a parent's chastisement of a rebellious or uncomprehending child. Of
   course the child, wanting his own way, experiences the purification
   process as painful and controlling. This, however, is not the parents
   intent.

   Does this mean that parents are wrong to correct their children? Does
   God not have the same right, or obligation, to correct us for our own
   ultimate happiness?

   191. A New Day...A New Start

   (Discipline Bears The Fruit Of Righteousness)

   Lord, deprive me not of Thy heavenly joys. Lord, deliver me from
   eternal torments. Lord, if I have sinned in mind or thought, in word or
   deed, forgive me. Lord, deliver me from all ignorance, forgetfulness,
   cowardice and stony insensibility. Lord, deliver me from every
   temptation. Lord, enlighten my heart which evil desires have darkened.
   Lord, I being human have sinned, but Thou being the generous God, have
   mercy on me, knowing the sickness of my soul. Lord, send Thy grace to
   my help, that I may glorify Thy holy Name. Lord Jesus Christ, write me
   Thy servant in the Book of Life, and grant me a good end. O Lord my
   God, even though I have done nothing good in Thy sight, yet grant me by
   Thy grace to make a good start. Lord, sprinkle into my heart the dew of
   Thy grace. Lord of heaven and earth remember me, Thy sinful servant,
   shameful and unclean, in Thy Kingdom. Amen.

   --St. John Chrysostom, Prayer Book

   Hebrews 12: 11-14

   Every day is a new day to strive for "that holiness without which no
   one will see the Lord." To achieve that holiness requires discipline
   which at first seems a cause for pain but ultimately brings the
   peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who are trained by it. There
   is no failure in falling. The only failure is not to get up and start
   anew.

   Is my faith and conviction strong enough to weather the tests of every
   day living? If not, how can I strengthen it?

   192. A Declaration of Faith

   (Glory To The Father, Son, And Spirit)

   There is one God, the Father of the living Word, who is His subsistent
   Wisdom and Power and Eternal Image: perfect Begetter of the perfect
   Begotten, Father of the only-begotten Son. There is one Lord, Only of
   the Only, God of God, Image and Likeness of Deity, Efficient Word,
   Wisdom comprehensive of the constitution of all things, and Power
   formative of the whole creation, true Son true Father, Invisible of
   Invisible, and Incorruptible of Incorruptible, and Immortal of Immortal
   and Eternal of Eternal. And there is One Holy Spirit, having His
   subsistence from god, and being made manifest by the Son, to wit to
   men. Image of the Son, Perfect Image of he Perfect; Life, the Cause of
   the living; Holy Fount; Sanctity, the Supplier, or Leader, of
   Sanctification; in whom is manifested God the Father, who is above all
   and in all, and God the Son, who is through all. There is a perfect
   Trinity, in glory and eternity and sovereignty, neither divided nor
   estranged. Wherefore there is nothing either created or in servitude in
   the Trinity; nor anything super induced, as if at some former period it
   was non-existent, and at some later period it was introduced. And thus
   neither was the Son ever wanting to the Father, nor the Spirit to the
   Son; but without variation and without change, the same Trinity abideth
   ever.

   --Gregory Thaumaturgus, 3rd century Church Father, (CCEL)

   Ephesians 1:3-14

   This alternative Creed, older than the Nicean Creed used in Church,
   contains a staggering number of names for God and qualities of God
   including: Father, Efficient Word, Wisdom, Power, Eternal Image,
   Begetter of the Perfect Begotten, Lord, Only of Only, Likeness of
   Deity, Invisible, Incorruptible, Immortal, Eternal, Holy Spirit, Life,
   Son, the Cause, Holy Fount, Sanctity, the Supplier, Leader of
   Sanctification, and Trinity. When I read it, I am overwhelmed by the
   majesty and mystery of the Trinity. St. Paul's writing on the Trinity
   in Ephesians is equally overpowering. I don't think that I could
   believe in a God I could fully comprehend. There would be no mystery or
   majesty but only a larger version of myself (ughhh! How egotistical!)

   Do I expect to fully comprehend God in this life?

   193. The Devil's Last Laugh

   (The Son Was Revealed To Destroy The Works Of Satan)

   Afore time did the devil deride the nature of man with great laughter,
   and he has had his joy over the times of our calamity as his
   festal-days. But the laughter is only a three days pleasure, while the
   wailing is eternal; and his great laughter has prepared him for a
   greater wailing and ceaseless tears, and inconsolable weeping, and a
   sword in his heart. This sword did our Leader forge against the enemy
   with fire in the virgin furnace, in such wise and after such fashion as
   He willed, and gave it His point by the energy of His invincible
   divinity, and dipped it in the water of an undefiled baptism, and
   sharpened it by sufferings without passion in them, and made it bright
   by the mystical resurrection; and hence with by Himself He put to death
   the vengeful adversary, together with his whole host. What manner of
   word, therefore, will express our joy of his misery? For he who was
   once an archangel is now a devil; he who once lived in heaven is now
   seen crawling like a serpent upon earth; he who once was jubilant with
   the cherubim, is now shut up in pain in the guard-house of swine; and
   him, too, in fire, shall we put to rout if we mind those things which
   are contrary to his choice; by the grace and kindness of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, to whom be the glory and the power unto the ages of the ages.
   Amen.

   --Gregory Thaumaturgus, On All the Saints, (CCEL)

   John 3:8 Mark 1:21-28

   This powerful piece of sermon, by an early Church father for the Feast
   of All Saints, describes the victory of Jesus and the crushing defeat
   and fall of Satan. This victory can be witnessed in the exorcisms of
   Jesus. Amazingly, as members of His Body, Jesus has given us a share of
   this authority over the powers of evil as long as we use the power of
   faith in Jesus and not our own feeble strength. With the power of
   Christ, we can do greater things than He did when on earth. Why doesn=t
   this power of Christ manifest itself more often? Our lack of faith is
   the answer.

   Do I believe that I can have the power to vanquish evil in the Name of
   Jesus?

   194. The Calling of the Magi

   (All Gods Will Prostrate Themselves Before The Lord)

   And the king forthwith gave orders to bring in all the interpreters of
   prodigies, and the sages who were under his dominion. And when all the
   heralds sed with their proclamations, all these assembled in the
   temple. And when they saw the star above Pege, and the diadem with the
   star and the stone, and the statues lying on the floor, they said: O
   king, a root divine and princely has risen, bearing the image of the
   King of heaven and earth. For Pege is the daughter of the Bethlehemite
   Pege. And the diadem is the mark of a king, and the star is a celestial
   announcement of portents to fall on the earth. Out of Judah has arisen
   a kingdom which shall subvert all the memorials of the Jews. And the
   prostration of the gods upon the floor prefigured the end of their
   honor. For he who comes, being of more ancient dignity, shall displace
   all the recent. Now, therefore, O king, send to Jerusalem. For you will
   find the Christ of the Omnipotent God borne in bodily form in the
   bodily arms of a women. And the star remained above the statue of Pege,
   called the Celestial, until the wise men came forth, and then it went
   with them.

   --BJulius Africanus, 3rd century Church father, Narrative of Events
   Happening in Persia on the Birth of Christ, CCEL

   1 Samuel 5:1-12 Isaiah 49:6

   Whether it be Dagon, the god of the Philistines, prostrating before
   Yahweh; Pege, the god of Persia, prostrating before the new-born
   Christ; or my ego, prostrating itself before the spirit of Jesus within
   me and others, the message is the same. All old gods are left behind in
   the light of new revealed truth.

   Am I open to putting aside my old gods of the ego: power, wealth and
   fame?

   195. The Proper Attitude Towards Prayer

   (O God, Be Merciful To Me, A Sinner)

   And this Hannah..., who was a type of the Church, maintains and
   observes, in that she prayed to God not with clamorous petition, but
   silently and modestly, within the very recesses of her heart. She spoke
   with hidden prayer, but with manifest faith. She spoke not with her
   voice, but with her heart, because she knew that thus God hears; and
   she effectually obtained what she sought, because she asked it with
   belief....And let not the worshiper...be ignorant in what manner the
   publican prayed with the Pharisee in the temple. Not with eyes lifted
   up boldly to heaven, nor with hands proudly raised; but beating his
   breast, and testifying to the sins shut up within, he implored the help
   of the divine mercy. And while the Pharisee was pleased with himself,
   this man who thus asked, the rather deserved to be sanctified, since he
   placed the hope of salvation not in the confidence of his innocence,
   because there is none who is innocent, but confessing his sinfulness he
   humbly prayed, and He who pardons the humble heard the petitioner....

   --BSt. Cyprian, Treatise IV: On the Lord=s Prayer, CCEL

   1 Samuel 1:1-20 Luke 18:9-14

   St. Cyprian points out the qualities and conditions that make prayer
   heard by God including silence, modesty, faith, heart-felt need,
   humility, confession of wounds/errors and patient reliance on the
   divine mercy. While I believe that God hears all prayer, these
   qualities and conditions make me receptive to receiving God's answer
   whether or not it is to my liking.

   Am I open to hearing God's answer to my prayer even if it is not what I
   wanted or expected?

   196. Christian Warfare?

   (I Will Offer Terms Of Peace)

   All the spoiling then, which Rome was exposed to in the recent
   calamity- all the slaughtering, plundering, burning and misery- was a
   result of the custom of war. But what was novel was that savage
   barbarians showed themselves in so gentle a guise, that the largest
   churches were chosen and set apart for the purpose of being filled with
   the people to whom quarter was given, and that in them none were slain,
   from them none forcibly dragged; that into them many were led by their
   relenting enemies to be set at liberty, and that from them none were
   led into slavery by merciless foes. Whoever does not see that this is
   to be attributed to the name of Christ, and to the Christian temper, is
   blind; whoever see this, and gives no praise, is ungrateful; whoever
   hinders anyone from praising it, is mad. Far be it from any prudent man
   to impute this clemency to the barbarians. There fierce anger and
   bloody minds were awed, and bridled, and marvelously tempered by Him
   who so long before said by His prophet: I will visit their
   transgression with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes;
   nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from them.

   --St. Augustine, City of God, Chapter 7, CCEL

   Deuteronomy 20:10-18

   The Jews were more lenient to enemies of war than the surrounding
   nations. At best, however, the Jews made slaves of all vanquished
   peoples. Generally, if the enemy was from a distant country, all males
   would be put to death and all women and children taken into slavery. If
   the enemy lived nearby, all souls were put to death, including
   children. St. Augustin's description of the fifth century sack of Rome
   by the Germanic tribes indicate a humanity that goes well beyond Old
   Testament teaching and may be considered an aspect of the
   Christianizing of the ancient world.

   How much mercy am I willing to offer al Qaeda and Taliban prisoners of
   war?

   197. The Providence Of God

   (The Lord Is Kind To The Ungrateful And Wicked)

   To the divine providence it has seemed good to prepare in the world to
   come for the righteous good things, which the unrighteous shall not
   enjoy; and for the wicked evil things, by which the good shall not be
   tormented. But as for the good things of this life, and its ills, God
   has willed that these should be common to both; that we might not too
   eagerly covet the things which wicked men are seen quually to enjoy,
   nor shrink with an unseemly fear from the ills which even good men
   often suffer.

   --St. Augustine, City of God, Chapter 8, CCEL

   Psalm 145:13-18 Luke 6: 35-36

   I have often believed that adverse circumstances in my life were a form
   of punishment while pleasant circumstances implied that I did something
   right, or at least that I prayed correctly. As I grow spiritually I
   realize, much to my chagrin and astonishment, that I have grown much
   from the adversity while the good circumstances brought no lasting joy
   or growth! St. Augustine's words on God's providence regarding worldly
   things are very pertinent here. What I consider good or bad becomes
   increasingly ambivalent depending on where I am at spiritually. What
   becomes more important is my attitude and my ability to look beyond
   myself and my ego as the center of the universe, and to look toward
   what is best for my ultimate good and the good of others.

   Am I willing to grow up and mature spiritually?

   198. The Restraint Of Human Freedom

   (I Will Not Spend My Life On Human Pleasures But On The Will Of God)

   ...He (God)...placed man at the head of the world, and man, too, made
   in the image of God, to whom He imparted mind, and reason, and
   foresight that he might imitate God; and although the first elements of
   his body were earthly, yet the substance was inspired by a heavenly and
   divine breathing. And when He had given him all things for his service,
   He willed that he alone should be free. And lest, again, an unbounded
   freedom should fall into peril, He laid down a command, in which man
   was taught that there was no evil in the fruit of the tree; but he was
   forewarned that evil would arise if perchance he should exercise his
   free will, in contempt of the law that was given. For, on the one hand,
   it had behooved him to be free, lest the image of God should,
   unfittingly be in bondage, and on the other, the law was to be added,
   so that an unbridled liberty might not break forth even to a contempt
   of the Giver...

   --BNovatian, 3rd century Church father, Concerning the Trinity, CCEL

   1 Peter 4: 1-6

   The point made by Novatian and St. Peter is well taken. Freedom,
   without self-restraint, would result in my reverting to the carnal
   desires of my fleshly nature including debauchery, evil desires,
   drunkenness, orgies, carousing and wanton idolatry. Worst of all, the
   lack of self-restraint would ultimately result in my contempt for God.
   And since I am created in God's image, a spirit, this contempt of God
   would result in my self-contempt and convert me into a self-willed evil
   spirit!

   Do I really understand the importance of self-restraint to my
   salvation?

   199. The Wrath Of God

   (God Will Destroy Those Who Destroy The Earth)

   ...If we read of His wrath, and consider certain descriptions of His
   indignation, and learn that hatred is asserted of Him, yet we are not
   to understand these to be asserted of Him in the sense in which they
   are human vices. For all these things, although they may corrupt man,
   cannot at all corrupt the divine power... He is simple and without any
   corporeal comixture, being wholly of that essence, which, whatever it
   be, He alone knows, constitutes, His being, since He is called Spirit.
   And thus those things which in men are faulty and corrupting, since
   they arise from the corruptibility of the body, and matter itself, in
   God cannot exert the force of corruptibility, since, as we have said,
   they have come, not of vice, but of reason.

   --BNovatian, 3rd century Church father, Concerning the Trinity, CCEL

   Revelations 11: 18

   While I do not pretend to understand the Book of Revelations and the
   other apocalyptic literature of the Bible, I do know that God's wrath
   is a purifying fire that will destroy the forces of evil (those who
   destroy the earth) and establish the reign of God where all things will
   be created anew.

   Do I fear the purifying fire of God's love?

   200. The Sermon On The Mount

   (Blessed Are The Pure In Spirit)

   If any one will piously and soberly consider the sermon which our Lord
   Jesus Christ spoke on the mount...I think that he will find in it, so
   far as regards the highest morals, a perfect standard of the Christian
   life: and this we do not rashly venture to promise, but gather it from
   the very words of the Lord Himself. For the sermon itself is brought to
   a close in such a way , that it is clear there are in it all the
   precepts which go to mold the life.... He has sufficiently indicated,
   as I think, that these sayings which He uttered on the mount so
   perfectly guide the life of those who may be willing to live according
   to them, that they may justly be compared to one building upon a rock.
   I have said this merely that it may be clear that the sermon before us
   is perfect in all the precepts by which the Christian life is
   molded....

   --BSt. Augustine, The Sermon on the Mount, Chapter 1, CCEL

   Matthew 5:1-12

   The Beatitudes, and the Sermon itself, express the fact that the old,
   false values of the ego-centered world (wealth, power, fame) are
   disappearing and a new, spiritual world is being born. Who is Blessed?
   It is the poor in spirit, those who morn, the meek, those who hunger
   for righteousness, the merciful, the clean of heart, the peacemakers,
   and those persecuted for righteousness. These values and
   characteristics are not considered very high by the world's standards
   but they constitute the standard in the Kingdom of God.

   Am I learning to mold my character on the Kingdom of Heaven, and not
   the earthly culture in which I live?
     __________________________________________________________________

   201. The Way Of Light

   (I Will Embrace The Child-Like)

   The way of light, then, is as follows. If anyone desires to travel to
   the appointed place, he must be zealous in his works. The knowledge,
   therefore, which is given to us for the purpose of walking in this way,
   is the following. Thou shall love Him who created thee: thou shall
   glorify Him who redeemed thee from death. Thou shall be simple in
   heart, and rich in spirit. Thou shall not join thyself to those who
   walk in the way of death...Thou shall not exalt thyself but shall be of
   a lowly mind. Thou shall not take evil counsel against thy neighbor.
   Thou shall not be a corrupter of youth. Thou shall love thy neighbor
   more then thine own soul. Thou shall not slay the child by procuring
   abortion; nor, again, shall thou destroy it after it is born. Thou
   shall not withdraw thy hand from thy son, or form thy daughter, but
   from their infancy thou shall teach them the fear of the Lord. Receive
   as good things the trials which come upon thee. Thou shall seek out
   everyday the faces of the saints, either by word examining them, and
   going to exhort them, and meditating how to save a soul by the word or
   by thy hands thou shalt labor for the redemption of thy sins...This is
   the way of light.

   --Epistle Attributed to Barnabas, 2ond century, Chapter 19, CCEL

   Mark 10: 13-16 Matthew 2: 16-18

   Jesus teaches that one must be child-like to enter the Kingdom of God
   and that the one who leads them astray would be better off if he/she
   had never been born. This epistle from the early second century teaches
   what we in 20th century America have forgotten: the killing of
   children, born or unborn, physically or spiritually, is a great evil
   that will not leave the perpetrator unscathed. By killing their
   children, physically or spiritually, they are killing the child-light
   within themselves and are, in effect, aborting their own Godly spirits
   and humanity.

   What are my views on abortion?

   202. The Way of Darkness

   (Lord, Fill Me With Light)

   But the way of darkness is crooked, and full of cursing; for it is the
   way of eternal death with punishment, in which way are the things that
   destroy the soul, viz, idolatry, over-confidence, the arrogance of
   power, hypocrisy, double-heartedness, adultery, murder, rapine,
   haughtiness, transgression, deceit, malice, self-sufficiency, magic,
   want of the fear of God, (but incline to) hatred of truth, pity not the
   needy, murder of children, destroyers of the workmanship of God....

   --Epistle Attributed to Barnabas, 2ond century, Chapter 20, CCEL

   Luke 11: 33-36 Matthew 5:14

   Jesus warns that spiritually blind people will lead others that are
   blind into the pit of their own destruction. ATake care then that the
   light in you not become darkness!@ This way of darkness is crooked
   since it is built on ego-desires and it destroys the soul as it
   destroys the workmanship of GodB-our own spiritual life.

   Am I encouraged to continue to kill my ego so that I may truly live?

   203. Order In Creation

   (I Will Judge Angels)

   On the fifth day the land and water brought forth their progenies. On
   the sixth day the things that were wanting were created; and thus God
   raised up man from the soil, as lord of all the things which He created
   upon the earth and the water. Yet He created angels and archangels
   before He created man, placing spiritual beings before earthly ones.
   For light was made before sky and the earth. This sixth day is called
   parasceve, that is tho say, the preparation of the kingdom. For he
   perfected Adam, whom He made after His image and likeness. But for this
   reason He completed His works before He created angels and fashioned
   man, lest perchance they should falsely assert that they had been His
   helpers.

   --Victorinus, 3rd Century Church Father, On the Creation of the World,
   CCEL

   Colosians 2:18 1 Corinthian 6:3

   While the wholly spiritual angels were created before mankind, and,
   ultimately, we will become wholly spiritual beings; we are not to
   worship angels and, in fact, we will someday judge the angels! Why is
   this so? Perhaps it=s because angels, never having had bodies, were
   never subject to the illusions that we, being both fleshly and
   spiritual, are subject to. When the angels fell from grace, they could
   not blame it on fleshly desires that creates the human ego. They fell
   purely due to self-will and, thus, their fall was considered more
   grievous since they were not blinded by a material point of view. By
   the time we become spirits, we will have learned the lessons form the
   changes due to both free-will and ego.

   In what ways do I imagine that I will judge the angels?

   204. Fearless Witness To The Truth

   (I Will Give True Testimony)

   Ambrose, Bishop, to the most blessed Prince and most Christian Emperor
   Valentinian. As all men who live under the Roman sway engage in
   military service under you, the Emperors and Princes of the world, so
   too do you yourselves owe service to Almighty God and our holy
   faith...Since, then, most Christian Emperor, there is due from you to
   the true God both faith and zeal, care and devotion for the faith, I
   wonder how the hope has risen up to some, that you would feel it a duty
   to restore by your command alters to the gods of the heathen...What
   will you answer a priest who says to you, "The Church does not seek
   your gifts, because you have adorned the heathen temples with gifts.
   The Alter of Christ rejects your gifts, because you have made an alter
   for idols...The Lord Jesus refuses and rejects your service, because
   you have served idols, for He said to you: You cannot serve two
   masters."

   --St. Ambrose, Epistle 17, CCEL

   Mark 6:17-20 Acts 25:13 - 26:1

   I am amazed at the guts of St. Ambrose, a priest, in addressing an
   Emperor! The Bible points out many cases of highly spiritual people
   Atalking straight@ to a King with mixed, usually negative, results.
   John the Baptist lost his head due to his straight talk with King Herod
   and King Ahab pursued the prophet Elijah for years with the intent of
   killing him. In other cases, it was more favorable, as when St. Paul
   addressed King Agrippa. In any event, straight talk in the name of
   truth, regardless of the consequences, is the result of great spiritual
   maturity.

   Am I willing to talk the truth to those in authority even if it seems
   to be to my detriment?

   205. Evil Is Taught

   (I Will Not Teach Lies)

   There is nothing evil by nature, but it is by use that evil things
   become such. So I say...that man was made with a free-will, not as if
   there were already evil in existence, which he had the power of
   choosing if he wished, but on account of his capacity of obeying or
   disobeying God....For this was the object to be gained by free-will.
   And man after his creation receives a commandment from God, and from
   this at once rises evil; for he does not obey the divine command, and
   this alone is evil, namely, disobedience, which had a beginning. For no
   one has it in his power to say that it is without an origin, when its
   author had an origin. But you will be sure to ask whence arose this
   disobedience. It is clearly recorded in Holy Scripture ...that man was
   not made by God in this condition, but that he has come to it by some
   teaching. For man did not receive such a nature as this. For if it were
   the case that his nature was such, this would not have come upon him by
   teaching. How one says in Holy Writ, that "man has learnt (evil)". I
   say, then, that disobedience to God is taught. For this alone is evil
   which is produced in opposition to the purpose of God, for man would
   not learn evil by itself....For my part I say that the beginning of
   evil was envy, and it arose from man's being distinguished by God with
   higher honor. Now evil is disobedience to the commandment of God.

   --Methodius, 3rd century Church father, Concerning Free-Will, CCEL

   Titus 1:10-14 Micah 2: 11

   I think that it is human nature to seek the easy path, to hear what one
   wants to hear, in order to feel good about one=s attitudes and
   behaviors. Unfortunately, what I want to hear may have no bearing on
   the truth which may require work on my part to grow and change.
   Definitely not the easy way! Unless I am willing to choose teachers
   that challenge my complacency, I may never grow spiritually.

   Am I willing to learn from teachers who are willing to tell me the
   truth and not just what I want to hear?

   206. Encourage Forgiveness

   (I Will Forgive)

   Although my lord and brother has already begged of your nobleness that
   you would see that Tutis should be most safe, yet it has been allowed
   to me to Commend the same person in a letter, in order that, by the
   petition being doubled, he may be held all the safer. For let it be
   granted that a youthful fault and error of a yet unsettled age has
   injured him so as to inflict a scar on his early years, still one, who
   did not yet know what was due to right conduct, has gone wrong almost
   without contracting blame. For when he came to a right state of mind
   and to reflection, he understood on better thoughts that a theatrical
   life was to be condemned....It behooves your Excellency to show favor
   to good intentions, so that he who, by the goodness of God, has entered
   on a pious duty, should not be forced to sink into the pitfall of the
   theater.

   --Sulpihus Severus, Letter 5, CCEL

   Philemon

   I am not about to argue that the theater is an evil way of life any
   more then I would say that it is evil for a slave to try to run away
   from his slavery. These say more about the culture than about religion
   and faith. The real issue here is forgiveness. While I am not arguing
   that there are not real things to be forgiven, these two examples
   indicate that, with the perspective of hindsight, there are fewer
   things to forgive than I would have imagined.

   Do I hold unrealistic grievances against people and circumstances that
   primarily hurt my own spiritual growth?

   207. Reigning With Christ

   (We Will Be Priests Of Christ)

   Then the righteous shall go forth from their hiding places, and shall
   find all things covered with carcases and bones. But the whole race of
   the wicked shall utterly perish; and there shall no longer be any
   nation in this world, but the nation of God alone. Then for seven
   continuous years the woods shall be untouched, nor shall timber be cut
   form the mountains, but the arms of the nations shall be burnt, and now
   there shall be no war, but peace and everlasting rest. But when the
   thousand years shall be completed, the world shall be renewed by God,
   and the heavens shall be folded together, and the earth shall be
   changed, and God shall transform men into the similitude of angels, and
   they shall be white as snow; and they shall always be employed in the
   sight of the Almighty, and shall make offerings to their Lord, and
   serve Him forever.

   --Lactantius, Book 7: Of A Happy Life, Chapter 26, CCEL

   Revelations 20: 1-10

   When I read about the end times, I feel both joy and fear/confusion. I
   feel joy for the saints and their destiny, and fear/confusion for the
   plight of the wicked. Could I become one of the wicked? If God loves me
   more than my mother could, and my mother would never condemn me to
   eternal torture, would God do so? I must believe that no one is
   condemned by accident, and that those who are is due completely to
   their own free will.

   How is the infinite love and mercy of God reconciled with the final
   judgement and punishment?

   208. Exhortation To Righteousness

   (For Freedom Christ Set Us Free)

   Let those who are hungry come, that being fed with heavenly food, they
   may lay aside their lasting hunger; let those who are athirst come,
   that they may with full mouth draw forth the water of salvation from an
   ever-flowing fountain. By this divine food and drink the blind shall
   both see, and the deaf hear, and the dumb speak, and the lame walk, and
   the foolish shall be wise, and the sick shall be strong, and the dead
   shall come to life again. For whoever by his virtue has trampled upon
   the corruptions of the earth, the supreme and truthful arbiter will
   raise him to life and to perpetual light. Let know one trust in riches,
   no one in badges of authority, no one even in royal power: these things
   do not make a man immortal.... Let us therefore apply ourselves to
   righteousness, which will alone, as an inseparable companion, lead us
   to God; and while a spirit rules these limbs, let us serve God with
   unwearied service, let us keep our posts and watches, let us boldly
   engage with the enemy whom we know, that victorious and triumphant over
   our conquered adversary, we may obtain from the Lord that reward of
   valor which He Himself has promised.

   --Lactantius, Book 7: Of A Happy Life, Chapter 27, CCEL

   Galatians 5:1, 5-6, 13-21

   Lactantius said: ALet us apply ourselves to righteousness which
   alone...leads us to God...and lets us serve God with unwearied
   service.@ St. Paul says: AThrough the Spirit, by faith, we await the
   hope of righteousness.@ St. Paul defines righteousness as faith working
   through love (which is service).

   How well do I serve my neighbors, my Church, my Country?

   209. Resolving Issues

   (We Will Meet Together In The Spirit)

   Gregory, servant of the servants of God, to all the Bishops constituted
   throughout Sicily....This also we have plainly perceived to be a thing
   that ought to be done; that once in the year your whole fraternity
   should assemble, at Syracuse or Cabana, receiving...Peter...subdeacon
   of our See, you may settle with due discretion whatever things pertain
   to the advantage of the churches of the province, or to the relief of
   the necessities of the poor and oppressed, or to the admonition of all,
   and the correction of those whose transgressions may peradventure be
   proved. from which council far be animosities, which are the nutriment
   of crimes, and may inward grudges die away, and that discord of souls
   which is beyond measure execrable. Let concord well-pleasing to God,
   and charity, approve you as His priests. Conduct all things, therefore,
   with such deliberation and calmness that yours may most worthily be
   called an Episcopal Council.

   --St. Gregory the Great, Book 1-Epistle 1, CCEL

   Acts 15:1-12, 22-36

   From the Council of Jerusalem in about AD 60 to the Second Vatican
   Council of the 1960's and beyond, Christian leaders have been getting
   together to resolve the problems of their day. As with the rest of us,
   everyone has different gifts and no one person, or group of people,
   have all of the answers. By coming together as the Body of Christ, the
   Church, the Holy Spirit speaks most clearly and completely. The message
   of the Holy Spirit may be much more inclusive than I believe!

   Am I willing to come together with my brothers and sisters and listen
   to and learn from their truth?

   210. Hardships Of The Spiritual Life

   (I Will Suffer With Those Who Suffer)

   Gregory to Theoctista, Sister of the Emperor. With how great devotion
   my mind prostrates itself before your Venerableness I cannot fully
   express in words; nor yet do I labor to give utterance to it , since,
   even though I were silent, you read in your heart your own sense of my
   devotion. I wonder, however, that you withdraw your countenance, till
   of late bestowed on me, from this my recent engagement in the pastoral
   office; wherein, under color of episcopacy, I have been brought back to
   the world; in which I am involved in such great earthly cares as I do
   not at all remember having been subjected to even in a lay state of
   life. For I have lost the deep joys of my quiet, and seem to have risen
   outwardly while inwardly falling down. Whence I grieve to find myself
   banished far from the face of my Maker. For I used to strive daily to
   win my way outside the world, outside the flesh; to drive all phantasms
   of the body from the eyes of my soul and to see incorporeally supernal
   joys...But, having been suddenly dashed from this summit of things by
   the whirlwind of this trial, I have fallen into fears and tremors,
   since, even though I have no fears for myself, I am greatly afraid for
   those who have been committed to me. On every side I am tossed by the
   waves of business, and sunk by storms....

   --St. Gregory the Great, Book 1: Epistle 5, CCEL

   2 Corinthians 11: 23-29 1 Corinthians 4: 7-11

   This personal letter of St. Gregory from his first year as Bishop of
   Rome is very telling. He indicates how inadequate he feels about his
   Ajob@ and how much he missed the monastic life. He even felt that he
   had been banished from God=s sight. He obviously grew from his
   suffering, as did St. Paul, for he is later referred to as AGregory the
   Great@. By the patient and humble acceptance of the hardships of their
   callings, and their willingness to rely on the Lord=s power, they have
   become inspiring examples of our faith in Jesus.

   Am I willing to pursue God=s will even if it means I must suffer
   greatly?

   211. Morning Prayer To The Holy Trinity

   (Bless The Lord My Soul!)

   As I rise from sleep I thank Thee, O Holy Trinity, for through Thy
   great goodness and patience Thou was not angered with me, an idler and
   sinner, nor hast Thou destroyed me in my sins, but hast shown Thy usual
   love for men, and when I was prostrate in despair, Thou hast raised me
   to keep the morning watch and glorify Thy power. And now enlighten my
   mind's eye and open my mouth to study Thy words and understand Thy
   commandments and do Thy will and sing to Thee in heartfelt adoration
   and praise Thy Most Holy Name of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and
   ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

   --St. Basil the Great, Prayer Book

   Psalm 103:1-5, 13-18

   Psalm 103 is perhaps my favorite since it beautifully expresses the
   love of God. He forgives sins, cures illness, redeems life, crowns with
   love and tenderness, contents with good things and renews youthful
   strength (to name a few). How should I respond to this overflowing
   love? According to St. Basil, I should glorify, pray, study God's Word,
   understand and do His will, sing, adore and praise. In my worst moments
   of fear, despair, anxiety and depression, God is as near and dear as a
   tender Father. Bless the Lord my soul!

   Do I recognize that glorifying, adorning, and praising God may be the
   answer to my problems? (Nott because God needs them, but I do.)

   212. The Cross: Not Only A Mystery But An Example

   (Jesus Is The Way, Truth, Life)

   The cross of Christ, which was set up for the salvation of mortals, is
   both a mystery and an example: a sacrament where by the Divine power
   takes effect, an example whereby man=s devotion is excited: for to
   those who are rescued from the prisoner=s yolk Redemption further
   procures the power of following the way of the cross by imitation. For
   if the world=s wisdom so prides itself in its error that everyone
   follows the opinions and habits and whole manner of life of him whom he
   has chosen as his leader, how shall we share in the name of Christ save
   by being inseparably united to Him, Who is, as He Himself asserted,
   Athe Way, the Truth, and the Life@? The Way that is of holy living, the
   Truth of Divine doctrine, and the Life of eternal happiness.

   --BSt. Leo the Great, Sermon 72: On the Lord=s Resurrection II, CCEL

   John 14:4-7

   Divine Doctrine + Holy Living = Eternal Happiness

   I like this equation! It is the only one I=ve seen that satisfies me
   with its comprehensiveness and simplicity (and as an engineer, I=ve
   seen a lot of equations!) Since Christianity is a relationship with
   Jesus, I must base my life both on what He taught and what He did. The
   power of His teaching inspires my actions and my feeble efforts to live
   a Christ-like life reveal new insights into His doctrine. Together they
   lead to joy and peace in both this life and beyond.

   In what ways can I get to know Jesus more and more?

   213. Morning Prayer

   (God Is Faithfulness And Love)

   Having risen from sleep, I hasten to Thee, O Lord, Lover of men, and by
   Thy loving-kindness I strive to do thy work, and I pray to Thee: help
   me at all times, in everything, and deliver me from every evil thing of
   the world and every attack of the devil, and lead me into Thine eternal
   Kingdom. For Thou art my Creator, the Giver and Provider of everything
   good, and all mu hope is in Thee, and to Thee I send up glory, now and
   ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

   --St. Macarius the Great, Prayer Book

   Titus 3:4-8

   Lord Jesus, I thank You for Your love of me; whether or not I deserve
   it. If it weren't for Your love and sustaining grace, it would not only
   be inconceivable to do Your good work, I would find it difficult on
   many days to fight my human weaknesses like depression, guilt and
   shame. Be gracious to me, Lord, and fill me with Your joy so that I may
   pass it on to the others you have placed in my path. May You help me to
   live fully in the present moment LordB the moment You are with me.
   Amen.

   Do I remember to pray in my weakness?

   214. Jesus Experienced Our Weakness And Mortality

   (Jesus Understands Me)

   When the whole body of mankind had fallen in our first parents, the
   merciful God purposed so to succor, through His only-begotten Jesus
   Christ, His creatures made after His image, that the restoration of our
   nature should not be effected apart from it, and that our new estate
   should be an advance upon our original position. Happy, if we had not
   fallen from that which God made us; but happier, if we remain that
   which he has re-made us. It was much to have received form from Christ;
   it is more to have a substance in Christ... We were taken up by that
   nature, which did not break off the Branch from the common stock of our
   race, and yet excluded all taint of the sin which has passed upon all
   men. That is to say, weakness and mortality, which were not sin but the
   penalty of sin, were undergone by the Redeemer of the World in the way
   of punishment, that they might be reckoned as the price of redemption.

   --St. Leo the Great, Sermon 72: On the Lord's Resurrection, CCEL

   Hebrews 2:14-18

   Jesus experienced all of the weaknesses and effects of mortality that I
   experience including feelings of frustration, anger and fear, the
   effects of hormones and aches/pains including physical death. None of
   these are things which His Father, Yahweh, could experience as a human
   being. I am grateful that He can understand me! Even more: He loved us
   so much that He improved upon our nature by adding His own divinity and
   making us all children of God thus overcoming our weakness and
   mortality!

   Do I spend time meditating on what Jesus has done for me?

   215. Teaching Through Experience

   (Leadership = Service)

   No one is allowed to preside over the assembly of the brethren, or even
   over himself, before he has not only deprived himself of all his
   property but has also learnt the fact that he is not his own maker and
   has no authority over his own actions. For one who renounces the world,
   whatever property or riches he may possess, must seek the common
   dwelling of a Coenobium, that he may not flatter himself in any way
   with what he has forsaken or what he has brought into the monastery. He
   must also be obedient to all, so as to learn that he must, as the Lord
   says, become again a little child, arrogating nothing to himself on the
   score of his age and the number of years which he now counts as lost
   while they were spent to no purpose in the world and, as he is only a
   beginner, and because of the novelty of the apprenticeship, which he
   knows he is serving in Christ's service, he should not hesitate tp
   submit himself even to his juniors. Further, he is to habituate himself
   to work and toil, so as to prepare with his own hands; in ;accordance
   with the Apostle's command, daily supply of food, either for his own
   use or for the wants of strangers; and that he may also forget the
   pride and luxury of his past life, and gain by grinding toil humility
   of heart. And so no one is chosen to be set over a congregation of
   brethren before that he who is to be placed in authority has learnt by
   obedience what he ought to enjoin on those who are to submit to
   him.....

   --John Cassain, Book II: Of the Canonical System Of the Nocturnal
   Prayers and Psalms, Chapter 3, CCEL

   1 Timothy 3: 1-13

   No one is allowed to presideB even over himself--before he has learned
   the fact that he is not his own maker and has no authority over his own
   actions! In a country built on "rugged individualism", this admonition
   would not get many cheers. But is it false? It implies that everyone
   must learn obedience, the giving up of self-will, in order to truly
   master himself--much less rule anybody else. To teach discipline, one
   must become self-disciplined through obedience to authority. Christ,
   the ultimate authority, says that this obedience is reflected in
   service to others.

   In what ways do I still need to learn self-discipline over my emotions,
   my desires, and my ego?

   216. The True Nature Of Wealth

   (God Chooses The Weak To Shame The Strong)

   The nature then of Christ's teaching is attested by His own statements:
   that they who wish to arrive at eternal blessedness may understand the
   steps of assent to that high happiness. "Blessed", he saith, "are the
   poor in spirit for their's is the kingdom of heaven"...He shows that
   the kingdom of heaven must be assigned to those who are recommended by
   the humility of their spirits rather than by the smallness of their
   means. Yet it cannot be doubted that this possession of humility is
   more easily acquired by the poor than the rich: for submissiveness is
   the companion of those that want, while loftiness of mind dwells with
   riches. Notwithstanding, even in many of the rich is found that spirit
   which uses its abundance not for the increasing of its pride but on
   works of kindness, and counts that for the greatest gain which it
   expends in the relief of other's hardships. It is given to every kind
   and rank of men to share in this virtue, because men may be equal in
   will, though unequal in fortune: and it does not matter how different
   they are in earthly means, who are found equal in spiritual
   possessions. Blessed, therefore, is poverty which is not possessed with
   a love of temporal things, and does not seek to be increased with the
   riches of the world, but is eager to amass heavenly possessions.

   --St. Leo the Great, Sermon 95: A Homily On the Beatitudes, CCEL

   Zephaniah 2:3, 3:12-13 1 Corinthians 1:26-31

   ABlessed is poverty which is not possessed with a love of temporal
   things and does not seek to be increased with the riches of the world.@
   I am sure that dire poverty is no more of a blessing than extreme
   wealth in attaining holiness. The real question, if one has more than
   enough to live on, is how attached one is to his/her possessions. A
   poor person may dream and obsess about having more possessions while a
   rich person may not be owned by his belongings.

   What is my attitude about wealth? Why do I want the security it may
   bring?

   217. What Is Fasting?

   (The Believers Were United, Heart And Soul)

   For in the early days of the faith when only a few, and those the best
   of men, were known by the name of monks, who, as they received that
   mode of life from the Evangelist Mark of blessed memory, the first to
   preside over the Church at Alexandria as Bishop, not only preserved
   those grand characteristics for which we read, in the Acts of the
   Apostles, that the Church and multitude of believers in primitive times
   was famous..., but they added to these characteristics others still
   more sublime. For withdrawing into more secluded spots outside the
   cities they led a life marked by such rigorous abstinence that even to
   those of another creed the exalted character of their life was a
   standing marvel. For they gave themselves up to the reading of Holy
   Scripture and to prayers and to manual labor night and day with such
   fervor that they had no desire or thoughts of food--unless on the
   second or third day bodily hunger reminded them, and they took their
   meat and drink not so much because they wished for it as because it was
   necessary or life; and even then they took it not before sunset, in
   order that they might connect the hours of daylight with the practice
   of spiritual meditations, and the care of the body with the night, and
   might perform other things much more exalted than these.

   --John Cassain, Book II: Of the Canonical System of the Nocturnal
   Prayers and Psalms, Chapter 4, CCEL

   Isaiah 58:5-11 Acts 4: 32-37

   When I read about the fasting that was done in the early Christian
   communities, I cringe! This is definitely not one of my spiritual
   gifts. I enjoy food very much and do not eat just to stay alive. When I
   feel sinful because I enjoy my food, I remember the words of Isaiah
   which say, in effect, that true fasting is not inflicting pain on
   oneself, but doing good such as feeding the hungry, sheltering the
   homeless and releasing captives. This kind of fasting will result in
   our light blazing out and our spiritual wounds being quickly healed.
   May God grant me the ability to fast in this way!

   Does fasting bring me closer to God?

   218. The Pure Of Heart Shall See God

   (The Pure Hearted Shall Receive Blessings)

   "Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God." Great is the
   happiness, beloved, of him for whom so great a reward is prepared.
   What, then, is it to have the heart pure, but to strive after those
   virtues which are mentioned (in the beatitudes)? And how great the
   blessedness of seeing God, what mind can conceive, what tongue declare?
   And yet this shall ensue when man's nature is transformed... Rightly is
   this blessedness promised to purity of heart. For the brightness of the
   true light will not be able to be seen by the unclean sight: and that
   which will be happiness to minds that are bright and clean, will be a
   punishment to those that are stained. Therefore, let the mists of
   earth's vanities be shunned and your inward eyes purged from all the
   filth of wickedness, that the sight may be free to feed on this great
   manifestation of God...

   --St. Leo the Great, Sermon 94: Homily on the Beatitudes, CCEL

   Psalm 24: 3-6 Psalm 73:1

   I must always remember that to see the truth and to be pure hearted, I
   must know and think the truth. I am a spirit that is temporarily using
   a body. In spite of appearances, I am not a separate entity, distinct
   from my brothers and sisters. We are all parts of the Body of Christ
   and what hurts one, hurts all. Our sense of separateness, generated by
   our egos, must be reduced if we are to see the true light.

   Am I willing to learn the truth about myself in spite of appearances?

   219. Duty Toward Parents Is Love Of Self

   (Respect For A Father Expiates Sins)

   Not every man that is a sinner is also undutiful: but the undutiful man
   cannot fail to be a sinner. Let us take an instance from general
   experience. Sons, though they be drunken and profligate and
   spendthrift, can yet love their fathers; and with all these vices, and,
   therefore, not free from guilt, may yet be free from undutifulness. But
   the undutiful, though they may be models of continence and frugality,
   are, by the mere fact of despising the parent, worse transgressors than
   if they were guilty of every sin that lies outside the category of
   undutifulness.

   --Hilary of Poitiers, Fourth Century Church Father, Sermon On Psalm 1,
   CCEL

   Sirrah 3:1-16

   It took me many years to forgive my father for his alcoholism, the lack
   of attention he gave me and the pain and chaos he caused my family. A
   turning point came when I looked in a mirror one day and saw my
   father's face in mine! I had acquired many of his characteristics, good
   and bad. Would I want my children to forgive me for my less than
   stellar characteristics? Ultimately, to hate my father was a form of
   self hatred. To forgive him was to forgive myself and allow myself to
   grow emotionally and spiritually.

   Have I learned to forgive others for their shortcomings so that I may
   be forgiven for mine?

   220. An Entire Theology In A Psalm!

   (The Upright Will Floruish)

   The Holy Spirit made choice of this magnificent and noble introduction
   to the Psalter, in order to stir up weak man to a pure zeal for piety
   by the hope of happiness, to teach him the mystery of the Incarnate
   God, to promise him participation in heavenly glory, to declare the
   penalty of the Judgement, to proclaim the two-fold resurrection, to
   show forth the counsel of God as seen in His award. It is indeed after
   a faultless and mature design that He has laid the foundation of this
   great prophecy; His will being that the hope connected with the happy
   man might allure weak humanity to zeal for the Faith, that the analogy
   of the happiness of the tree might be the pledge of a happy hope, that
   the declaration of His wrath against the ungodly might set bounds of
   fear to the excesses of ungodliness, that difference in rank in the
   assemblies of the saints might mark difference in merit, that the
   standard appointed for judging the ways of the righteous might show
   forth the majesty of God.

   --Hilary of Poitiers, Sermon on Psalm 1, CCEL

   Psalm 92: 13-15 Psalm 26: 4-8

   Reading the first Psalm after reading St. Hilary's comments leaves me
   with a sense of amazement; an entire theology in only six verses! It is
   all built on something that all men innately want but generally don't
   know how to get: happiness.

   In what ways have I tried to find happiness apart from God and His
   will?

   221. Symbols Of Christ

   (I Shall Be With You)

   And Gideon, moved with that message, when he heard that, though
   thousands of people failed, God would deliver His own from their
   enemies by means of one man, offered a kid, and according to the word
   of the Angel, laid its flesh and unleavened cakes upon the rock, and
   poured the broth upon them. And as soon as the Angel touched them with
   the end of the staff which he bore, fire burst forth out of the rock,
   and so the sacrifice which he was offering was consumed. By which it
   seems clear that rock was a figure for the Body of Christ, for it is
   written: "They drank of that rock that followed them, and that rock was
   Christ". Which certainly refers not to His Godhead, but to His Flesh,
   which watered the hearts of the thirsting people with the perpetual
   stream of His Blood.

   --St. Ambrose, Book 1: On the Holy Spirit, CCEL

   1 Corinthians 10: 1-4 Judges 6: 11-24

   This kind of scriptural interpretation, seeing symbols of Christ in Old
   Testament events, seems at times a little contrived. It is, however,
   comforting to see the essential unity of Scripture, Old and New
   Testament, and knowing that Jesus is with me, as He was with Gideon,
   whether or not I am aware of it. I am grateful for God's continuous
   presence!

   In what ways do I recognize God's presence when I am in emotional pain?

   222. Interpreting The Apocalypse

   (This Calls For Shrewdness..)

   "And there are seven kings: five have fallen, and one is, and the other
   is not yet come; and when he is come, he will be for a short time." The
   time must be understood in which the written Apocalypse was published,
   since then reigned Caesar Domitian; but before him had been Titus his
   brother, and Vespasian, Otho, Vitellius, and Galba. These are the five
   who have fallen. One remains, under whom the Apocalypse was
   written--Domitian, to wit. "The other has not yet come", speaks of
   Nerva; "and when he is come, he will be for a short time," for he did
   not complete the period of two years.

   --Victorinus, Commentary On the Apocalypse of the Blessed Job, CCEL

   Revelations 17:8-18

   Victorinus, a third century Church father, knew more about how to
   interpret apocalyptic imagery from the Scriptures than anyone today.
   While there are references and allusions to the future in such
   literature, it was written primarily to encourage the generation in
   which it was written to face some persecution. Those to whom it was
   addressed understood the imagery much better than do we who live
   thousands of years later in a totally different culture. It might be as
   easy for someone born and living in central Africa in the 10th century
   to understand James Joyce=s Ulysses.

   Do I have a tendency to over-interpret Scripture according to my own
   predilections rather than rely on the interpretation handed down by the
   Church?

   223. Dying For The Truth

   (I Shall Prove Myself Worthy...)

   The sentence of judgement sayest that these men came to Japan from the
   Philipines, but I did not come from any other country I am a true
   Japanese. The only reason for my being killed is that I have taught the
   doctrine of Christ. I certainly did teach the doctrine of Christ. I
   thank God it is for this reason I die. I believe that I am telling only
   the truth before I die. I know you believe me and I want to say to you
   all once again: Ask Christ to help you to become happy. I obey Christ.
   After Christ's example I forgive my persecutors. I do not hate them. I
   ask God to have pity on all, and I hope my blood will fall on my fellow
   men as a fruitful rain.

   --St. Paul Mikki, MartyrB1597, SOTD

   2 Maccabees 6: 18-31

   While I find the idea of martyrdom very unsettling, it raises an
   important question. Am I willing to give all for the Atruth@? Eleazar
   of Israel in the second century before Christ preferred to die than to
   pretend to do something which the Jewish law forbade. He felt it would
   be a terrible example to those around him who respected him for his
   wisdom and character. St. Paul Mikki did the same as a martyr in 16th
   century Japan. He died for no other reason than telling the truth about
   Christ. Did their deaths mean anything? More than two centuries later,
   British missionaries found many Christians secretly performing services
   taught by Paul Mikki and his companions who were martyred in 1597!

   Am I willing to sacrifice everything for the truth?

   224. A Standard For Sacrificial Giving

   (My Worldly Wealth Is Rotting)

   The bread which you do not use is the bread of the hungry; the garment
   hanging in your wardrobe is the garment of him who is naked; the shoes
   that you do not wear are the shoes of the one who is barefoot; the
   money that you keep locked away is the money of the poor; the acts of
   charity that you do not perform are so many injustices that you commit.

   --St. Basil the Great, SOTD

   James 5:1-6

   The words of Sts. James and Basil always strike me hard. While I have
   given much time, talent and treasure to worthy causes over the years, I
   always keep an ample supply for myself and my future.

   Is this the way God would want it? Am I meant to save for a future that
   may not be there? Does this reflect a lack of faith? Is promising to
   use ample amounts of my retirement money and time a legitimate
   substitute for not doing more now, in the present?

   225. The Love and Generosity Of God

   (May I Learn To Discern Good From Evil)

   God accepts our desires as though they were a great value. He longs
   ardently for us to desire and love him. He accepts our petitions for
   benefits as though we were doing him a favor. His joy in giving is
   greater than ours in receiving. So let us not be apathetic in our
   asking, nor set too narrow bounds to our requests; nor ask for
   frivolous things unworthy of God's greatness.

   --St. Gregory Nazianen, SOTD

   1 Kings 3: 4-13 Luke 6:38

   King Solomon asked the Lord for the spiritual gifts of discernment and
   wisdom. Because of this correct placement of priorities, spiritual
   before temporal, the Lord also gave him the temporal things which he
   did not ask for such as wealth, long life and glory. I should ask God
   for big things which are worthy of His greatness and goodness and equal
   to my rank as a child of God. The greatest I can ask for is to be made
   a saint and to find joy in bringing God's mercy and love to others in
   this short span of time that I am in this body and on this planet.

   Lord Jesus, will you make me a saint for your glory and my joy??

   226. Preparing For Prayer

   (What The Upright Desire Comes As A Present)

   Prepare for prayer by living virtuously. Without virtue, no one can
   attain a peaceful mind. Proper prayer can be offered only if one is
   free of worrying about business, of gossip, of anger, of love of money.
   Whatever we have been thinking about before we pray will come into our
   minds while we pray. So, before we pray we must become the kind of
   people we want to be while we are praying. What we do not want to
   disrupt our prayer, we must keep out of our lives while we are not
   praying. Growing in virtue is an important preparation for prayer.

   --Abba Isaac (Conference with John Cassian), Rules For Prayer

   Proverbs 10: 24-25

   What Abba Isaac says is true. When I try to meditate, the things of the
   world that I am attached to tend to destroy my peace of mind and my
   prayer. I must become the kind of person I want to be while I am
   praying through virtuous living and God=s Providence. After all, if I
   desire only God=s will, my desire will be fulfilled like a present from
   the Lord.

   In what ways must I change in order to obtain peace?

   227. We Pray To Know God, Not Give God Orders!

   (If It Is The Lord's Will I Shall Still Be Alive)

   a) Prayer begins with the proper mental preparation. we should not
   approach God "carelessly, sluggishly, and disdainful."

   b) Pray three times daily.

   c) Outline of Prayer:

   Praise

   Thanksgiving

   -for benefits others receive from God

   -for benefits we receive from God

   Confession

   -confession of sins

   -for healing and deliverance form the habits that bring us to sin

   -for forgiveness

   Petitions for great and heavenly things (not the fleeting trivialities
   of life)

   Doxology, praise to God through Christ in the Holy Spirit

   --St. Origen (paraphrase), On Prayer, Rules For Prayer

   James 4:13-17

   While I have been praying a similar outline of prayer every morning for
   the last twelve years, there are a couple of areas that I need to
   concentrate on more. These include thanking God for the graces that
   others have received and praying for the deliverance of habits of mind
   and body that lead me into cycles of guilt and depression.

   In what ways can I improve my method of prayer?

   228. Prayer Rule of St. Benedict

   (Lord, Teach Us To Pray...)

   a) Pray eight times per day: 2 AM, 5 AM, 6 AM, 9 AM, Noon, 3 Pm, 5 PM,
   7 PM

   b) The use of the psalms as a basis of prayer relieves us of the burden
   of setting an agenda for prayer. We will find that almost everything we
   would ever want to include in our prayer is to be found somewhere in
   the Psalter

   c) Prayer should be brief and pure unless the grace of God inspires us
   to pray longer.

   d) When the community prays together, it should always be brief.

   --St. Benedict (paraphrase), The Rule, Rules For Prayer

   Matthew 6:7-8

   Brief and often. That is a summary of the method of prayer of St.
   Benedict. When taken to its limits it becomes prayer without ceasing or
   practicing the presence of God. Even the Lord=s Prayer (the Our
   Father), brief as it is in the Gospel of Matthew, is even briefer in
   the Gospel of Luke. Ultimately, prayer becomes a meditation with no
   words.

   Do I use too many words in my prayers?

   229. Cross Training

   (May I Be Wise As A Fox And Innocent As A Dove)

   Greetings in God, my most excellent sir, and venerable son Gregory,
   from Origen. A natural readiness of comprehension, as you well know,
   may, if practice be added, somewhat to the contingent end, if I may so
   call it, of that which any one wishes to practice. Thus, your natural
   good parts might make of you a finished Roman lawyer or a Greek
   philosopher, so to speak, of one of the schools in high reputation. But
   I am anxious that you should devote all the strength of your natural
   good parts to Christianity for your end; and in order to this, I wish
   to ask you to extract from the philosophy of the Greeks what may serve
   as a course of study or a preparation for Christianity, and from
   geometry and from astronomy what will serve to explain the sacred
   Scriptures, in order that all that the sons of the philosophers are
   wont to say about geometry and music, grammar, rhetoric, and astronomy,
   as fellow -helpers to philosophy, we may say about philosophy itself,
   in relation to Christianity.

   --St. Origen, Letter to St. Gregory, CCEL

   Luke 16:8

   Jesus teaches that the children of the world are more astute in dealing
   with their own kind than the children of light. He also teaches that we
   need to learn to be as wise as foxes in dealing with them on spiritual
   matters. St. Origen advises St. Gregory to learn all that he can from
   philosophy and science and to formulate it to the need to teach
   Christianity to the educated Greeks. The implication is that truth is
   one and that the Book of the World is the main source of teaching.

   In what ways can I make use of new, worldly knowledge to further
   explain Christianity to those around me?

   230. A Case For Purgatory

   (I Will Come To Terms With My Opponent)

   All souls, therefore, are shut up within Hades, moreover, there are
   already experienced there punishments and consolations... In short,
   inasmuch as we understand "the prison" pointed out in the Gospel to be
   Hades, and as we interpret "the utmost farthing' to mean the very
   smallest offence which has to be recompensed there before the
   resurrection, no one will hesitate to believe that the soul undergoes
   in Hades some compensatory discipline, without prejudice to the full
   process of the resurrection, when the recompense will be administered
   through the flesh besides. This point the Paraclete has also pressed
   home on our attention in most frequent admonitions, whenever any of us
   has admitted the force of His words from a knowledge of His promised
   spiritual disclosures.

   --St. Tertullian, A Treatise on the Soul, Chapter 58, CCEL

   Matthew 5:25-26

   St. Tertullian indicates that he has received his interpretation of
   Jesus= parable from the Holy Spirit. It is evident that many other
   Church fathers have also received a similar interpretation which has
   then become Church dogma. A sign of the working of the Holy Spirit is
   mercy. The Lord allows the soul to continue to be purged after physical
   death. The prayers of the Communion of Saints also speeds up the
   purgation process. Praise God for His mercy and love!

   Do I seek to interpret Scripture in a merciful manner?

   231. A Father-Son Relationship

   (Father, Do Not Put Us To The Test)

   Let us, therefore, brethren beloved, pray as God our Teacher has taught
   us. It is a loving and friendly prayer to beseech God with His own
   word, to come up to His ear in the prayer of Christ. Let the Father
   acknowledge the words of His Son when we make our prayer, and let Him
   also who dwells within in our breast Himself dwell in our voice. And
   since we have Him as an Advocate with the Father for our sins, let us,
   when as sinners we petition on behalf of our sins, put forward the
   words of our Advocate. For since He says, that "whatever we shall ask
   the Father in His name, He will give us," how much more effectually do
   we obtain what we ask in Christ's name, if we ask for it in His own
   prayer!

   --St. Augustine, On the Lord's Prayer, CCEL

   Luke 11: 1-4

   Lord Jesus, do not subject me to the test. For I am weak and You are
   strong. I am limited and you are infinite. I am flesh and blood and You
   are Spirit. I am tired of mental sufferingB even if I need it to grow
   into Your Image. I am weary of the purification process, as necessary
   as it might be. I seek Your peace and heart-rest. Be not far from me.
   Teach me to submit to Your will quickly so as not to create unnecessary
   pain. Help me to learn my lessons quickly. Please, be merciful to me
   during the final test as I try to show mercy to those around me. Thank
   You for Your love. Amen.

   In what ways do I put my family members, co-workers, friends, etc. to
   the test?

   232. The Reality Of Evil Spirits

   (What Do You Want With Me Jesus?)

   What shall we say about magic? Say, to be sure, what almost everyone
   says of it--that it is an imposture. But it is not we Christians only
   whose notice this system of imposture does not escape. We, it is true,
   have discovered, these spirits of evil, to be sure, not by a complicity
   with them, but by a certain knowledge that is hostile to them; nor is
   it by any procedure that is attractive to them, but by a power which
   subjugates them that we handle their wretched system --that manifold
   pest of the mind of man, that artificer of all error, that destroyer of
   our salvation and our soul at one swoop....For, as we have already
   suggested, there is hardly a human being who is unattended by a demon;
   and it is well known to many, that premature and violent deaths, which
   men ascribe to accidents, are in fact brought about by demons. This
   imposture of the evil spirit lying concealed in the persons of the
   dead, we are able, if I mistake not, to prove by actual facts, when in
   cases of exorcism the evil spirit,... after trying to circumvent the
   bystanders, is vanquished by the pressure of divine grace, and sorely
   against his will confesses all the truth... In all cases of a true
   resurrection, when the power of God recalls souls to their bodies,
   either by the agency of prophets, or of Christ, or of apostles, a
   complete presumption is afforded us, by the solid, palpable, and
   ascertained reality of the revived body, that its true form must be
   such as to compel one's belief of the fraudulence of every incorporeal
   apparition of dead persons.

   --St. Tertullian, A Treatise On the Soul, Chapter 57, CCEL

   Mark 5:1-20

   Although modern psychiatry says much about mental illness and its
   manifestations, the story in Mark=s Gospel about the Gerasene demoniac
   clearly shows that there is a force of evil which is beyond the
   individual ego and will. I suspect that my ego, as diseased as it might
   become, could not be thrust into a herd of pigs who then rush to their
   deaths by drowning! Christianity has always taught that evil comes from
   the flesh, the world and the devil. While most evil can be attributed
   to the first two, not all of it can. It appears that the only one who
   benefits from a complete disbelief in evil spirits is Satan himself.
   While Jesus has conquered evil and His power is far beyond the power of
   evil, if I don=t believe in evil spirits, I will not claim the power
   needed for my protection and the protection of all beings.

   What are my beliefs about the power of evil and its causes?

   233. The Father's Will: Be Christ-Like

   (I Will Repent And Turn To God)

   Now that is the will of God which Christ both did and taught. Humility
   in conversation; steadfastness in faith; modesty on words; justice in
   deeds; mercifulness in works; discipline in morals; to be unable to do
   a wrong, and to be able to bear a wrong when done; to keep peace with
   the brethren; to love God with all one's heart; to love Him in that He
   is a Father; to fear Him in that He is God; to prefer nothing whatever
   to Christ, because He did not prefer anything to us; to adhere
   inseparably to His love; to stand by His cross bravely and faithfully;
   when there is any contest on behalf of His name and honor, to exhibit
   in discourse that constancy wherewith we make confession; in torture,
   that confidence wherewith we do battle; in death, that patience whereby
   we are crowned; -this is to desire to be fellow heirs with Christ; this
   is to do the commandment of God; this is to fulfil the will of the
   Father.

   --St. Augustine, On the Lord's Prayer, CCEL

   Acts 3: 11-26

   In a nutshell, God wants me to repent (be willing to change) and to
   give up my evil ways by becoming more Christ-like. To become more
   Christ-like I must become more humble, steadfast, modest, just,
   merciful, disciplined, long-suffering, peaceful and loving--preferring
   nothing to Christ since He preferred nothing to me!

   Am I willing to repent and have Christ remake me into His image? In
   what ways am I not yet ready to repent (change)?

   234. A Time For Evil?

   (There Is A Season For Everything)

   This reflection has befallen me at this time concerning the shaking
   that is to take place at this time, and the host that has assembled
   itself for the sword. The times were disposed beforehand by God. The
   times of peace are fulfilled in the days of the good and just; and the
   times of many evils are fulfilled in the days of the evil and
   transgressors...Good has come to the people of God, and blessedness
   awaits that man through whom the good came. And evil is stirred up as
   regards the host that is gathered together by means of the evil and
   arrogant one who glories; and woe also is there reserved for hi through
   whom the evil is stirred up. Do not, my beloved, reproach the evil
   person who has inflicted evil upon many; because the times were
   beforehand disposed and the time of their accomplishment has arrived.

   --Aphrahat, Church Father, The Demonstrations Of Aphrahat,CCEL

   Eccleastes 3:1-8

   There is a time for love and a time for hate, a time for war and a time
   for peace. Even though the book of Ecclesiastes is incomplete in its
   spiritual perception, there appears to be much truth in it if one
   examines everyday existence. The only problem with perception, whether
   it be personal, clannish, national, or religious, is that there are
   always two sides to the same coin. One mans freedom fighter is another
   mans terrorist. One mans evil empire is another mans holy nation. In
   the big scheme of things, I do not know what good will come from what I
   cal evil. The Jews in exile in Babylon saw profound evil. God saw the
   purifying of a people for its own good. I must trust the words of St.
   Paul: All things turn out for the good for those who love God.

   What in my world do I call evil and why?

   235. Attending To The Business Of Life

   (I Will Seek God's Will In All I Do)

   Accept the duties which come upon you quietly, and try to fulfil them
   methodically, one after another. If you attempt to do everything at
   once, or with confusion, you will only cumber yourself with your own
   exertions, and by dint of perplexing your mind you will probably by
   overwhelmed and accomplish nothing. In all your affairs lean solely on
   God's Providence, by means of which alone your plans can succeed.
   Meanwhile, on your part work on in quiet co-operation with Him, and
   then rest satisfied that if you have trusted entirely in Him you will
   always obtain such a measure of success as is most profitable for you,
   whether it seems so or not to your own individual judgement... When
   your ordinary work or business is not specially engrossing, let your
   heart be fixed more on God then on it, and if the work be such as to
   require your undivided attention, then pause from time to time and look
   to God..by looking up at the heavens rather than down upon the deeps
   ...So doing, God will work with you, in you, and for you, and your work
   will be blessed.

   --St. Francis de Sales, Introduction to the Devout Life, Chapter 10,
   CCEL

   Proverbs 3:5-6 Deuteronomy 10:12-13

   ATrust in the Lord. Put no faith in your own perception. Acknowledge
   Him and He will see that your paths are smooth.@ I love St. Francis de
   Sales! He always says what I need to hear and he says it so simply and
   gently. I must accept my duties quietly and fulfill them methodically.
   I must work in cooperation with the Lord by leaning on His Providence.
   When my work is dull or in short supply, then let my heart be fixed
   more on God than on it. If the work requires my attention, practice the
   presence of God as often as possible. Doing so, God will work in, for,
   and with me and my work will prosper to the extent that God wills it.

   How can I improve my attitude about work? How is God my supervisor? In
   what ways does God's work fill up the lacks and gaps in my job?

   236. Jesus: The Rock Of Our Faith

   (Jesus Is The Cornerstone Of My Faith)

   Hear then, my beloved, and open the inward ears of thy heart unto me,
   and the spiritual perceptions of thy mind to that which I say unto
   thee. Faith is compounded of many things, and by many kinds is it
   brought to perfection. For it is like a building that is built up of
   many pieces of workmanship and so its edifice rises to the top. And
   know, my beloved, that in the foundations of the building stones are
   laid, and so resting upon stones the whole edifice rises until it is
   perfected. Thus also the true Stone, our Lord Jesus Christ, is the
   foundation of all our faith. And on Him, on this Stone faith is based.
   And resting on faith all the structure rises until it is completed. For
   it is the foundation that is the beginning of all the building. For
   when anyone is brought nigh unto faith, it is laid for him upon the
   Stone, that is our Lord Jesus Christ. And his building cannot be shaken
   by the waves, nor can it be injured by the winds. By the stormy blasts
   it does not fall because its structure is reared upon the rock of the
   true Stone.

   --Aphrahat, Church Father, The Demonstrations Of Aphrahat, CCEL

   Luke 20: 17-18

   Jesus is the cornerstone of my faith. If this stone falls on me I will
   be crushed. If I fall on it, I will be broken. If I build my faith on
   my ego desires, the rock of Christ will crush it. If I start with
   Christ as the cornerstone of faith and then build a structure out of
   hot air and illusion, the structure will collapse and fall on the
   immovable rock of Christ. The implication is that my faith will be
   broken or crushed. It might feel like death as my ego and illusions are
   dashed to pieces, but I can still learn to build my foundation
   properly! Jesus doesn=t desire my death, He desires my happiness which
   comes from giving up my illusions and my ego and putting my faith on
   Jesus where it belongs.

   Are my ego and beliefs illusions preparing me for a smashing fall? What
   does a fall feel like (depression, despair, discouragement)?

   237. Candle Stick Or Bushel Basket?

   (Everything Will Come To Light)

   Ye are the light of the world. What view are we to take? That the
   expression "under a bushel measure" is so used that only the
   concealment of the candle is to be understood, as if He were saying, No
   one lights a candle anc conceals it? Or does the bushel measure also
   mean something, so that to place a candle under a bushel is this, to
   place the comforts of the body higher than the preaching of the truth,
   so that one does not preach the truth so long as he is afraid of
   suffering any annoyance in corporeal and temporal things?...Everyone,
   therefore, who obscures and covers up the light of good doctrine by
   means of temporal comforts, places his candle under a bushel measure.
   "But on a candlestick." Now it is placed on a candlestick by him who
   subordinates his body to the service of God, so that the preaching of
   the truth is the higher, and the serving of the body the lower; yet by
   means even of the service of the body the doctrine shines more
   conspicuously, inasmuch as it is insinuated into those who learn by
   means of bodily functions, i.e. by means of the voice and tongue, and
   other movements of the body in good works.

   --St. Augustine, On the Sermon On the Mount, CCEL

   Luke 8:16-18 John 8:12

   One way of letting my light shine definitely does not feel like
   strength but like weakness and shame. When I am in pain over something
   work-related, I need to express it to my supervisor and do what needs
   to be done to resolve the situation in a manner that doesn't blame
   others but takes responsibility for my own actions and mental health.
   By doing so, even if very discrete, a situation may change for the
   better for others as well as myself. Self-care is a legitimate way of
   letting my light shine and not hiding it under a bushel basket.

   In what ways can realistic self-care and responsibility for myself help
   influence my environment for the better?

   238. Owe Nothing To Anyone

   (Give To God What Is God's)

   Be ye subject to all royal power and dominion in things which are
   pleasing to God, as to the ministers of God, and the punishes of the
   ungodly. Render al the fear that is due to them, all offerings, all
   customs, all honor, gifts, and taxes. For this is God=s command, that
   you owe nothing to anyone but the pledge of love, which God has
   commanded by Christ.

   --BConstitutions of the Holy Apostles (3rd Cent), Book 4, CCEL

   Matthew 22: 15-22 Matthew 17:24-27

   Jesus paid, and encouraged others to pay, the taxes and other service
   due to civil and religious institutions. In the case of religious
   institutions, He believed that citizens of the Kingdom should be
   exempt; but to avoid being the downfall of others, He paid it. We
   should owe nothing but the pledge of love which was certainly the main
   concern of Jesus.

   Will the example of my behavior in any way hurt others? Do I fulfill my
   civic (taxes, voting, jury duty) and religious (time, talent, treasure)
   duties?

   239. Christian Duty Toward Orphans

   (The Lord Is Father To The Fatherless)

   When any Christian becomes an orphan...it is good that some one of the
   brethren who is without a child, should take the young man, and esteem
   him in the place of a son, and he that has a son about the same age,
   and that is marriageable, should marry the maid to him: for they which
   do so perform a great work, and become, fathers of the orphans, and
   shall receive the rewards of this charity from the Lord God. But if any
   one that walks in the way of man-pleasing is rich, and therefore is
   ashamed of orphans, the Father of orphans and Judge of widows will make
   provision for the orphans, but himself shall have such an heir as will
   spend what he has spared...

   --BConstitutions of the Holy Apostles, Book 4, CCEL

   Exodus 22: 21-23 Psalm 68: 6-7

   According to both Old and New Testaments, God has a special place near
   His heart for orphans and widows. While it may not be possible to adopt
   all orphans, Judeo-Christian morality requires that we do something to
   help. I have been a Big Brother several times, volunteered time to a
   protected home for children in transition and have befriended children
   whose parents were divorced. In all cases, it is a two-way street. I
   get back love, joy, an ability to learn how to play and healing from my
   own scares from youth.

   In what ways can I be a father, brother or friend to needy children in
   my community?

   240. The Allure Of Evil

   (I Will Live In A Godly Manner)

   Thou shall not be a wanderer and gadder abroad, rambling about the
   streets, without just cause, to spy out such as live wickedly. But by
   minding thy own trade and employment, endeavor to do what is acceptable
   to God. And keeping in mind the oracles of Christ, meditate in the same
   continually....Nay, although thou beest rich, and so dost not want a
   trade for thy maintenance, be not one that gads about, and walks abroad
   at random; but either go to some that are believers, and of the same
   religion, and confer and discourse with them about the lively oracles
   of Go.

   -Constitutions of the Holy Apostles, Book 1, CCEL

   1 Theselonians 4: 1-12

   AAspire to live a tranquil life, to mind your own affairs and to work
   with your own hands...that you may conduct yourselves properly towards
   outsiders.@ I must always remember that my example may be the main
   message from God that someone may receive today. In addition, I am
   definitely not above temptation to sin so why do I want to search out
   temptation?

   In what ways does my entertainment consist of being a voyeur to how the
   ungodly live? What movies, TV shows, books, and music entice me?

   241. A Visit By The Guardian Angel

   (God Commands The Angels To Guard Me)

   After I Had been praying at home, and had sat down on my couch, there
   entered a man of glorious aspect, dressed like a shepherd, with a white
   goat's skin, a wallet on his shoulders, and a rod in his hand, and
   saluted me. I returned his salutation. And straightway he sat down
   besides me, and said to me, "I have been sent by a most venerable angel
   to dwell with you the remaining days of your life." And I thought that
   he had come to tempt me, and I said to him, "Who are you? For I know
   him to whom I have been entrusted." He said to me, "Do you not know
   me?" "No," said I. "I", said he, "the shepherd to whom you have been
   entrusted." And while he yet spake, his figure was changed; and then I
   knew that it was he to whom I had been entrusted. And straightway I
   became confused, and fear took hold of me, and I was overpowered with
   deep sorrow that I had answered him so wickedly and foolishly. But he
   answered, and said to me, "Do not be confounded, but receive strength
   from the commandments which I am going to give you. For I have been
   sent...to show you again all the things which you saw before,
   especially those of them which are useful to you..." All these words
   did the shepherd, even the angel of repentance, command me to write.

   --Pastor of Hermas, 2ond century, Vision Five, CCEL

   Psalm 91:9-13 Psalm 34: 8-10

   I have not said the guardian angel prayer since I was a child but I
   really do believe that the grace of God protects me in ways that are
   otherwise difficult to explain. As a hiker and camper, there were times
   when I could have been seriously hurt if not for a felt force pushing
   me or turning me in such a way as to prevent an accident. I should
   spend more prayer time thanking God and His angel for their protection.

   In what mysterious ways have I felt the grace of God protecting me?

   242. Gender Issues In Ministering

   (I Will Be Chaste Before God)

   Our Lord Himself was constantly with His twelve disciples when He had
   come forth to the world. And not only so; but also, when He was sending
   them out, He sent them out two and two together, men with men; but
   women were not sent with them, and neither in the highway nor in the
   house did they associate with women or with maidens: and thus they
   pleased God in everything. Also when our Lord Jesus Christ Himself was
   talking with the woman of Samaria by the well alone, "His disciples
   came" and found Him talking with her, "and wondered that Jesus was
   talking with a woman." Is He not a rule, such as may not be set aside,
   an example, and a pattern to all the tribes of men? And not only so;
   but also, when our Lord was risen from the place of the dead, and Mary
   came to the place of sepulture, she ran and fell at the feet of our
   Lord and worshiped Him, and would have taken hold of Him. But He said
   to her: "Touch Me not; for I am not yet ascended to My Father." Is it
   not, then, matter for astonishment, that , while our Lord did not allow
   Mary, the blessed woman, to touch His feet, yet thou livest with them,
   and are waited on by women and maidens, and sleepest where they sleep,
   and women was thy feet for thee, and anoint thee? ...To Jesus Christ
   our Lord women ministered of their substance: but they did not live
   with Him; but chastely, and holily, and unblameably they behaved before
   the Lord, and finished their course, and received the crown in our Lord
   God Almighty.

   --St. Clement of Rome, Second Epistle, Chapter 15, CCEL

   1 Kings 11: 1-3

   King Solomon had 700 wives and 300 concubines-- and they turned his
   heart from the Lord!! Somehow this doesn=t sound surprising (I wonder
   when he had time to rule)! Like today, many women were attracted to
   powerful men, and the men, being too human, find the temptation
   irresistible. Jesus was fully human and thus experienced this
   temptation but never acted on it. For most of us though, the advice of
   St. Clement, though extreme, is sensible: Do not put yourself in
   temptations path.

   How do I manage my relationships with the opposite sex so as to live
   chastely?

   243. Tasting Reality

   (My God, Why Have You Forsaken Me?)

   "The Kingdom of God is within you," says the Lord. Turn, then, to God
   with all your heart. Forsake this wretched world and your soul shall
   find rest. Learn to despise external things, to devote yourself to
   those that are within, and you will see the kingdom of God come unto
   you, that kingdom which is peace and joy in the Holy Spirit, gifts not
   given to the impious.... If you do not know how to meditate on heavenly
   things, direct your thoughts to Christ's passion and willingly behold
   His sacred wounds. If you turn devoutly to the wounds and precious
   stigmata of Christ, you will find great comfort in suffering... A man
   who is a lover of Jesus and of truth, a truly interior man who is free
   from uncontrolled affections, can turn to God at will and rise above
   himself to enjoy spiritual peace. He who tastes life as it really is ,
   not as men say or think it is, is indeed wise with the wisdom of God
   rather than of men.

   --Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, CCEL

   Mark 15: 22-37

   I rarely think of the sufferings of Jesus as much as during Lent. It is
   sometimes hard to imagine God suffering and dying. But the Gospels show
   clearly the reality of the crucifixion. In addition, by one estimate
   325 people have received the stigmata of Jesus since the time of St.
   Francis of Assisi. These are miraculous appearances of the wounds of
   Christ on hands, feet and side with real blood oozing from them.

   Do I accept the reality that Jesus suffered and died for the love of
   me?

   244. Am I Greedy?

   (I Will Not Make Money A God)

   It is the Christian's privilege to be rich in material things, and poor
   in attachment to them, thereby having the use of riches in this world
   and the merit of poverty in the next... No one will ever own themselves
   to be avaricious--every one denies this contemptible vice--men excuse
   themselves on the plea of providing for their children, or plead the
   duty of prudent forethought:--they never have too much, there is always
   some good reason for accumulating more; and even the most avaricious of
   men not only do not own to being such, but sincerely believe that they
   are not; and because avarice is as a strong fever which is all the less
   felt as ti rages most fiercely.

   --St. Francis de Sales, Introduction to the Devout Life, CCEL

   1 Timothy 6:10 Isaiah 55: 1-2

   When I read about what St. Francis de Salle says about avarice, I
   wince. It definitely strikes me as true. It seems like no amount of
   money is too much either for current wants/needs or certainly for
   perceived future needs. It is not only money, however, that I am
   talking about. It seems that once I own something (micro-wave oven,
   telephone answering machine, VCR, etc.), I wonder how I ever managed to
   live without it! But the truth of the matter is that none of these
   things satisfy me or give me security. Isaiah asks me why I spend my
   money and energy on what fails to satisfy when all of the important
   things that do satisfy are provided by God for the asking.

   Has money/security become a god to me at the expense of the true God?

   245. Is It Possible To Become An Image Of Christ?

   (The Just Are Never Abandoned)

   The patient and humble endurance of the cross--whatever nature it may
   be--is the highest work we have to do. Oh, how far I am at 84 years of
   age from being an image of Jesus in his sacred life on earth.

   --St. Katharine Drexel, SOTD

   Psalm 37:25-26

   The words of St. Katharine make me ponder. A great saint in old age
   still feels incredibly far from being an image of Christ! And I, in my
   hubris and mid-life, sometimes feel that I am so Christ-like! A sign of
   spiritual growth in a saint is a lack of pride and the nearer one gets
   to Christ, the finer the imperfections that will be noticed.
   Ultimately, one can only approach being Christ-like in this life but
   never achieve it.

   How Christ-like do I think I am (on a scale of 1-10)? How Christ-like
   am I really? (Ask your best friend and your worst enemy.)

   246. Faith

   (Faith Is Assurance)

   It is not only among us, who are marked with the name of Christ, that
   the dignity of faith is great; all the business of the world, even of
   those outside the Church, is accomplished by faith. By faith, marriage
   laws join in union persons who were strangers to one another. By faith,
   agriculture is sustained; for a man does not endure the toil involved
   unleash believes he will reap a harvest. By faith, seafaring men,
   entrusting themselves to a tiny wooden craft, exchange the solid
   element of the land for unstable motion of the waves. Not only among us
   does this hold true but also, as I have said, among those outside the
   fold. For though they do not accept the Scriptures but advance certain
   doctrines of their own, yet even these they receive on faith.

   --St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesis V, SOTD

   Genesis 15:6 Hebrews 11:1

   I must be very careful about where I place my faith. There are cases
   where one who believed that a curse was placed on them actually died of
   fright to fulfill the curse! Where I place my faith and how/what I
   think probably have more of an influence on my life than any exterior
   event.

   Where do I place my faith? Is it really worthy of my faith?

   247. The Inner Teacher

   (I Will Be With Them In Distress)

   If I glance at a book, no matter how good and moving it is, my heart at
   once contracts and I read without understanding or, if I understand, I
   cannot meditate on it. Whin I'm in this state, the Bible and The
   Imitation of Christ come to my rescue. In them I find hidden manna, a
   pure and substantial food. But above all, the Gospels help me in my
   prayers. They are always showing me new ways of looking at things and I
   am always finding hidden and mysterious meanings in them. I understand,
   and by experience, I know that the Kingdom of God is within us. Jesus
   has no need of books or doctors of the Church to guide souls. He, the
   Doctor of doctors, can teach without words. I have never heard him
   speak, but I know that he is within me. He guides and instructs me
   every moment of the day. Just when I need it, a new light shines on my
   problems. This happens not so much during my hours of prayer as when
   I'm busy with my daily work.

   --St. Therese of Lisieux, The Autobiography of a Soul, LF

   Psalm 91:14-16 Matthew 10:17-20

   Jesus teaches me not to worry about what to say when giving testimony
   to Him because the Spirit of the Father will give me the words to say
   at that moment. St. Therese says: "He guides and instructs me every
   moment of the day. Just when I need it, a new light shines on my
   problems." I must always remember that where the soul is there is God,
   right at the center of my being. I need only stop the chatter and
   clatter of life and listen to the soundless voice for inspiration and
   guidance.

   How do I feel about the fact that God is at the center of every soul?

   248. Attaining God

   (I Will Love God With My Whole Heart, Soul, Strength)

   The price of your faithfulness is your God. God is what you will get,
   the One who is preparing himself as the reward for true worshipers.
   Just cast your minds, dearly beloved, over the whole of creation,
   heaven, earth, sea, everything in heaven, everything on earth,
   everything in the sea,. How beautiful they are, how wonderful, how
   harmoniously arranged! Do these things move you at all? Of course they
   do. Why? Because they are beautiful. So what about the One who made
   them? You would be absolutely stunned if you could see the beauty of
   the angels. So what about the Creator of the angels? That One is the
   reward of your faith and your fidelity...Do not expect from the Lord an
   earthly reward for our good lives. Let us set our sights on the things
   that are promised to us. Let us place our hearts where they can=t go
   rotten with worldly anxieties. These things which so preoccupy people
   all pass away, these things all fly off, nothing but a mist is human
   life on earth.

   --St. Augustine, Sermons, LF

   Matthew 22:34-40

   The price of my faithfulness is God. He is what I will get. But to get
   Him I must, as Jesus says, love Him with all my heart, soul, mind and
   strength. So much so that the things of this life have no attachment to
   me. The only attachment I must have is to the love of God which I must
   give freely to those around me.

   Is God the most important thing in my life? What things in my life am I
   too attached to?

   249. Spiritual Disputes- Part 1

   (I Will Oppose Error)

   As for Origen, whose writings he has translated into our language, I
   have neither formerly known, nor now do I seek to know either who he
   was or what expression he may have given to his thought. But as to the
   feeling left by this mater on my own mind I should to be glad to speak
   to your holiness for a moment. The impression which I have received is
   this,--and it has been brought out clearly by the reading of parts of
   Origen's works bu the people of our City, and by the sort of mist of
   blindness which it threw over them,-that his object was to disintegrate
   our faith, which is that of the Apostles, and has been confirmed by the
   traditions of the fathers, by leading us into tortuous paths.

   --Anastasius, Letter to John (Bishop of Jerusalem), CCEL

   Galatians 2: 11-14

   One Church father accuses another of despicable motives! It even
   happened among the Apostles when St. Paul accused St. Peter in public
   of hypocrisy. As a follower of Christ, I may very well disagree with
   another's point of view on a matter of faith. However, I must be very
   careful if I am to judge someone's motives. If I judge someone's
   motives it will almost certainly be a negative judgement.

   What are my motives for judging the sincerity of the beliefs of others?

   250. Spiritual Disputes- Part 2

   (I Will Not Distort Scripture)

   I am next informed that some stir has been made on the question of the
   nature of the soul. Whether complaints on a matter of this kind ought
   to be entertained instead of being put aside, you must yourself decide.
   If, however, you desire to know my opinion on the subject, I will state
   it frankly. I have read a great many writers on this question, and I
   find that they express divers opinions...For myself, I declare in the
   presence of God that, after reading each of these opinions, I am up to
   the present moment unable to hold any of them as certain and absolute;
   the determination of the truth in this question I leave to God and to
   any to whom it shall please Him to reveal it.

   --Rufinus, Letter to Anastasius, Bishop of Rome, CCEL

   2 Peter 3:14-16

   There are many places in Scripture where different readings or
   interpretations of a passage are plausible. St. Peter says as much when
   he indicates that some passages of the writings of St. Paul are
   difficult to understand. In many cases how one interprets a passage is
   not critical to the faith although in some cases it is (for example,
   how do you interpret Jesus' commission to Peter?). It is probably best
   to use an interpretation endorsed by the Church through the early
   Church fathers. This will hopefully be the most living interpretation.
   Otherwise, I may choose an interpretation that is more self-serving
   than accurate.

   Do I accept the teachings of the Church in places where Scripture is
   unclear?
     __________________________________________________________________

   251. A Saints Dying Words

   (The Lord Will Deliver Me)

   The last thing I ask of you--and I ask it in the name of our Lord Jesus
   Christ--is that you love him alone, that you trust implicitly in Him
   and that you encourage one another continually to suffer for the love
   of Him.

   --St. Mary Magdalene de Pazzi, dying words to fellow sisters, SOTD

   2 Timothy 3:10-12

   "...all who want to live religiously in Christ Jesus will be
   persecuted." I wonder about this adage of St. Paul. My suffering
   generally has to do with my ego and not outside persecution.

   Since I don't suffer for Christ (not that I am aware of) , does this
   mean that I don't live religiously and have compromised my faith to
   please others and live in comfort?

   252. A Priestly People

   (We Are A Kingdom Of Priests)

   O Priest! You are not yourself because you are God's. You are not of
   yourself because you are the servant and minister of Christ. You are
   not your own because you are the spouse of the Church. You are not
   yourself because you are the mediator between God and man. You are not
   from yourself because you are nothing. What then are you? Nothing and
   everything O Priest! Take care lest what was said to Christ on the
   cross be said to you: He saved others, himself he cannot save!

   --St. Norbert,SOTD

   In a sense, all Christians are called to be priests though not
   necessarily as a profession. If I truly want to do God's will, I am not
   my own. My time is not my own. Nothing I own is my own. My talents are
   gifts and can be taken away if misused. I am supposed to be God's
   hands, mind and heart to the world around me.

   Do I take the fact that I am a part of a kingdom of priests seriously?

   253. Praying For The Dead

   (God Gives Gifts Through The Prayers Of Many)

   Lay me not with sweet spices, for this honor avails me not. Nor yet use
   incense and perfumes, for the honor befits me not. Burn yet the incense
   in the holy place. As for me, escort me only with your prayers. Give ye
   your incense to God and over me send up hymns. Instead of perfume and
   spice, be mindful of me in your intercessions.

   --St. Ephrem, The Testament of St. Ephrem, SOTD

   2 Corinthians 1: 11-12

   In double blind controlled experiments, prayer for others has been
   shown to promote healing and health. If the love of God expressed in
   prayer can bring healing and even raise the dead, I am sure that the
   love of God can heal souls outside of time in eternity.

   Do I pray for my loved ones who are no longer in the flesh?

   254. When To Act

   (This Is The Way....)

   The saints are like the stars. In His providence Christ conceals them
   in a hidden place that they may not shine before others when they might
   wish to do so. Yet they are always ready to exchange the quiet of
   contemplation for the works of mercy as soon as they perceive in their
   hearts the invitation of Christ.

   --St. Anthony of Padua, Sermons, SOTD

   Isaiah 30:20-21

   While I've never heard God say: "This is the way, keep to it", I know
   intuitively at times what He wants me to do. Suddenly, doors open,
   motivation arises and talents are ready to be used in a specific way.
   Working on this book is one such case. One week earlier, I never would
   have thought of doing this. The next week, I'm enthusiastically writing
   with ease. Praise God!

   In what ways have I experienced God's call?

   255. Trusting God

   (God Is Faithful)

   I am not my own; I have given myself to Jesus. He must be my only love.
   The state of helpless poverty that may befall me if I do not marry does
   not frighten me. All I need is a little food and a few pieces of
   clothing. With the work of my hands I shall always earn what is
   necessary and what is left over I'll give to my relatives and to the
   poor. If I should become sick and unable to work, then I shall be like
   the Lord on the Cross. He will have mercy on me and help me, I am sure.

   --Blessed Kateri Tekakwitha, SOTD

   2 Timothy 2:13

   When I read Kateri's words I am struck by her simple faith and trust in
   the Lord's providence. It was a tme when there was no social security
   and it was possible that she really could have died from hunger and
   poverty. She puts me to shame! With all of my social safety nets,
   retirement accounts and savings, I still wonder if I will have enough!
   May the good Lord forgive me for my lack of trust and help me to
   change.

   Do I trust God with the simple trust of a child towards his father?

   256. Three Callings

   (I Will Listen To God's Words)

   To make clear therefore the main differences between these three kinds
   of callings, the first is from God, the second comes through man, the
   third is from compulsion. And a calling is from God whenever some
   inspiration has taken possession of our heart, and even while we are
   asleep stirs in us a desire for eternal life and salvation, and bids us
   to follow God and cleave to His commandments with life-giving
   contrition.....The second kind of calling is that which we said took
   place through man, viz, when we are stirred up by the example of some
   of the saints, and their advice, and thus inflamed with the desire of
   salvation.... But the third kind of calling is that which comes from
   compulsion when we have been involved in the riches and pleasures of
   this life and temptations suddenly come upon us and either threaten us
   with peril of death, or smite us with the loss and confiscation of our
   goods, or strike us down with the death of those dear to us, and thus
   at length even against our will we are driven to turn to God whom we
   scorned to follow in the days of our wealth.

   --Abbot Paphnutus, The Conferences of John Cassian, CCEL

   Jeremiah 6:19 Psalm 50: 18-21

   While I'm sure that I've had callings of the first two types, the
   third--compulsion--probably has had the greatest impact on my spiritual
   life. Whether the cause is divorce, alcoholism, blindness, financial
   problems, work-related problems, or mental health issues; these
   problems have kept me humble and mindful of God. As I've gotten older,
   I hope that I've acquired enough wisdom (and a dislike for needless
   pain and suffering) to be alert to the first two types of callings!

   Do I still need to be "beat with a stick" to hear the calling of God?
   In what ways do I learn of God's call from other people?

   257. The Goal

   (I Have A Clear Goal In Mind)

   And our profession too has its own goal and end, for which we undergo
   all sorts of toils not early without weariness but actually with
   delight, on account of which the want of food in fasting is no trial to
   us, the weariness of our vigils becomes a delight; reading and constant
   meditation on the Scriptures does not pall upon us, and further
   incessant toil, and self-denial, and the privation of all things, and
   the horrors also of this vast desert have no terrors for us. And
   doubtless for this it was that you yourselves despised the love of
   kinsfolk, and scorned your fatherland, and the delights of this world,
   and passed through so many countries, in order that you might come to
   us, plain and simple folk as we are, living in this wretched state in
   the desert.

   --Abbot Moses, The Conferences of John Cassian, CCEL

   1 Corinthians 9: 24-27

   St. Paul and Abbot Moses talk about the same thing. They have a clear
   goal in mind--their salvation--and they subordinate everything else in
   their life to attain that prize. They subdue their bodies and train
   their minds with a zeal that is almost unheard of in a hedonistic
   culture such as the one we live in. It would be extremely difficult to
   be half as focused as the desert saints and apostles.

   What goals are more important than my salvation? In what ways can I
   train my body and mind to reach my goal?

   258. Three Renunciations

   (I Am Rooted In Jesus)

   We must now speak of the renunciations, of which tradition and the
   authority of Holy Scripture show us three, and which every one of us
   ought with the utmost zeal to make complete. The first is that by which
   as far as the body is concerned we make light of all the wealth and
   goods of this world; the second, that by which we reject the fashions
   and vices and former affections of soul and flesh; the third, that by
   which we detach our soul from all present and visible things, and
   contemplate only things to come, and set our heart on what is
   invisible.

   --Abbot Paphnutius, The Conference of John Cassian, CCEL

   Colosians 2: 6-8

   If Jesus is my Lord and Savior, it is obvious that I must train my self
   to live in Him and to root myself in Him. I must give up my attachment
   for outward things. Secondly, I must give up my ego and its inner
   attachments. Finally, I must set my heart on the things above, where
   Christ is seated at the right hand of the Father. It is obvious that to
   do all of this requires a consecrated life set apart from the world as
   the desert fathers were. To live a layman's life in a spiritual manner,
   I must beware of all or nothing thinking regarding these renunciations.
   I must take steps, even if they are small, to reach these goals.

   In what ways can I simplify my life and make it less materialistic? In
   what ways can I live a life of virtue and wrestle with my own inner
   demons? In what small ways can I let my thinking transcend the world?

   259. Mental Dryness In Prayer

   (My God, Why Have You Forsaken Me?)

   A threefold account of this mental dryness of which you speak has been
   given by the Elders. For it comes either from carelessness on our part,
   or from the assaults of the devil, or from the permission and allowance
   of the Lord. From carelessness on our part, when through our own
   faults, coldness has come upon us, and we have behaved carelessly and
   hastily, and owing to slothful idleness have fed on bad thoughts, and
   so make the ground of our heart bring forth thorns....From the assaults
   of the devil when...we are actually intent on good desires, our enemy
   with crafty subtly makes his way into our heart, and without our
   knowledge and against our will we are drawn away from the best
   intentions....But for God's permission and allowance there is a twofold
   reason. First, that being for a short time forsaken by the Lord, and
   observing with all humility the weakness of our own heart, we may not
   be puffed up on account of our previous purity of heart, granted to us
   by His visitation: and by proving that we are forsaken by Him we cannot
   possibly recover our former state ...by any...efforts on our own...But
   a second reason for this allowance, is to prove our perseverance and
   steadfastness of mind, and real desires, and to show in us, with what
   purpose of heart, or earnestness in prayer we seek for the return of
   the Holy Spirit...

   --Abbot Daniel, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Matthew 27: 45-46

   While most of my metal dryness undoubtedly comes from my own
   carelessness in pruning my mental garden, some comes from the other
   sources.

   If Jesus Himself had His moment of feeling forsaken by the Father while
   hanging on the Cross to show the importance of perseverance, why should
   the same testing not happen to me, a claimed follower of Christ?

   260. The Eight Faults

   (I Have No Reason To Boast)

   There are eight principal faults which attack mankind, viz.,
   first...gluttony, secondly fornication, thirdly...the love of money,
   fourthly anger, fifthly dejection, sixthly..listlessness or low spirts,
   seventhly..boasting and eighthly pride. Of these faults there are two
   classes. For they are either natural to us as gluttony, or arise
   outside of nature as covetousness. But their manner of acting on us is
   fourfold. For some cannot be consummated without an act on the part of
   the flesh, as gluttony and fornication, while some can be completed
   without any bodily act, as pride and vainglory. Some find the reasons
   for their being excited outside us, as covetousness and anger; others
   are aroused by internal feelings, as listlessness and dejection.

   --Abbot Serapion, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Ephesians 2: 8-10

   I am surprised to see feeling states that accompany dejection and
   listlessness on the list of principal faults. I suspect that dejection
   accompanies hopelessness and listlessness accompanies depression. These
   may be seen as faults because, at their roots, they are the result of a
   lack of faith and trust in God. I must remember that I am God's work of
   art, created for the good works He designated to make up my life.

   If I have faith in God, how can I feel hopeless and depressed?

   261. The Grace Of God

   (Grace Was From Before Time Began)

   ...God's grace and mercy always work in us what is good, and that when
   it forsakes us, the efforts of the worker are useless, and that however
   earnestly a man may strive, he cannot regain his former condition
   without His help... And this grace on the other hand sometimes does not
   refuse to visit with that holy inspiration of which you spoke, and with
   an abundance of spiritual thoughts, even the careless and indifferent;
   but inspires the unworthy, arouses the slumberers, and enlightens those
   who are blinded by ignorance; and mercifully reproves us and chastens
   us, shedding itself abroad in our hearts, that thus we may be stirred
   by the compunction which He excites , and impelled to rise from the
   sleep of sloth. Lastly, we are often filled by His sudden visitation
   with sweet odors, beyond the power of human composition--so that the
   soul is ravished with these delights, and caught up, as it were, into
   an ecstasy of spirit, and becomes oblivious of the fact that it is
   still in the flesh.

   --Abbot Daniel, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   2 Timothy 1: 7-10

   God's grace and mercy always work out in me what is good, but its
   effect on me is dependent on my attitude toward legitimate suffering
   and the acceptance of correction. For example, when I got divorced, I
   studied myself and what went wrong through the annulment process and
   learned to change and grow through the acceptance of the associated
   pain and suffering. I did not just run to a new relationship to kill
   the pain or blame everything on my wife. I came out on the other side a
   stronger, more healed and loving person. If I didn't work on my issues
   and accept the legitimate suffering, I would have grown hard,
   insensitive to pain and never have learned from the experience. God's
   grace would have been ineffective at that time.

   What is my attitude toward suffering?

   262. How To Vanquish The Devil

   (The Devil Will Leave Me)

   For it was right that He who was in possession of the perfect image and
   likeness of God should be Himself tempted through those passions,
   through which Adam also was tempted while he still retained the image
   of God unbroken, that is, through gluttony, vainglory, pride; and not
   through those in which he was by his own fault entangled and involved
   after the transgression of the commandment, when the image and likeness
   of God was marred. For it was gluttony through which he took the fruit
   of the forbidden tree, vainglory through which it was said "Your eyes
   shall be open", and pride through which it was said "Ye shall be as
   gods, knowing good from evil". With these three sins then we read that
   the Lord our Savior was also tempted, with gluttony when the devil said
   to Him: "Command these stones that they be made bread:" with vainglory:
   "If Thou art the Son of God cast Thyself down:" with pride, when he
   showed him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them and
   said: "All this will I give to Thee if Thou wilt fall down and worship
   me:" in order that He might by His example teach us how we ought to
   vanquish the tempter when we are attacked on the same lines of
   temptation as He was.

   --Abbot Serapion, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Matthew 4: 1-11

   Jesus was tempted in all ways as me yet never gave in to them. He
   conquered them with the word of God as revealed in the Scriptures. The
   other principal faults could be conquered in the same way as gluttony,
   vainglory and pride. For example, anger can be countered by using
   Ephesians 4: 26 (I will not sin by letting anger get control over me)
   and greed can be countered with 1 Timothy 6: 6-10 (The love of money is
   the root of all evil).

   Am I aware enough of my flaws to be able to take steps to counter them?

   263. The Good, The Bad, And The Indifferent

   (He Who Loses His Life For Christ Will Save It)

   Altogether there are three kinds of things in the world, viz., good,
   bad, and indifferent. And so we ought to know what is properly good,
   and what is bad, and what is indifferent, that our faith may be
   supported by true knowledge and stand firm in all temptations. We must
   then believe that in things which are merely human there is no real
   good except virtue of soul alone, which leads us with unfeigned faith
   to things divine, and makes us constantly adhere to that unchanging
   good. And on the other hand we ought not to call anything bad, except
   sin alone, which separates us from the good God, and unites us to the
   evil devil. But those things are indifferent which can be appropriated
   to either side according to the fancy or wish of their owner, as for
   instance riches, power, honor, bodily strength, good health, beauty,
   life itself, and death, poverty bodily infirmities, injuries, and other
   things of the same sort, which can contribute either to good or to evil
   as the character and fancy of their owner directs.

   --Abbott Theodore, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Luke 9: 23-26

   Jesus makes the same point as Abbot Theodore when He talks about the
   ambivalence of worldly existence and what is important. I may gain the
   whole world, achieve everything my ego wants, acquire everything my
   heart desires and I would still be unhappy and empty. Everything but
   virtue and sin has a similar ambivalence and can be used for my
   spiritual good or ill depending on my attitude and the power of my ego.

   Who is my master and Lord--Jesus or my ego? Am I sure of this?

   264. The Longevity of Sanctity

   (The Youngest Will Die At A Hundred)

   In the choir of saints who shine like brilliant stars in the night of
   this world, we have seen the holy Paphnutius, like some great luminary,
   shining with the brightness of knowledge. For he was a presbyter of our
   company, I mean of those whose abode was in the desert of Scete, where
   he lived to extreme old age, without ever moving from his cell, of
   which he had taken possession when still young, and which was five
   miles from the church, even to nearer districts; nor was he when worn
   out with ;years hindered by the distance from going to Church...But not
   wanting to return from thence empty handed he would lay on his
   shoulders a bucket of water to last him all the week, and carry it back
   to his cell, and even when he was past ninety would not suffer it to be
   fetched by the labor of younger men.

   --St. John Cassain, The Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Isaiah 65: 20

   Unless they were martyred, it seems that the way of life of the desert
   fathers promotes long life and vigor. There is no Alzheimer disease or
   obesity here! It is evidently true what Jesus says about serving Him:
   If I give all for the Kingdom of God, all other important things will
   be given to me as well.

   Are my priorities in the proper order? How can I improve them?

   265. Evils Or Afflictions?

   (God Is Training Me For Sonship)

   Sometimes Holy Scripture is wont by an improper use of terms to use
   "evils" for "affliction", not that these are properly and in their
   nature evils, but because they are imagined to be evils by those on
   whom they are brought for their good. For when divine judgement is
   reasoning with men it must speak with the language and feelings of men.
   For when a doctor for the sake of health with good reason either cuts
   or cauterizes those who are suffering from the inflamation of ulcers,
   it is considered an evil by those who have to bear it.

   --Abbott Theodore, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Hebrews 12: 5-13

   There are many episodes in my life which seemed evil at the time but
   proved to be a blessing in retrospect. There was an extremely painful
   period at work when I became obsessed with someone who worked for me.
   The relationship never got off of the ground and I had to constantly
   fight my feelings so as not to do anything inappropriate. The stress of
   trying to control my obsession was like a fire in me by burning away
   much of my interior self and throwing me into a depression. When I
   finally emerged from this, I found that I had changed. I lost my
   co-dependency and people-pleasing behaviors and became ready for a
   real, unobssessive relationship a few years latter. I probably would
   not have changed with anything less painful. The curse became a
   blessing!

   Can I see the painful episodes of my life as challenges to grow and
   change?

   266. Friendship

   (How Good It Is To Live As Brothers)

   Among all these then there is one kind of love which is indissoluble,
   where the union is owing not to the favor of a recommendation, or some
   great kindness or gifts, or the reason of some bargain, or the
   necessities of nature, but simply to similarity of virtue. This, I say,
   is what is broken by no chances , no interval of time or space can
   sever or destroy, and what even death itself cannot part. This is true
   and unbroken love which grows by means of the double perfection and
   goodness of friends, and which when once its bonds have been entered,
   no differences of liking and no disturbing opposition of wishes can
   sever.

   --Abbot Joseph, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Psalm 133

   I have had many very good friendships over the years that have vanished
   over time due to moving to new localities, changes in priorities,
   changes in family situations, or the necessity to grow in opposite and
   conflicting directions. None was built on the decision to help each
   other to live a virtuous life. Today, however, I do have a friend that
   does meet this criteria. He is more like a brother that I would have
   chosen than a friend. We encourage each other in our spiritual growth
   which is a great joy. How good it is to live as brothers, for there the
   Lord bestows His blessings...

   Am I blessed with the gift of a friend with whom I can share my
   spiritual journey? Do I really want one?

   267. Practical Perfection

   (I Will Be Perfected In Christ)

   But this practical perfection depends on a double system, for its first
   method is to know the nature of all faults and the manner of their
   cure. Its second, to discover the order of the virtues, and form our
   mind by their perfection so that it may be obedient to them, not as if
   it were forced and subject to some fierce sway, but as if it delighted
   in its natural good, and throve upon it, and mounted by that steep and
   narrow way with real pleasure. For in what way will one, who has
   neither succeeded in understanding the nature of his own faults, nor
   tried to eradicate them, be able to gain an understanding of virtues,
   which is the second stage of practical training, or the mysteries of
   spiritual and heavenly things, which exist in the higher stage of
   theoretical knowledge?

   --Abbott Nesteros, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Colosians 1: 28-29

   Practical perfection consists of pruning the bad (faults) from my
   spiritual garden while cultivating the good (virtues). This is not
   easy! Learning about my faults is painful because I need to accept the
   truth about myself and my ego. Striving to eradicate faults is painful
   because they seem to be so much a part of my being that reliving them
   can feel like death. Cultivating virtue is painful because it requires
   that I change which is very difficult. It is obvious that I cannot do
   any of this perfectly on my own even though it requires my cooperation
   to advance at all. I will, according to St. Paul, become perfected in
   Christ. It requires the presence of Jesus in my life and in the lives
   of those around me to accomplish this.

   In what ways can I begin to tend my spiritual garden?

   268. Controlling Faults

   (Perfect Love Drives Out Fear)

   There are...three things which enable men to control their faults;
   viz., either the fear of hell or of laws even now imposed,; or the hope
   and desire of the kingdom of heaven; or a liking for goodness itself
   and the love of virtue....If them any one is aiming at perfection, from
   that first stage of fear which we rightly termed servile he should be
   advancing a steep mount to the higher path of hope--which is compared
   not to a slave but to a hireling, because it looks for the payment of
   its recompense...., yet it cannot attain to that love of a son who,
   trusting in his father's kindness and liberality, has no doubt that all
   that the father has is his...

   --Abbot Chaeremon, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   1 John 4: 17-19

   I would like to say that my spiritual journey is fully motivated by
   love alone but it wouldn't be true. I have much less fear of punishment
   than when I was a youth. In my 20's and 30's I was motivated less by
   fear and more by the good things I could hope to get from God and by
   pleasing others. In my late 40's I started to become motivated by love
   (without fully giving up the others), wanting mostly the peace and joy
   that is not of this world. I pray that as I become a semi-centarian I
   will increasingly think of myself as a son of God and less as a slave
   or hireling.

   What is my relationship to God: slave, hireling or son?

   269. The Foundations Of Friendship

   (Jesus Calls Me Friend)

   The first foundation then, of true friendship consists in contempt for
   worldly substance and scorn for all things that we possess....The
   second is for each man so to prune his own wishes that he may
   not...prefer his own opinions to those of his neighbor. The third is
   for him to recognize that everything, even what he deems...necessary,
   must come after the blessing of love and peace. The fourth for him to
   realize that he should never be angry for any reason good or bad. The
   fifth for him to try to cure any wrath which a brother may have
   conceived against him however unreasonably, in the same way that he
   would cure his own knowing that the vexation of another is equally bad
   for him , as if he himself were stirred against another....The
   last...that he should realize daily that he is to pass away from this
   world; as the realization of this not only permits no vexation to
   linger in the heart, but also represses all the motion of lusts and
   sins of all kinds.

   --Abbot Joseph, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   John 15: 12-17

   The crux of Abbot Joseph's discussion on friendship is that I should
   have no priority greater than the attainment of the blessing of love
   and peace. If my goal is to have a mind-set of love and peace, I must
   value that more than worldly goods and my own opinion. In short,
   everything my ego holds dear as a requirement of happiness must take a
   backseat. I must also, as an act of love, value the needs of others at
   least as much as I value my own (love my neighbor as myself). Jesus
   calls us His friends if we imitate His example.

   How can I learn to value others as much as I value myself?

   270. Vocation

   (I Will Work Out My Salvation)

   Wherefore it is good and profitable for each one to endeavor with all
   his might and main to attain perfection in the work that has been
   begun, according to the line which he has chosen as the grace which he
   has received; and while he praises and admires the virtues of others,
   not to swerve from his own line which he has once for all chosen... For
   no members can claim the offices of other members, because the eyes
   cannot perform the duties of the hands, nor the nostrils of the ears.

   --Abbot Nesteros, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Phillipians 2: 12-14

   God gives me the intention and the power to work out my salvation. He
   also has given me gifts in bud, which must be cultivated to full bloom
   through practice. I do not know what my talents are without exploration
   and practice. I may not receive the power and intention from God to do
   this before I do my part by taking the first steps toward exploring my
   talents. Once I have discovered what I should be doing, I must do it
   with all of my strength and beware of trying to do the work that
   someone else was called to do!

   Do I have talents in bud that need to be cultivated? What steps will I
   take to do my part in exploring these gifts?

   271. Fallen Nature vs. Individual Fault

   (God asked: Where Are You?)

   The time spent here, and the dwelling in solitude, and meditation,
   through which you think that we ought to have attained perfection of
   the inner man, has only done this for us, viz., teach us that which we
   are unable to be, without making us what we are trying to
   be...Wherefore we being inflamed by daily exercise of this kind, and
   yet not seeing that we gain from them amu strength and stability in
   heart are overcome and in despair driven to this opinion; viz., to
   believe that it is from no fault of our own but from a fault of our
   nature that these wanderings of mind are found in mankind.

   --Abbot Serenus, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Genesis 3: 6-9

   As Adam and Eve hid from God in the garden of Eden, I suspect that my
   wandering mid is a similar way of hiding from the voice of God within.
   Unless I am trained from a very early age to stop the mind chatter, it
   becomes a habit and a part of my nature. But, as in Eden, God continues
   to call me: Where are you?

   Am I going to continue to hide from the One who loves me"

   272. Imitation vs. Reality

   (I Will Not Lie To The Holy Spirit)

   There are three kinds of monks in Egypt, of which two are admirable,
   the third is a poor sort of thing and by all means to be avoided. The
   first are those...who live together in a congregation and are governed
   by the direction of a single Elder....The second are those who were
   first trained (as noted above) and then being made perfect in practical
   life chose the recesses of he desert....And while the Christian
   religion was rejoicing in these two orders of monks though this system
   had begun by degrees to deteriorate, there arose afterwards that
   disgusting and unfaithful kind of monks, or rather that baleful plant
   revived and sprang up again which when it first shot up in the persons
   of Ananas and Sapphira in the early Church was cut off by the severity
   of the Apostle Peter....These sprang from the number of those...who
   wanted to imitate rather than truly to aim at ...perfection, urged
   thereto by rivalry or by the praises of those who preferred the
   complete poverty of Christ.

   --Abbot Piamun, Conferences Of John Cassain, CCEL

   Acts 5: 1-11

   The story of Ananas and Sapphira is one of the most disturbing stories
   in the New Testament. The heart of the issue is trying to get the honor
   of the Christian community for virtuous conduct when it is not
   deserved--in effect, lying to the Holy Spirit. Evidently, many were
   accepting the title of "monk" with out really living the life of a
   monk. While I cannot judge others in this regard, I must judge myself
   for my motives and actions are almost never done purely for the love of
   God.

   In what ways do I "talk the talk" without "walking the walk"?

   273. A Variety Of Unclean Spirits

   (The Devil Is On The Prowl)

   It is clearly proved that there exist in unclean spirits as many
   desires as there are in men. For some of them, which are commonly
   called Plani, are shown to be so seductive and sportive that, when they
   have taken continual possession of certain places or roads, they
   delight themselves not indeed with tormenting the passers by whom they
   can deceive, but, contenting themselves merely with laughing at them
   and mocking them, try to tire them out rather than to injure them:
   while some spend the night merely by harmlessly taking possession of
   men, though others are such slaves to fury and ferocity with hurting
   the bodies of those, of whom they have taken possession, by tearing
   them in a dreadful manner, but actually are eager to rush upon those
   who are passing by at a distance, and to attack them with most savage
   slaughter...Others we find affect the hearts of those whom they have
   seized with empty pride...Others we find are not only keen for lies,
   but also inspire men with blasphemies...

   --Abbot Serenus, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   1 Peter 5: 8-11 1 Kings 22: 18-21

   According to Abbot Serenus, it may be difficult to separate what is
   demon-inspired from what is simply unholy human since, evidently, there
   are as many desires in demons as there are in human beings. In any
   case, according to St. Peter, while it may be true that the devil is on
   the prowl looking for someone to devour, it is also true that if I
   stand up to him, full of faith in Christ, Jesus will deliver me from
   his jaws.

   Am I willing to call upon the name of Jesus in faith to help me fight
   my spiritual battles regardless of their origin?

   274. Acts Expressing Repentance

   (I Am Saved By Grace)

   If you plead that owing to weakness of the flesh you cannot get rid of
   your sins by fasting...then atone for them by profuse almsgiving. If
   you have nothing that you can give to the needy, at least you can purge
   them away by amendment of life. But if you cannot secure perfection in
   goodness by the eradication of all your faults , you can show a pious
   anxiety for the good and salvation of another. But if you complain that
   you are not equal to this service, you can cover your sins by the
   affection of love. And if in this also some sluggishness of mind makes
   you weak, at least you should submissively with a feeling of humility
   entreat for remedies for your wounds by prayer s and intercession of
   the saints...

   --Abbot Pinufius, Conferences Of John Cassain, CCEL

   Ephesians 2: 4-7

   Even while I was dead through sin, Jesus' grace through love has
   brought me to life again. It is a free gift. I did nothing to deserve
   it. What remains for me to do is to express gratitude to Jesus by
   performing the activities mentioned by the Abbot.

   In what concrete ways do I express my gratitude to God?

   275. Trust: Faith In Action

   (I Come To You In The Name Of The Lord)

   Strive to live content in the midst of those things that cause you
   discontent...Free your mind from all that troubles you, God will take
   care of things. You will be unable to make haste in this

   (Choice)without, so to speak, grieving the heart of God, because he
   sees that you do not honor him sufficiently with holy trust. Trust in
   him, I beg you, and you will have the fulfillment of what your heart
   desires.

   -St. Vincent de Paul, Letters, SOTD

   1 Samuel 17: 40=53

   The story of David and Goliath is one of the great examples of trust in
   God's saving action. His trust in God was so complete that God allowed
   the very first stone that David slung to kill the giant. Because of his
   trust in God, God gave him the desire of his heart which was the
   glorifying of God's name through the victory of His people.

   Do I trust God with my life? (Be honest!)

   276. Our Mother The Church

   (The Spirit Binds Us Together In Peace)

   You cannot have God for your father if you do not have the Church for
   your mother...God is one and Christ is one, and the Church is one; one
   is the faith, and one is the people cemented together by harmony into
   the strong unity of a body...if we are the heirs of Christ, let us
   abide in the peace of Christ; if we are the sons of God, let us be
   lovers of peace.

   --BSt. Cyprian, The Unity of the Catholic Church, SOTD

   Ephesians 4: 1-6

   Jesus always prayed that His followers may be one in the mystical Body
   of Christ, which is the Church. Faith is ultimately not a private
   matter but communal as was God's relationship with Israel. Whether or
   not I belong to a specific Church, I am still part of the Body of
   Christ.

   What part of the Body of Christ am I?

   277. Walk In Mary's Footsteps

   (Lord, Let It Be Done In Accordance With Your Word)

   In dangers, in doubts, in difficulties, think of Mary, call upon Mary.
   Let not her name depart from your lips, never suffer it to leave your
   heart. And that you may more surely obtain the assistance of her
   prayer, neglect not to walk in her footsteps. With her for guide, you
   shall never go astray; while invoking her, you shall never lose heart;
   so long as she is in your mind, you are safe from deception; while she
   holds your hand, you cannot fall; under her protection you have nothing
   to fear; if she walks before you, you shall not grow weary; if she
   shows you favor, you shall reach the goal.

   --BSt. Bernard, SOTD

   Luke 1: 38-41

   Walk in Mary's footsteps for it is the path of faith. Mary offered
   herself as an empty vessel to the Lord and He filled her with His love
   and His Son. Mary is blessed because she believed what the angel told
   her all the way the Cross.

   Am I willing to walk the path of faith blazed by Mary?

   278. When Looking Within May Not Be Good

   (Hardships Develop Perseverance)

   She was full of faith, yet all her life had been tormented by thoughts
   against it. While apparently enjoying the peace and easiness of mind of
   souls who have reached a high state of virtue, she suffered such
   interior trials that she often told me her mind was so filled with all
   sorts of temptations and abominations that she had to strive not to
   look within herself...But for all that suffering her face never lost
   its serenity, nor did she once relax in the fidelity God asked of her.
   And so I regard her as one of the holiest souls I have ever met on this
   earth.

   --BSt. Vincent de Paul referring to St. Jane Frances de Chantal,
   Butler=s Lives of the Saints, SOTD

   Romans 5:1-5

   It is very surprising to find a saint that strives not to look within
   herself when self-examination is a foundation of spiritual growth. I
   assume that she is referring to looking within as an obsession to
   search for and punish herself for any little imperfection that she
   might find which is a form of scrupulosity. All one can do is to be
   willing and ready to remove the defect. God must do the work. God may
   even allow one to keep the defect in order to keep them humble and to
   develop their character.

   Has looking within become an obsession with me?

   279. Our Vocation

   (One Thing Only Is Needed)

   Our wish, our object, our chief preoccupation must be to form Jesus in
   ourselves, to make his spirit, his devotion, his affections, his
   desires and his disposition live and reign there. All our religious
   exercises should be directed to this end. It is the work which God has
   given us to do unceasingly.

   --BSt. John Eudes, The Life and Reign of Jesus In Christians Souls,
   SOTD

   Luke 10: 38-42

   My work is to believe in the one whom God sent, Jesus Christ. It is the
   one needed thing and it will not be taken from me though I can only
   give it away through a lack of care.

   What is the one needed thing in my life?

   280. Public Prayer

   (Give Thanks To The Lord For He Is Good)

   Private prayer is like straw scattered here and there: If you set it on
   fire it makes a lot of little flames. But gather these straws into a
   bundle and light them, and you get a mighty fire, rising like a column
   into the sky, public prayer is like that.

   --BJohn Vianney, SOTD

   Psalm 118

   If we are truly one in the Body of Christ, our prayer is a communion
   and Jesus is among us as He promised. In one sense, I suspect that all
   prayer is public prayer since time and space have no meaning in
   eternity which is the true nature of things.

   Do I pray at least daily whether it is in public or not?

   281. The Use Of Knowledge

   (Knowledge Inflates, Love Builds)

   There are some who desire knowledge early for its own sake; and that is
   shameful curiosity. And there are others who desire to know, in order
   that they themselves may be known; and that is vanity, disgraceful too.
   Others again, desire knowledge in order to acquire money or preferment
   by it; that too is a discreditable quest. But there are also some who
   desire knowledge, that they may build up the souls of others with it
   and that is charity. Others, again, desire it that they may themselves
   be built u thereby; and that is prudence. Of all these types, only the
   last two put knowledge to right use.

   --St. Bernard, Sermon on the Canticle of Canticles, SOTD

   1 Corinthians 8:1-3

   I enjoy learning about science, culture, religion and many other
   things. I know, however, that knowledge, like things, will not make me
   holy or happy. Only love will do that. If I had the choice of being
   unlearned but loving or learned and unloving, I would probably choose
   the latter even though I should choose the former..

   In what ways can I use my knowledge to build up others?

   282. Self-Renunciation

   (Whoever Believes In Jesus Will Never Die)

   Perhaps it is after all not so difficult for a man to part with his
   possessions, but it is certainly most difficult for him to part with
   himself. To renounce what one has is a minor thing; but to renounce
   what one is, that is asking a lot.

   --St. Gregory the Great, Homilies On The Gospels, SOTD

   John 11: 25-27

   Renouncing what I own is very difficult for me even though I live a
   relatively simple life and I live below my means. Renouncing what I am,
   giving up my ego with its judgements and self-centeredness, is much
   more difficult and can only be done with the grace of God. I must put
   on Jesus and be transformed into a Christ-like person by believing in
   and loving Him. If I give up myself, I will live. If I don't give up
   myself, I will never have lived in the truest sense.

   How badly do I want to live a real life?

   283. The Courage Of A Saint

   (God Is With You Wherever You Go)

   Courage my sons. Don't you see that we are leaving on a mission? They
   pay our fare in the bargain. What a piece of good luck! The thing to do
   now is to pray well in order to win as many souls as possible. Let us,
   then, tell the Blessed Virgin that we are content, and that she can do
   with us anything she wishes.

   --Maximilian Mary Kobe, SOTD

   Joshua 1: 8-9

   It is hard to imagine St Maximilian Colby going off to the
   concentration camps of Nazi Germany in such high spirits! He was a man
   of incredible faith. He must have truly taken to heart the advice of
   Joshua: Be firm and steadfast. ADo not fear or be dismayed for the
   Lord, your God, is with you wherever you go.@

   What steps can I take to cultivate a faith like St. Maximilian?

   284. The Desire Of Christ

   (Jesus Came For Sinners, Not The Upright)

   Christ, like a skillful physician, understands the weakness of men. He
   loves to teach the ignorant and the erring he turns again to his own
   true way. He is easily found by those who live by faith; and to those
   of pure eye and holy heart, who desire to knock at the door, he opens
   immediately. He does not disdain the barbarian, nor does he set the
   eunuch aside as no man. He does not hate the female on account of the
   woman's act of disobedience in the beginning, nor does he reject the
   male on account of the man's transgression. But he seeks all, and
   desires to save all, wishing to make all the children of God, and
   calling all the saints unto one perfect man.

   --Hippolytus, Treatise on Christ and Antichrist, SOTD

   Mark 2: 15-17

   Like a skillful physician, Jesus desires to save all of humanity from
   the disease of sin and ego. We need only to humbly recognize our
   boundedness and receive His healing touch. If I refuse to recognize my
   illness, He will still call me to come to Him for healing. He will not
   force Himself on me and, like any good physician, He will do no harm.

   Why do I refuse to be healed?

   285. Dealing With Temptation

   (I Will Run From Temptation)

   In the remotest part of the wild and stony desert, burnt up with the
   heat of the scorching sun so that it frightens even the monks that
   inhabit it, I seemed to myself to be in the midst of the delights and
   crowds of Rome. In this exile and prison to which for the fear of hell
   I had voluntarily condemned myself, I many times imagined myself
   witnessing the dancing of the Roman maidens as if I had been in the
   midst of them: in my cold body and in my parched-up flesh, which seemed
   dead before its death, passion was able to live. Alone with this enemy,
   I threw myself in spirit at the feet of Jesus, watering them with my
   tears, and I tamed my flesh by fasting whole weeks. I am not ashamed to
   disclose my temptations, but I grieve that I am not now what I then
   was.

   --St. Jerome, Letter to St. Eustochium, SOTD

   Genesis 39: 6-12

   St. Jerome and Moses handled temptation in different ways. St. Jerome
   wrestled with his temptations face to face and learned to tame himself.
   Moses, when confronted with the temptation of the wife of Pharaoh, ran
   away. Both responses were adequate for the given situation. Jerome
   could not run away from himself and Moses didn't think it wise to sit
   around and argue ethics with a seductress.

   In what ways do I deal with temptations?

   286. Abstaining From Lawful Things

   (I Will Seek My Neighbors Advantage)

   ..It is not so praiseworthy for us to abstain from forbidden as from
   lawful things; and not to use these last out of reverence for Him, Who
   has permitted us to use them because of our weakness. And so if even
   those who, faithfully offering tithes of their fruits , are obedient to
   the more ancient precepts of the Lord, cannot yet climb the heights of
   the gospel, you can see very clearly how far short of it those fall who
   do not even do this. For how can these men be partakers of the grace of
   the gospel who disregard fulfilment even of the lighter commands of the
   law...Christ...does not constrain anyone, by the compulsion of a
   command, to those lofty heights of goodness, but stimulates them by the
   power of free will, and urges them on by wise counsels and the desire
   of perfection...

   --Abbot Theonas, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   1 Corinthians 10: 23-24

   As Jesus teaches in the Sermon on the Mount (Matthew 5-7), love goes
   beyond the law. While the law is like a finite equation (eye=tooth),
   love is like an unbounded equation that approaches infinity. (love
   &gt;= Infinity = God). While the law teaches love and justice as finite
   things that can have numerical values (should I forgive seven times?),
   Jesus teaches that we are to love as God loves: infinitely, universally
   and perfectly. We are to love others as much as God loves us.

   How can I grow beyond my limited concepts of love?

   287. The Testimony Of Conscience

   (I Will Develop A Clean Mind And Conscience)

   ...The full and perfect description of penitence is, never again to
   yield to those sins for which we do penance, or for which our
   conscience is pricked. But the proof of satisfaction and pardon is for
   us to have expelled the love of them from our hearts....Wherefore the
   truest test of penitence and witness of pardon is found in our own
   conscience, which even before the day of judgement and of knowledge,
   while we are still in the flesh, discloses our acquittal from guilt,
   and reveals the end of satisfaction and the grace of forgiveness. And
   what has been said may be more significantly expressed, then only
   should we believe that the stains of past sins are forgiven us, when
   the desires for present delights as well as the passions have been
   expelled from our heart.

   --Abbott Pinufius, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Titus 1: 15-16 Hebrews 13:18

   While a well trained conscience is a great God-given warning signal
   that indicates that we are in spiritually dangerous territory, a
   corrupted conscience is either too sensitive or not sensitive enough.
   As a child, I suffered from scrupulosity. I constantly felt guilty and
   was constantly (several times per week) going to confession. It affects
   me to this day in the form of self-criticism. The other extreme is a
   conscience that has been so maltrained or ignored that nothing brings
   on the warning signals, not even murder.

   What is the condition of my conscience?

   288. Feeding A Vice

   (I Will Look To The Lord In His Strength)

   Those then who are unable and ignorant how to struggle against the
   promptings of their own fancies, when they are harassed in their cell,
   by accidie attacking their bosom more violently than usual, if they
   relax their strict rule and allow themselves the liberty of going out
   oftener, will arouse a worse plague against themselves by means of this
   which they fancy is a remedy: just as men fancy that they can check the
   violence of an inward fever by a drought of the coldest water, though
   it is a fact that by it its fire is inflamed rather than quenched, as a
   far worse attack follows after the momentary alleviation.

   --Abbott Abraham, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   1 Chronicles 16: 11-12

   Trying to purge an interior temptation with an exterior cure is about
   as productive as trying to fill an interior void with material tidbits
   or trying to fill an emotional pain with alcohol. It may work for a
   short while but it will come back again. The reason is that the
   attempted cure has little or nothing to do with the perceived problem.
   This is the likely cause of much addictive behavior. An interior
   problem needs to be wrestled with interiorly but it probably cannot be
   conquered alone. One must look to the Lord and His strength.

   In what ways do I try to resolve spiritual problems with physical cures
   (or vice versa)?

   289. Grace vs Law

   (Grace And Truth Come Through Christ)

   ...It lies today in our own power whether we choose to live under the
   grace of the gospel or under the terrors of the law: for each man must
   incline to one side or the other in accordance with the character of
   his actions, for either the grace of Christ welcomes those who go
   beyond the law, or else the law keeps its hold over the weaker ones as
   those who are its debtors and within its clutches. For one who is
   guilty as regards the precepts of the law will never be able to attain
   to the perfection of the gospel, even though he idly boasts that he is
   a Christian and freed by the Lord's grace: for we must not only regard
   as still under the law the man who refuses to fulfill what the law
   enjoins, but the man as well who is satisfied with the mere observance
   of what the law commands, and who never brings forth fruits worthy of
   his vocation and the grace of Christ, where it is not said: "Thou shalt
   offer to the Lord thy God thy tithes and first fruits," but : "Go and
   sell all that thou hast and give to the poor, and come follow me."

   --Abbot Theonas, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   John 1: 16-17

   Lord Jesus, I must confess that I often have a hard time meeting the
   demands of the law, much less the demands of love. I seem to be able to
   transcend my limited self only occasionally and only with Your grace. I
   ask, Lord, that You work with my best intentions and desires and enable
   them to produce fruit for Your Kingdom even if I am not aware of them.

   Do I remember times when I've transcended myself with God's grace?

   290. Different Strokes For Different Folks

   (Everything Is Lawful, But Not Everything Is Beneficial)

   Sometimes we see bad precedents taken from good things. For if a man
   ventures to do the same thing as another, but not with the same mind
   and purpose, or not with equal goodness, he will immediately fall into
   the snares of deception and death through the things from which others
   gain the fruit of eternal life.....Wherefore it is right for each one
   of us first to consider carefully the measure of his powers and in
   accordance with its limits, to choose what system he pleases, because
   though all are good, yet all things cannot be fit for all men.

   --Abbott Abraham, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   1 Corinthians 6: 12

   I rarely wish I were in someone else shoes anymore. I've learned that
   everyone has their own personal crosses to bear even if they are well
   hidden. These crosses are tailor-made for them. They are also given
   specific gifts made especially for them. I would not want their crosses
   anymore than they would want mine. I may admire their gifts and try to
   cultivate some of them if possible, but I should mostly cultivate what
   I've been given.

   Do I cultivate what I've been given or do I wish I had the gifts of
   others?

   291. Against Suicide

   (Thou Shall Not Kill)

   You have suggested the case of an impious judge giving to two athletes
   of piety the alternatives of sacrificing to demons, or flinging
   themselves into the sea. You describe the one as choosing the latter
   and plunging without hesitation into the deep, while the other,
   refusing both, shows quite as much abhorrence of the worship of idols
   as his companion, but declines to commit himself to the waves, and
   waits for this fate to be violently forced upon him. You have suggested
   these circumstances, and you ask which of these two took the better
   course. I think that you will agree with me that the latter was the
   most praiseworthy. No one ought to withdraw himself from life unbidden,
   but should await either a natural or a violent death.

   --Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, Letter to Irenaeus, CCEL

   Deuteronomy 21: 1-9

   Lord, may I learn a proper respect for all life including my own. I am
   to love others as I love myself but do my actions prove proper
   self-care? Teach me not to abuse myself with chemicals, junk food,
   entertainment that kills the soul, or anything else that denies that my
   body is a temple of the Holy Spirit. Teach me to nurture myself with
   love and discipline. And then, Lord, allow me the joy of giving back to
   all of your creation. Amen.

   In what small ways do I kill myself?

   292. Tempering Grief

   (Christ Has Been Raised From The Dead)

   Had I heard of the death of your dignity's most honorable husband I
   should have written long ago, and now my object in writing is not to
   lull your great sorrow to sleep by consolatory words. They are
   unnecessary. They who have learnt the wisdom of philosophers and
   consider what this life is, find reason strong enough to meet and break
   grief's rising surge. And even while you are remembering your long
   companionship, reason recognizes the divine decrees, and to meet the
   forces of the tears of sorrow marshals at once the course of nature,
   the law of God, and the hope of the resurrection. Knowing this as I do,
   there is no necessity to use many words. I only beseech you to avail
   yourself of good sense in the hour of need. Think of the death of him
   who is gone as no more than a long journey, and wait for the promise of
   our God and Savior. For He who promised the resurrection cannot lie,
   and is the fount of truth.

   --Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, Letter to Theonilla, CCEL

   1 Corinthians 15: 12-28

   I hate to admit it but my reaction to death has generally been either
   numbness or depression. Neither response reflects the Christian faith
   which is absolute confidence in Jesus= promise of a resurrection.

   What are my reactions to death?

   293. Obeying Superiors of the Faith

   (A Bishop Is God's Steward)

   Study, therefore, to be established in the doctrines of the Lord and
   the apostles, that so all things, whatsoever ye do, may prosper both in
   the flesh and spirit, in faith and love; in the Son, and in the Father,
   and in the Spirit; in the beginning and in the end; with your most
   admirable bishop, and the well compacted spiritual crown of your
   presbytery, and the deacons who are according to God. Be ye subject to
   the bishop, and to one another, as Jesus Christ to the Father,
   according to the flesh;, and the apostles to Christ, and to the Father,
   and to the Spirit; that so there may be a union both fleshly and
   spiritual.

   --Ignatius, Epistle to the Magnesians, CCEL

   Titus 1: 5-9 Matthew 23:1-3

   Among other qualities, the New Testament indicates that the character
   of Church elders should be irreproachable and impeccable. They must be
   held in good repute by outsiders so as never to fall into disrepute.
   They must hold to the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience.
   They are to be examined and admitted only if there is nothing against
   them. While one should not expect perfection from flesh and blood, if
   an elder falls far short of these standards, I may still need to obey
   him but not follow his example (see Matthew 13).

   Do I have a proper respect for Church authority?

   294. Salvation History

   (God Will Write His Law In My Heart)

   But why the Gospel was not preached in ancient times to all men and to
   all nations, as it is now, will appear from the following
   considerations. The life of the ancients was not of such a kind as to
   permit them to receive the all-wise and all-virtuous teaching of
   Christ. For immediately in the beginning, after his original life of
   blessedness, the first man despised the command of God, and fell into
   this mortal and perishable state, and exchanged his former divinely
   inspired luxury for this curse-laden earth. His descendants having
   filled our earth, showed themselves much worse, with the exception of
   one here and there, and entered upon a certain brutal and insupportable
   mode of life....Then when the excess of wickedness had overwhelmed
   nearly all the race, like a deep fit of drunkenness, beclouding and
   darkening the minds of men, the first-born and first-created wisdom of
   God, the pre-existent Word himself, induced by his exceeding love for
   man, appeared to his servants, now in the form of angels, and again to
   one and another of those ancients who enjoyed the favor of God, in his
   own person as the saving power of God, not otherwise, however, than in
   the shape of man, because it was impossible to appear in any other way.

   -Eusebius, Book 1, CCEL

   Jeremiah 31: 31-34 Genesis 19: 1-2

   The Old Testament contains hints of its own fulfillment scattered
   throughout, especially in the prophets. My favorite is the brief
   description of the new covenant in Jeremiah. It indicates that the new
   covenant will be eternal, it will be written on our hearts, it will not
   have to be taught to anyone, and it will involve the forgiveness of
   sins.

   What are my favorite passages in the Old Testament that point to the
   New Testament?

   295. Christ-Types

   (I Bore Your Name, O Lord)

   Moses was the first to make known the name of Christ as a name
   especially august and glorious. When he delivered types and symbols of
   heavenly things, and mysterious images, in accordance with the oracle
   which said to him, "Look, that thou make all things according to the
   pattern which was shown the in the mount," he consecrated a man high
   priest of God, in so far as that was possible, and him he called
   Christ. And thus to this dignity of the high priesthood, which in his
   opinion surpassed the most honorable position among men, he attached
   for the sake of honor and glory the name of Christ....(Moses')
   successor, therefore, who had not hitherto borne the name Jesus, but
   had been called by another name, Auses, which had been given him by his
   parents, he now called Jesus, bestowing the name upon him as a gift of
   honor, far greater than any kingly diadem...Thus Moses bestowed the
   name of our Savior, Jesus Christ, as a mark of the highest honor, upon
   two men who in his time surpassed all the rest of the people in virtue
   and glory, namely, upon the high priest and upon his own successor in
   the government.

   --Eusebius, Book 1, CCEL

   Jeremiah 15: 10-21

   Just as there are summaries of the New Testament in the Old Testament,
   there are many Christ-types in the Old Testament including Melkezedeck,
   Elijah, Elisha, Moses, and Abraham to name a few. My favorite is the
   prophet Jeremiah. When I read the confessions of Jeremiah scattered
   throughout the book, I can hear the voice of Jesus, the Suffering
   Servant of Isaiah, talking to his Father with great intimacy.

   Who are my favorite characters from the Old Testament? Do they remind
   me of Jesus?

   296. Christian In Deed

   (Without Faith It Is Impossible To Please God)

   But although it is clear that we are new and that this new name of
   Christians has really but recently been known among all nations,
   nevertheless our life and our conduct, with our doctrines of religion,
   have not been lately invented by us, but from the first creation of
   man, so to speak, have been established by the natural understanding of
   divinely favored men of old. That this is so we shall show in the
   following way. That the Hebrew nation is not new, but is universally
   honored on account of its antiquity, is known to all. The books and
   writings of this people contain accounts of ancient men, rare indeed
   and few in number, but nevertheless distinguished for piety and
   righteousness and every other virtue. Of these, some excellent men
   lived before the flood, others of the sons and descendants of Noah
   lived after it, among them Abraham, whom the Hebrews celebrate as their
   own founder and forefather. If any one should assert that all those who
   have enjoyed the testimony of righteousness, from Abraham himself back
   to the first man, were Christians in fact if not in name, he would not
   go beyond the truth.

   --St. Jerome, Lives of Illustrious Men, CCEL

   Hebrews 11: 4-12

   If righteous, pre-Christian Jews can be considered Christian in deed if
   not in name, why not righteous pre-Christian non-Jews and
   post-Christian non-Christians? If righteous, non-Christian persons of
   faith do not feel called to Christianity, can this be held against
   them? If the gifts that these persons have is God-given, and they know
   that, give thanks for them and use them for God=s glory, will God
   condemn them as unworthy?

   Do I believe that just calling myself a Christian will save me?

   297. Disease

   (I Will Pray To God For Healing)

   ...It disturbs some that the power of this Disease attacks our people
   equally with the heathers, as if the Christian believed for this
   purpose, that he might have the enjoyment of the world and this life
   free from the contact of ills, and not as one who undergoes all adverse
   things here and is reserved for future joy. It disturbs some that this
   mortality is common to us with others, and yet what is there in this
   world which is not common to us with others, so long as this flesh of
   ours still remains, according to the law of our first birth, common to
   us with them? ....Moreover, if the Christian know and keep fast under
   what condition and what law he has believed, he will be aware that he
   must suffer more than others in the world, since he must struggle more
   with the attacks of the devil.

   --St. Cyprian, Treatise VIL: On the Mortality, CCEL

   Sirrah 38: 1-15

   Given the sea of bacteria that we live in, what amazes me most is not
   the number of people who get sick but that so many stay well and never
   contract some strange and deadly disease. The human immune system is
   truly a miracle that happens so often that we loose sight of what a
   blessing it is. When the immune system occasionally fails, the amazing
   blessing of the medical profession is another blessing waiting to
   happen by utilizing the God-given creativity of healing.

   Do I recognize what a miracle my immune system and the other bodily
   systems are? Do I give thanks to God for these miracles?

   298. The Opportunities Of Illness

   (I Will Weep With Those Who Weep)

   ...Beloved brethren,...what a great thing is it, how pertinent, how
   necessary, that pestilence and plague which seems horrible and deadly,
   searches out the righteousness of each one, and examines the minds of
   the human race, to see whether they who are in health tend the sick;
   whether relations affectionately love their kindred; whether masters
   pity their languishing servants; whether physicians do not forsake the
   beseeching patients; whether the fierce suppress their violence;
   whether the rapacious can quench the ever insatiable ardor of their
   raging avarice even by the fear of death; whether the haughty bend
   their neck; whether the wicked soften their boldness; whether, when
   their dear ones perish, the rich, even then bestow anything; and give,
   when they are to die without heirs.

   --St. Cyprian, Treatise VII: On the Mortality, CCEL

   Romans 12: 14-21

   Illness helps create the give-and-take system of mutual love. Illness
   is humbling and requires that I rely more on others (family, doctors,
   friends) at these times. It gives others an opportunity to develop
   their abilities to nurture, care and love.

   Do I accept the nurturing love of others when I am sick? How about
   other times? Do I bestow nurturing love on those who are ill?

   299. The Meeting Of Two Hermits

   (Unless I Die, I Will Not Live)

   ...The blessed Paul had already lived on earth the life of heaven for a
   hundred and thirteen years, and Antony at the age of ninety was
   dwelling in another place of solitude..., when the thought occurred to
   the latter, that no monk more perfect than himself had settled in the
   desert. However, in the stillness of the night it was revealed to him
   that there was farther in the desert a much better man than he, and
   that he ought to go and visit him. So then at break of day the
   venerable old man, supporting and guiding his weak limbs with a staff
   started to go.......Thus with smiles, Paul gave him access, and, the
   door being opened, they threw themselves into each other's arms,
   greeted one another by name, and joined in thanksgiving to God....The
   blessed Paul spoke to Antony: "I knew long sense, brother, that you
   were dwelling in those parts: long ago God promised you to me for a
   fellow-servant; but the time of my falling asleep now draws nigh; I
   have always longed to be dissolved and to be with Christ; my course is
   finished, and there remains for me a crown of righteousness. Therefore
   you have been sent by the Lord to lay my poor body in the ground, yea
   to return earth to earth."

   --St. Jerome, The Life of Paulus, the First Hermit, CCEL

   1 Corinthians 15: 36-45

   Before these two old saints met they were aware of each other even
   though many miles apart, through the spiritual gift of intuition. This
   gift was revealed to them through the silence of nights of meditation.
   It is likely that they also had other spiritual gifts that were not
   recorded. As they strove to become more Christ-like, they became more
   like Christ and were enabled to do the works that Jesus did.

   Do I sense that I have any spiritual gifts that go beyond the normal
   senses?

   300. Beware Of Luxury

   (The Lord Hates Pride)

   I may be permitted at the end of this little treatise to ask those who
   do not know the extent of their possessions, who adorn their homes with
   marble, who string house to house and field to field, what did this old
   man in his nakedness ever lack? Your drinking vessels are of precious
   stones; he satisfied his thirst with the hollow of his hand. Your
   tunics are of wrought gold; he had not the raiment of the meanest of
   your slaves. But on the other hand, poor though he was , Paradise is
   open to him; you with all your gold will be received into Gehenna. He
   though naked yet kept the robe of Christ; you , clad in your silks,
   have lost the vesture of Christ. Paul lies covered with worthless dust,
   but will rise again to glory; over you are raised costly tombs, but
   both you and your wealth are doomed to the burning. Have a care, I pray
   you, at least have a care for the riches you love. Why are even the
   grave-clothes of your dead made of gold? Why does not your vaunting
   cease even amid mourning and tears? Cannot the carcases of rich men
   decay except in silk?

   --St. Jerome, The Life of Paulus, the First Hermit, CCEL

   Amos 6: 1-8

   AWhat is your end goal?@, the minister asked, Aand is that goal worthy
   of Him who lives in you?@ If I seek a Acomfortable@ retirement as my
   goal, is it worth it? If my goal is to do whatever my ego dictates, is
   it worth it? The desert monks spent a lifetime cultivating their lives
   and their relationship with God, striving to do His will in all things
   and to be controlled by nothing but God. Although they died owning
   nothing ,they died with the peace and assurance that they lived the
   right way and were going home to the Kingdom of God. My end goal,
   especially after retirement (God willing), is to use my time, talent
   and treasure for God=s glory and my joy. May I learn to make them one.

   What is my end goal? Is it worthy of He who lives in me?
     __________________________________________________________________

   301. Flirting

   (I Will Preserve Discretion)

   Such foolish attachments between man and woman without any matrimonial
   intentions as are called amourettes,--mere abortions, or rather
   phantoms of friendship, --must not, idle and empty as they are, profane
   the name of friendship or love. Yet such frivolous, contemptible
   attractions often snare the hearts of both men and women, and although
   they may end in downright sin, there is no such intention on the part
   of their victims, who consciously do but yield to foolish trifling and
   toying. Some such have no object beyond the actual indulgence of a
   passing inclination; others are excited by vanity, which takes pleasure
   in captivating hearts; some are stimulated by a combination of both
   these motives. But all such friendships are evil, hollow and vain....

   --St. Francis de Salle, Introduction to the Devout Life, CCEL

   Proverbs 5:1-14

   Flirting is a form of temptation and is not harmless. It can cause
   jealousy and hurt in a marriage. It is a learned behavior. Children
   watch their parents or older siblings and pick up on this manipulative
   kind of behavior.

   Would I like my children to learn how to flirt? Would it bother me if
   my spouse was flirtatious?

   302. Understanding and Faith

   (Faith Has Overcome The World)

   Exhortation of the mind to the contemplation of God. It casts aside
   cares, and excludes all thoughts save that of God, that it may seek
   Him. Man was created to see God. Man by sin lost the blessedness for
   which he was made, and found the misery for which he was not made. He
   did not keep this good when he could keep it easily. Without God it is
   ill with us. Our labors and attempts are in vain without God. Man
   cannot seek God, unless God himself teaches him; nor find him, unless
   he reveals himself. God created man in his image, that he might be
   mindful of him, think of him, and love him. The believer does not seek
   to understand, that he may believe, but he believes that he may
   understand: for unless he believed he would not understand.

   --St. Anselm, Homo, CCEL

   1 John 5:1-11

   Faith is the window that opens my eyes to the spiritual world. Without
   faith, I can no more perceive the Kingdom of God than I can perceive
   radio waves without a radio. If I interpret my faith through the eyes
   of the world, I am disillusioned and depressed. If I interpret the
   world through the eyes of faith, I can see how far man has fallen and
   thank God for sending His Son to bring healing and heart rest.

   Is my spiritual receiver on and tuned in?

   303. Heresy

   (I Will Beware Of False Teachers)

   Inasmuch as certain men have set the truth aside, and bring in lying
   words and vain genealogies, which, as the apostle says, "minister
   questions rather than godly edifying which is in faith," and by means
   of their craftily-constructed plausibilities draw away the minds of the
   inexperienced and take them captive, [I have felt constrained, my dear
   friend, to compose the following treatise in order to expose and
   counteract their machinations.] These men falsify the oracles of God,
   and prove themselves evil interpreters of the good word of revelation.
   They also overthrow the faith of many, by drawing them away, under a
   pretense of [superior] knowledge, from Him who founded and adorned the
   universe; as if, forsooth, they had something more excellent and
   sublime to reveal, than that God who created the heaven and the earth,
   and all things that are therein. By means of specious and plausible
   words , they cunningly allure the simple-minded to inquire into their
   system; but they nevertheless clumsily destroy them, while they
   initiate them into their blasphemous and impious opinions....

   --St. Irenaeus, Against Heresies, Book 1, CCEL

   2 Peter 2:1-3

   While both Sts. Peter and Ireneaus were referring to a Gnosticism which
   was prevalent during the first Christian centuries, heresy essentially
   refers to the acceptance of only one side of a paradox. For example,
   accepting that Jesus was God but was not really a man (or vice versa)
   or claiming that the spiritual is good but the material, which God
   created, is bad. If I am a heretic in any way, it is probably in that I
   find it difficult to believe that God will really judge and condemn a
   person for not specifically believing that Jesus is Lord. This paradox
   is essentially that God is loving but will not ultimately demand
   justice.

   Are there doctrines that I have an especially difficult time accepting?
   Is the reason self-serving?

   304. Soul Mates

   (A Loyal Friend Is Beyond Price)

   Do you, my child, love everyone with the pure love of charity, but have
   no friendship save with those whose intercourse is good and true, and
   the purer the bond which unites you so much higher will your friendship
   be. If your intercourse is based on science it is praiseworthy, still
   more if it arises from a participation in goodness, prudence, justice
   and the like; but if the bond of your mutual liking be charity,
   devotion and Christian perfection, God knows how very precious a
   friendship it is! Precious because it comes from God, because it tends
   to God, because God is the link that binds you, because it will last
   for ever in Him. Truly it is a blessed thing to love on earth as we
   hope to love in Heaven, and to begin that friendship here which is to
   endure for ever there. I am not now speaking of simple charity, a love
   due to all mankind, but of that spiritual friendship which binds souls
   together, leading them to share devotions and spiritual interests, also
   as to have but one mind between them.

   --St. Francis de Salle, Introduction to the Devout Life, CCEL

   Sirrah 6:5-17

   The old adage that "birds of a feather flock together" is mostly true.
   In general, I will only make close friendships with those who are quite
   similar to me in likes, dislikes, attitudes and behaviors (whether
   these are good or bad). There are two situations, however, when this
   will not be true. If I recognize that I need to learn something, say
   some virtue, I will stay close to those who have that quality which I
   would like to emulate. If I am strong in my convictions and truly
   believe that God is asking me to do so, I will associate with those
   that are quite dissimilar from me so that they may learn by my example.
   In this case I must be sure that God is asking me to do this because I
   will very likely be opening myself up to harassment and ridicule. In
   general, I want to be friends with those who can teach me the most
   about myself and the spiritual life.

   What manner of friendships do I have?

   305. Soul As A Feather

   (I Will Live In The Truth)

   The nature of the soul is not inaptly compared to a very fine feather
   or very light wing, which, if it has not been damaged or affected by
   being spoilt by any moisture falling on it from without , is borne
   aloft almost naturally to the heights of heaven by the lightness of its
   nature, and the aid of the slightest breath: but if it is weighted by
   any moisture falling upon it and penetrating into it, it will not only
   not be carried away by its natural lightness into any aerial flights
   but will actually be borne down to the depths of earth by the weight of
   the moisture it has received. So also our soul, if it is not weighted
   with faults that touch it, and the cares of this world, or damaged by
   the moisture of injurious lusts, will be raised as it were by the
   natural blessing of its own purity and borne aloft to the heights by
   the light breath of spiritual meditation; and leaving things low and
   earthly will be transported to those that are heavenly and invisible.

   --Abbot Isaac, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   3 John:2-4

   The soul does not need anything added to it to be complete. It needs,
   however, to subtract the faults, cares and desires it has picked up
   over time. The soul flourishes in the warm sun of Truth and withers
   when steeped in the mire of the ego. If the soul is not burdened with
   the world, it naturally rises to God.

   In what ways can I unburden my soul?

   306. Socializing Vs. Solitude

   (I Will Seek Conversation With The Upright)

   Either to seek or to shun society is a fault in one striving to lead a
   devout life in the world, such as I am now speaking of. To shun society
   implies indifference and contempt for one's neighbors; and to seek it
   savors of idleness and uselessness. We are told to love one's neighbor
   as one's self. In token that we love him , we must not avoid being with
   him, and the test of loving one's self is to be happy when alone.
   "Think first on thyself," says St. Bernard, "and then on other men." So
   that if nothing obliges you to mix in society either at home or abroad,
   retire within yourself, and hold converse with your own heart. But if
   friends come to you, or there is fitting cause for you to go forth into
   society, th en by all means go, and meet your neighbor with a kindly
   glace and a kindly heart.

   --St. Francis de Salle, Introduction to the Devout Life, CCEL

   Sirrah 9:10-18

   Before I went into "Recovery" thirteen years ago, I had a difficult
   time "conversing with my own heart". I was always agitated and my mind
   was always churning. Being alone was painful. Since then, I've learned
   to enjoy my own company and I am generally not afraid to look within
   myself. There are times when I feel called to be involved in society
   through volunteer activities and by helping others with their problems.
   At other times, like the last two years, I feel called to more
   introverted activity (such as writing this book). I suspect that this
   period will be followed by a more extroverted one. God must provide the
   impetus otherwise my "helping" will be co-dependent and my
   "self-reflection" will become avoidance.

   Is their a balance of inner and outer activity in my life?

   307. Confessing Self-Truth

   (I Will Confess My Sins)

   ...If thou has confessed thyself a sinner, the truth is in thee: for
   the Truth itself is light. Thy life hath not yet shone in perfect
   brightness, because there are sins in thee, but yet thou hast already
   begun to be enlightened, because there is in thee the confession of
   sins.... Before all, then, confession; then, love... ...Now let us see
   whether he commendeth charity in regard of the sins which subsequently
   overtake us: because charity alone extinguisheth sins. Pride
   extinguisheth charity: therefore humility strengtheneth charity;
   charity extinguisheth sins. Humility goes along with confession, the
   humility by which we confess ourselves sinners: this is humility, not
   to say it with the tongue, as if only to avoid arrogancy, lest we
   should displease men if we should say that we are righteous. This do
   the ungodly and insane.

   --BSt. Augustine, Homily 1, CCEL

   James 5:16-18

   While I have no problem confessing myself a sinner, it has been about
   three years since I last went to Confession. There are at least three
   reasons why this is so. Part of it is a distaste for "sin counting"
   since such a tendency became obsessive with me when I was a child. In
   addition, while I believe that my sins are relatively minor, some are
   very bothersome to me because I believe that exterior circumstances
   seem to have forced me to sin even though I know that this is probably
   not totally true. Finally, many of my sins are attitudinal and not very
   specific. While I haven=t received sacramental Confession in a long
   time, I do confess my shortcomings in the manner of the 12-Step
   programs. I admit to God, myself and another human being the exact
   nature of my wrongs. I become ready to have God remove these
   characteristics. I ask Him to help me remove my shortcomings. While
   none of this justifies not going to Confession, it at least explains
   it. May God help me to change so that I can go to Confession more
   often.

   What are my reasons for not going to Confession? How self-serving are
   these reasons?

   308. Speak Of God With Passion!

   (I Will Be Sincere And Ernest)

   Physicians judge to a great extent as to the health or disease of a man
   by the state of his tongue, and our words are a true test of the state
   of our soul....We are apt to apply the hand quickly to the place where
   we feel pain, and so too the tongue is quick to point out what we love.
   If you love God heartily, my child, you will often speak of Him among
   your relations, household and familiar friends...Take care, then, never
   to speak of God, or those things which concern Him, in a merely formal,
   conventional manner; but with earnestness and devotion, avoiding the
   affected way in which some professedly religious people are perpetually
   interlarding their conversation with pious words and sayings, after a
   most unseasonable and unthinking manner. Too often they imagine that
   they really are themselves as pious as their words, which probably is
   not the case.

   -St. Francis de Salle, Introduction to the Devout Life, CCEL

   Titus 2:1-6

   I hate to admit it but I sometimes fancy myself as a self-styled
   theologian and talk big words without necessarily being emotionally
   attached to them. At these times I am not talking about God from my
   heart but only from my head.. God becomes an academia exercise. My
   academic words will never win souls for Christ unless they are also
   heart felt and reflect the way I truly believe and behave.

   When I talk about God, are my heart and head involved or do I just
   mouth dogma and jargon?

   309. Light And Self-Knowledge

   (I Will Recognize God=s Will)

   How much God is distant from the creature, how much the Maker from the
   making, how much Wisdom from that which is made by Wisdom, far beyond
   all things must this light needs be. And haply we shall be near to it,
   if we get to know what this light is, and apply ourselves unto it, that
   be it we may be enlightened; because in ourselves we are darkness, and
   only when enlightened by it can we become light, and not be put to
   confusion by it, being put to confusion by ourselves. Who is he that is
   put to confusion y himself He that knows himself to be a sinner. Who is
   he that by it is not put to confusion? He who by it is enlightened.
   What is it to be enlightened by it? He that now sees himself to be
   darkened by sins, and desires to be enlightened by it, draws near to
   it....But thou shall not be shamed by it, if, when it shall show thee
   to thyself that thou are foul, thine own foulness shall displease thee,
   that thou mayest perceive its beauty. This is that He would teach.

   --St. Augustine, Homily 1, CCEL

   Ephesians 5:6-20

   Whether or not my "self-knowledge" brings me to light is dependent on
   several decisions/actions that I make. The first is: Do I accept myself
   as an imperfect human being? If I don't, I choose to be blind to the
   truth. If I do, I can go on to the next question. Secondly: What is my
   attitude toward accepting myself as a sinner? If I don't like myself I
   will criticize myself, wallow in guilt, and feel hopeless. Or I will
   say that this is the way I am and I can't change. If I love myself I
   will humbly accept the truth about myself and have a desire to change.
   Finally: What actions will I take to change? If I don't love myself, my
   behavior will not change as I will be stuck in the pattern of
   sin-guilt-sin. Despair will increase. If I do love myself, I will know
   that while I cannot change without God's help, I must become ready to
   change and ask God to help change me. Ultimately, the light will burn
   away my darkness only if I cooperate with God's grace. This cooperation
   is my part.

   What is my attitude toward my imperfections?

   310. The Love Of God

   (Jesus Is Praying For And Watching Over Me)

   God is love, and all his operations proceed from love. Once he wills to
   manifest that goodness by sharing his love outside himself, then the
   Incarnation becomes the supreme manifestation of his goodness and love
   and glory. So, Christ was intended before all other creatures and for
   his own sake. For him all things were created and to him all things
   must be subject, and God loves all creatures in and because of Christ.
   Christ is the first-born of every creature, and the whole of humanity
   as well as the created world finds its foundation and meaning in him.
   Moreover, this would have been the case even if Adam had not sinned.

   --St. Lawrence of Brindisi, SOTD

   John 21: 15-19 John 17:6-19

   "Mark, do you love me?" The words of Jesus to Peter could just as
   appropriately have been said to me. While Peter denied Jesus three
   times, my behavior has denied Him many times that (seventy times seven
   times?). While Jesus asked Peter three times if he loved Him, He asks
   me that question every day.

   If my behavior is more important than my words, how do I answer this
   question?

   311. God Is My Supervisor

   (God Occupies My Heart With Joy)

   Discharge the official duties to which you are severally appointed with
   the utmost fear of God and affection to your prince, and perfect
   carefulness. Consider that every command of the emperor which does not
   offend God has proceeded from God Himself; and execute it in love as
   well as in fear, and with all cheerfulness. For there is nothing which
   so well refreshes a man who is wearied out with weighty cares as the
   seasonable cheerfulness and benign patience of an intimate servant...

   --Bishop Theonas, Bishop of Alexandria, Epistle to Lucianus, CCEL

   Ephesians 5: 17-19

   Each work day I ask God to be my supervisor. When I am not fully
   occupied with my work, I try to do other, non-trivial things which use
   my talents potentially for the glory of God. This may be doing homework
   for a social work class, it may be writing a meditation for this book,
   it may be listening to a co-worker who has the need to talk about their
   troubles. As it says in Eclesiastees, God occupies with joy those that
   are blessed.

   In what ways can I let God be my supervisor?

   312. Blaspheming The Holy Spirit

   (The Spirit Is Holy)

   He who has offended against the first term and the second, ay be judged
   to deserve smaller punishment; but he who has also despised the third
   can no longer find pardon. For by the first term and the second, he
   says, is meant the teaching concerning the Father and the Son; but by
   the third is meant the doctrine committed to us with respect to the
   perfection and the partaking of the Spirit. And with the view of
   confirming this, he adduces the word spoken by the Savior to the
   Disciples: "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear
   them now. But when the Holy Spirit is come, He will teach you...As the
   Savior converses with those not yet able to receive what is perfect,
   condescending to their littleness, while the Holy Spirit communes with
   the perfected, and yet we could never say on that account that the
   teaching of the Spirit is superior to the teaching of the Son, but only
   that the Son condescends to the imperfect , while the Spirit is the
   seal of the perfected; even so it is not on account of the superiority
   of the Spirit over the Son that the blasphemy against the Spirit is a
   sin excluding impunity and pardon, but because for the imperfect there
   is pardon, while for those who have tasted the heavenly gift, and been
   made perfect, there remains no plea or prayer for pardon.

   --Theognostus, Seven Books of Hypotyposes or Outlines, CCEL

   Mark 2:28-30

   These verses of Scripture have always troubled me. A sin that is
   unforgivable? As I understand it, this refers to a Spirit-filled person
   who decides to turn his/her back on the Spirit to such an extent that
   he/she attributes to the evil one the characteristics of God. The sin
   is unforgivable in that the person does not seek or want forgiveness.
   They have tasted the heavenly gifts and have consciously rejected them.
   God, of course, would forgive them if they repented.

   Do I have sins or flaws for which I refuse to repent or wish to be
   healed from?

   313. Secular Knowledge and Culture

   (All Truth Is From God)

   If, therefore, it should happen that a believer in Christ is called to
   this same office (librarian of the Emperor), he should not despise that
   secular literature and those Gentile intellects which please the
   emperor. To be praised are the poets for the greatness of their genius,
   the acuteness of their inventions, the aptness and lofty eloquence of
   their style. To be praised are the orators; to be praised also are the
   philosophers in their own class. To be praised, too, are the
   historians, who unfold to us the order of exploits, and the manners and
   the institutions of our ancestors, and show us the rule of life from
   the proceedings of the ancients.

   --Bishop Theonas, Bishop of Alexandria, Epistle to Lucianus, CCEL

   Acts 19: 11-20

   Truth is one and I should acknowledge the truth in any source whether
   it be sacred or profane, scientific or fiction, prose or poetry. I can
   marvel and learn from the beauty, wisdom, eloquence, style, etc. of any
   source. God can use any source to get a message across whether it be a
   billboard or the message on a passing truck. If I have "eyes to see"
   and "ears to hear", the message will be there. None of this implies
   that I should accept what is false whether it be from a government
   official or a trendy movie.

   How do I distinguish the kernel of truth from the chaff of falsehood?

   314. Role of the Congregation

   (I will Serve As Led By The Spirit)

   Demetrius has added to his letter that this is a matter that was never
   heard of before, and has never been done now, -namely, that laymen
   should take part in public speaking , when there are bishops present.
   But in this assertion he has departed evidently far from the truth by
   some means. For, indeed, wherever there are found persons capable of
   profiling the brethren, such persons are exhorted by the holy bishops
   to address the people.

   -Alexander of Cappadocia, Epistle to the people of Antioch, CCEL

   Acts 6: 1-7

   The abilities of the laity, the congregation of believers, have often
   been overlooked in favor of the professional clergy. One can see from
   the readings from Acts and from the third century that the abilities
   and gifts of the parishioners were always to be used for the common
   good of the Church.

   In what ways can I use my God given gifts for the benefit of my Church
   and community?

   315. Christian Hope

   (The Lord's Plans Are Full Of Hope)

   Bishop Theonas to Lucianus, the Chief Chamberlain of Our Most
   Invincible Emperor. I give thanks to Almighty God and our Lord Jesus
   Christ, who has not given over the manifesting of His faith throughout
   the whole world, as the sole specific for our salvation, and the
   extending of it even in the course of the persecutions of despots. Yea,
   like gold reduced in the furnace, it has only been made to shine the
   more under the storms of persecution, and its truth and grandeur have
   only become always the more and more illustrious, so that now, peace
   being granted to the churches by our gracious prince, the works of
   Christians are shining even in sight of the unbelieving, and God your
   Father, who is in heaven, is glorified thereby; a thing which, if we
   desire to be Christians in deed rather than in word, we ought to seek
   and aspire after as our first object on account of our salvation. For
   if we seek our own glory, we set our desire upon a vain and perishing
   object, and one which leads ourselves on to death. But the glory of the
   Father and of the Son, who for our salvation was nailed to the cross,
   makes us safe for the everlasting redemption; and that is the greatest
   hope of Christians.

   --Bishop Theonas, Bishop of Alexandria, Epistle to Lucianus, CCEL

   Jeremiah 29: 11-14a

   "I know what plans I have in mind for you, plans for peace...to give
   you a future and a hope." When I read these words of God spoken through
   Jeremiah, I believe that he is talking about the future redemption of
   Israel and mankind through Jesus. This is something that Jeremiah could
   never have fully understood, much less the people of Israel. But Israel
   had faith and hope in God=s promise just as Christians do. Christians
   believe that God still has wonderful plans for us even though we may
   not fully understand what they may be. We only know that they will be
   good!

   Do God's promises give me hope?

   316. Communal Guilt

   (God's Kindness Lasts 1000 Generations)

   Covetousness is a great evil; and it is not possible in a single letter
   to set forth those scriptures in which not robbery alone is declared to
   be a thing horrible and to be abhorred, but in general the grasping
   mind, and the disposition to meddle with what belongs to others, in
   order to satisfy the sordid love of gain.....Wherefore it seemed good
   to excommunicate such persons, lest the wrath (of God) should come upon
   the whole people, and upon those first of all who are set over them in
   office, and yet fail to make inquiry. For I am afraid, as the Scripture
   says, lest the impious work the destruction of the righteous along with
   his own.....Behold, did not Achar the son of Zata transgress in the
   accursed thing, and trouble then lighted on all the congregation of
   Israel? And this one man was alone in his sin; but he was not alone in
   the death that came by his sin.

   -Gregory Thaumaturgus, Canonical Epistle, CCEL

   Exodus 24: 6-7 Joshua 7: 1-26

   Both sin and salvation are partially communal. It is not that God
   punishes the innocent but that our lives (family, clan, community,
   world) are so increasingly intertwined that our actions have unintended
   consequences on others for good or ill. The reading from Exodus,
   however, makes a powerful point. Our acts of love carry more weight and
   affect more generations (1000) positively than our evil acts affect
   negatively (2 or 3).

   In what ways have the "victimless" indiscretions I've been involved
   with have negative consequences when viewed in hindsight? Have any of
   my actions had unintended positive effects on others?

   317. A Pure Will

   (The Lord Is My Judge)

   My child, often, when the fire is burning the flame does not ascend
   without smoke. Likewise, the desires of some burn toward heavenly
   things, and yet they are not free from temptations of carnal affection.
   Therefore, it is not altogether for the pure honor of God that they act
   when they petition Him so earnestly. Such, too, is often your desire
   which you profess to be so strong. For that which is alloyed with
   self-interest is not pure and perfect. Ask, therefore, not for what is
   pleasing and convenient to yourself, but for what is acceptable to Me
   and is for My honor, because if you judge rightly, you ought to prefer
   and follow My will, not your own desire or whatever things you wish.

   -Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, CCEL

   1 Corinthians 4: 1-5

   The only way that I can have a fully pure will is to be totally
   transformed into Christ. Until then, self-will will always play a part,
   although an increasingly minor role, in my decisions and actions. There
   are moments when I feel that I am tuned into god's will because the
   good I do brings me much joy and I recognize that I am being empowered
   to do something I would ordinarily not consider doing if my own will
   was in effect. These times come and go as the Spirit moves. My only
   role is to cooperate with God's grace at these times and pray that such
   times will increase in number and duration.

   In what ways can I cooperate with God's grace? If I know that God's
   will brings me joy, why do I not strive to be attuned with it more
   often?

   318. Avoiding Judgement

   (I Will Judge Myself)

   Of a truth, hasty judgements are most displeasing to God, and men's
   judgements are hasty, because we are not judges one of another, and by
   judging we ursup our Lord's own office. Man's judgement is hasty;
   because the chief malice of sin lies in the intention and counsel of
   the heart, which is shrouded in darkness to us. Moreover, man's
   judgements are hasty, because each one has enough to do in judging
   himself, without undertaking to judge his neighbor. If we would not be
   judged, it behoves us alike not to judge others, and to judge
   ourselves. Our Lord forbids the one, his Apostle enjoins the other....

   --St. Francis de Salle, Introduction to the Devout Life, CCEL

   Romans 7: 1-6

   While it is best not to judge others from a spiritual perspective, in a
   society of this world it is unavoidable. "Judge not lest ye be judged"
   I can only judge others if I am willing to have my own motives and
   behaviors judged by God and man. True and just judgement, however, can
   only be accomplished by God since God knows both the deed and the
   motive behind the deed. He understands and can read the human heart.
   Human judgement can only judge be the action. It can never fully
   understand the mitigating circumstances of one's motives.

   When I judge others, am I absolutely certain that my motives are both
   loving and just before I "cast the first stone"?

   319. Nature vs. Grace

   (God Probes The Mind And Tests The Heart)

   My child, pay careful attention to the movements of nature and of
   grace, for they move in very contrary and subtle ways, and can scarcely
   be distinguished by anyone except a man who is spiritual and inwardly
   enlightened. All men, indeed, desire what is good, and strive for what
   is good in their words and deeds. For this reason the appearance of
   good deceives many...Nature is not willing to die, or to be kept down,
   or to be overcome. Nor will it subdue itself or be made subject. Grace,
   on the contrary, strives for mortification of self....Nature works for
   its own interest and looks to the profit it can reap from another.
   Grace does not consider what is useful and advantageous to herself, but
   rather what is profitable to many...Nature is covetous and receives
   more willingly than it gives. It loves to have its own private
   possessions. Grace, however, is kind and openhearted. Grace shuns
   private interest, is contented with little, and judges it more blessed
   to give than to receive....Nature does everything for its own gain and
   interest. It can do nothing without pay and hopes for its good deeds to
   receive their equal or better, or else praise and favor. It is very
   desirous of having its deeds and gifts highly regarded. Grace, however,
   seeks nothing temporal, nor does she ask any recompense but God
   alone...Nature turns all things back to self. Grace brings all things
   back to God in whom they have their source...

   -Thomas a Kempis, The Imitation of Christ, CCEL

   Jeremiah 17: 9-10

   Lord, may You purify my motives. May You open my eyes to the reasons
   underlying my actions. May You purify my motives of self-will and
   selfishness. May You replace this egoism with the grace of Your
   presence so that my life may be full of grace. Finally, may You allow
   me to pass on Your grace to those around me for Your glory and my joy.
   Amen.

   Do I truly want my motives to be purified of self-centeredness?

   320. Re-Creation

   (God Rested On The Seventh Day)

   We must needs occasionally relax the mind, and the body requires some
   recreation also. Cassian relates how St. John the Evangelist was found
   by a certain hunter amusing himself by caressing a partridge, which sat
   upon his wrist. The hunter asked how a man of his mental powers could
   find time for so trifling an occupation. In reply, St. John asked why
   he did not always carry his bow strung? The man answered: Because, if
   always bent, the bow would lose its spring when really wanted. "Do not
   marvel then," the Apostle replied, "if I slacken my mental efforts from
   time to time, and recreate myself, in order to return more vigorously
   to contemplation." It is a great mistake to be so strict as to grudge
   any recreation either to others or one's self. Walking, harmless games,
   music, instrumental or vocal, field sports, etc., are such entirely
   lawful recreations that they need no rules beyond those of ordinary
   discretion, which keep everything within due limits of time, place, and
   degree. So again games of skill, which exercise and strengthen body or
   mind...

   --St. Francis de Salle, Introduction to the Devout Life, CCEL

   Genesis 2: 1-3

   One of the big revelations in Scripture from Genesis to the Gospels is
   that God, as Father and as Son, rested as a part of the creative
   process. There are places in Scripture where personified Wisdom is
   pictured as playing before the Lord during Creation.

   If we are created in God's image, recreation, literally re-creation, is
   a necessity to knowing and doing God's will as well as a way of resting
   the physical body.

   In what ways do I recreate myself? Are these periods followed by new
   energy and creativity? (If they are not, perhaps I am not recreating.)

   321. Awareness of Shortcomings

   (I Must Account For My Behavior)

   My confidence is placed in God who does not need our help for
   accomplishing his designs. Our single endeavor should be to give
   ourselves to the work and to be faithful to him, and not to spoil his
   work by our shortcomings.

   --St. Isaac Jogues, Letter of 9/12/1646, SOTD

   Ecclesiastes 11: 9-10

   My shortcomings are always there. I mostly need to be aware of them,
   consciously recognize them for what they are and not act on them.
   Today, on my way to work, I found myself judging and being aggravated
   by many people who did nothing to deserve my reaction. When I
   recognized what was happening, I smiled, shook my head and said: AThere
   you go again Mark, judging others instead of judging yourself.@ The
   aggravated feeling then left me.

   What shortcomings do I possess that prevent God's grace from working
   through me?

   322. Religious Freedom

   (The Church Will Be As A Bride Dressed For Her Husband)

   In every country, even the poorest of women is permitted to take a
   lawful husband according to the law of the land and by her own choice;
   but, through the desire of evil practices of the wicked, Holy Church,
   the bride of God and mother of us all, is not permitted lawfully to
   cling to her spouse on earth in accordance with divine law and her own
   will.

   --St. Gregory VII, A Call To The Faithful, SOTD

   Revelations 21: 1-4

   The Church of Christ is still persecuted in many countries just as it
   was in the first years of it's existence. This must be counteracted
   with love by Christians everywhere. A major way of counteracting this
   evil is to offer love and acceptance to those of other faiths. We
   should treat them with the love and respect that we want for ourselves.

   Do I try to understand and respect those of other faiths?

   323. I Am A Blessing

   (My Body Is A Temple Of The Holy Spirit)

   Go forth in peace, for you have followed the good road. Go forth
   without fear, for he who created you has made you holy, has always
   protected you, and loves you as a mother. Blessed be you, my God, for
   having created me.

   -St. Clare, on her deathbed, SOTD

   1 Corinthians 6: 19-20

   God has created me uniquely and I am precious in His sight. I have been
   ransomed at a great price, the shedding of my Creator's blood. If I
   take this to heart, I will be able to be like St. Clare when I reach
   the end of my earthly road. I will be able to be joyfully ready to meet
   my Maker and I will thank God for having created me.

   Do I believe that I am a unique blessing to those around me?

   324. The Liturgy: Surpassing Sacred Action

   (God Is Not A God Of Disorder But Of Peace)

   Rightly, then, the liturgy is considered as an exercise of the priestly
   office of Jesus Christ. In the liturgy the sanctification of man is
   manifested by signs perceptible to the senses...; in the liturgy, full
   public worship is performed by the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ, that
   is, by the Head and his members...From this it follows that every
   liturgical celebration, because it is an action of Christ, the
   priest and of his Body the Church, is a sacred action, surpassing all
   others.

   --St. Benedict, Constitution On The Sacred Liturgy 7, SOTD

   1 Corinthians 14: 26-33a

   The Mass is mystically performed by Jesus Himself as High Priest and
   Head of the Church. It is celebrated, thus, in conjunction with the
   congregation, a part of His Mystical Body. When Mass is celebrated ,
   Jesus is fully present spiritually and physically. It is a shadow and
   prefiguration of the worship of God that is being celebrated in
   eternity.

   Am I spiritually prepared to participate in this Heavenly celebration?

   325. A Prisoner For Christ

   (I Am Not Ashamed Of Those In Chains For Christ)

   I greet you from Smyrna together with the Churches of God present here
   with me. They comfort me in every way, both in body and in soul. My
   chains, which I carry about on me for Jesus Christ, begging that I may
   happily make my way to God, exhort you persevere in your concord and in
   your community prayers.

   --St. Ignatius of Antioch, Letter to the Church at Tralles, SOTD

   2 Timothy 1:15-18

   While I do attend a weekly Bible study, occasionally pray at a ADay of
   Prayer@ gathering and am open to talk about my faith if asked my
   opinion, I generally draw the line there regarding expressing my faith
   at work. I tend to distance myself from the more militant Christians. I
   have a tendency to justify my distancing by calling them Alunatic
   fringe@, Athose who would kill for God@, or Athose who love to see
   others as damned@. They take an active stand on issues like abortion
   and have gotten into trouble at work for doing so. Many of them are
   Apeculiar@. All of this said, I somehow suspect that I am not totally
   correct or honest in this assessment. I suspect that my desire to Afit
   in@ has outweighed the need to Astand out@ on many issues. Christians
   are supposed to be a peculiar people.

   Are my reasons for distancing myself from more militant Christians
   self-serving?

   326. Cultivating Our Little Garden

   (Blessed Are Those Who Seek God With All Of Their Heart)

   We cultivate a very small field for Christ, but we love it, knowing
   that God does not require great achievements but a heart that holds
   back nothing for self....The truest crosses are those we do not choose
   ourselves...He who has Jesus has everything.

   --St. Rose Philippine Duchesne, SOTD

   Psalm 119:1-5 Isaiah 5:1-6

   God can take my smallest efforts, bless them, and increase their
   impacts one-hundred fold or more like grain from a single kernel. God
   can take the small piece of Earth where I work and extend the goodness
   that He allows me to accomplish many times over, like a tree growing
   and spreading its branches. All God needs to do this is for me to have
   a heart that holds back nothing from Him. I must be willing to bloom
   where I am planted and become the type of plant I am meant to be.

   Do I believe that God can take me as I am and where I am, and
   accomplish great things through me?

   327. An Intimate Friendship

   (I Will Be A Friend Of God)

   Lord, you have granted me your secret friendship by opening the sacred
   ark of your divinity, your deified heart, to me in so many ways as to
   be the source of all my happiness; sometimes imparting it freely,
   sometimes as a special mark of our mutual friendship. You have so often
   melted my soul with your loving caresses that, if I did not know the
   abyss of your overflowing condescension, I should be amazed were I told
   that even your Blessed Mother had been chosen to receive such
   extraordinary marks of tenderness and affection.

   -St. Gertrude, The Life And Revelations Of St. Gertrude, SOTD

   Luke 1:1-4 James 2:18-23

   God=s Friend. Abraham was called God=s friend because his deeds
   reflected his faith in what God, his Friend, promised. St. Luke=s
   Gospel is written to Theopholis, Greek for Afriend of God@, one who is
   searching for truth and hungering to see God=s saving activity in
   everyday life and history. St. Gertrude considers her friendship
   Asecret@ and Amutual@, almost a love affair, where extraordinary
   tendencies and caresses are freely given. This is due to God=s grace
   and her openness to receive it.

   What level of friendship do I have with God? (acquaintance, buddy, best
   friend, soul-mate, lover...) Do I want to take this friendship to the
   next level? How do I do this?

   328. The Friends Of Christ

   (The Descendants Of The Saints Stand By The Commandments)

   The saints must be honored as friends of Christ and children and heirs
   of God, as John the theologian and evangelist says: "But as many as
   received him, he gave them the power to be made the sons of God..."Let
   us carefully observe the manner of life of all the apostles, martyrs,
   ascetics and just men who announced the coming of the Lord. And let us
   emulate their faith, charity, hope, zeal, life, patience under
   suffering, and perseverance unto death, so that we may also share their
   crowns of glory.

   -St. John Damascene, Exposition Of The Orthodox Faith, SOTD

   Ecclesiasticus 44:16-45:6

   It is not only the saints of old that I must emulate. I must also learn
   from the examples of the saints that I live and work with.

   Who are those that I have personally known that have taught me how to
   live a life of virtue, holiness and selfless service?

   329. The Spirit Of Scripture

   (Jesus Has Sent His Angel To Attest To The Truth)

   We Irish, living in the farthest parts of the earth, are followers of
   St. Peter and St. Paul and of the disciples who wrote down the sacred
   canon under the Holy Spirit. We accept nothing outside this evangelical
   and apostolic teaching....I confess I am grieved by the bad repute of
   the chair of St. Peter in this country....Though Rome is great and
   known afar, she is great and honored with us only because of this
   chair...Look after the peace of the Church, stand between your sheep
   and the wolves.

   -St. Columban, SOTD

   Revelations 22:16-21

   St. Columban and John the Evangelist make a strong point: I=d best
   beware of departing from the teaching of Scripture. How then does the
   Holy Spirit, who teaches us over time the things which Jesus couldn=t
   impart to His Apostles, fit in with this dictum? Since the Aletter@ of
   Scripture has much to do with the style and personal characteristics of
   the individual writers, the Aspirit@ of the teaching must be that of
   Scripture in general and Jesus in particular to be true. If the
   teaching is loving, just, forgiving and does not contradict Scripture,
   it may be valid.

   What things do I believe violate the spirit of Scripture? Are they
   self-serving?

   330. The Uniqueness Of Sainthood

   (I Will Use The Special Gifts I=ve Received For The Benefit Of Others)

   From the saints I must take the substance, not the accidents of their
   virtues. I am not St. Aloysius, nor must I seek holiness in his
   particular way, but according to the requirements of my own nature, my
   own character and the different conditions of my life. I must not be
   the dry, bloodless reproduction of a model, however perfect. God
   desires us to follow the examples of the saints by absorbing the vital
   sap of their virtues and turning it into our own life-blood, adapting
   it to our own individual capacities and particular circumstances. If
   St. Aloysius had been as I am, he would have become holy in a different
   way.

   --Bl. John XXIII, SOTD

   1 Peter 4:10-11

   God creates no clones. We are all unique. While we are to strive to be
   Christ-like, we are not Christ and, thus, do not have all of His
   qualities. We are to be Christ-like in our own unique way!

   What are my Christ-like characteristics? How are my Christ-like
   characteristics leading me to holiness? What path to holiness would
   both give me joy and glorify God?

   331. Proving The Existence Of God

   (The Lord Is God)

   I answer that the existence of God can be proved in five ways. The
   first and more manifest way is the argument from motion...It is
   necessary to arrive at a first mover, put in motion by no other; and
   this everyone understands to be God. The second way is from the nature
   of the efficient cause...It is necessary to admit a first efficient
   cause, to which everyone gives that name God. The third way is taken
   from possibility and necessity...We cannot but postulate the existence
   of some being having of itself its own necessity, and not receiving it
   from another, but rather causing in others their necessity. This all
   men speak of as God. The fourth way is taken from the gradation to be
   found in things...There must also be something which is to all beings
   that cause of their being, goodness, and every other perfection; and
   this we call God. The fifth way is taken from the governance of the
   world...Some intelligent being exists by whom all natural things are
   directed to their end; and this being we call God.

   --St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, CCEL

   1 Kings 18:20-40

   I don't think that St. Thomas Aquainas' proofs for the existence of God
   would convince many people today anymore than would Elijah's
   demonstration on Mt. Carmel. In fact, I don't believe that seeing one
   rise from the dead would convince many people today. The proof of God's
   existence rests on faith. With faith, the proofs are unnecessary but
   readily available. Without faith, no proof would be sufficient.

   What proof would convince me of the existence of God?

   332. The Human Soul Of Jesus

   (Stay Awake With Me)

   Behold, I have said this: that the contemplative lover of God is united
   with God through means (the grace of God, and the sacraments of Holy
   Church, and the Divine virtues, faith hope and charity, and a virtuous
   life according to the commandments of God), and also without means, and
   thirdly, without difference or distinction; and this I find in nature,
   and in grace, and also in glory. Further I have said that never
   creature may be or become so holy that it loses its created being and
   becomes God; even the soul of our Lord Jesus Christ shall ever remain
   creature, and other than God. Yet, none the less, we must all be lifted
   up above ourselves into God and become one spirit with God in love; and
   then we shall be blessed. And therefore mark my words and my meaning,
   and understand me aright as to what is the condition and the way to our
   eternal blessedness.

   --John of Ruysbroeck, The Book of Supreme Truth, CCEL

   Matthew 26:38

   I don't think that seeing Jesus in the flesh would increase my faith.
   It would probably detract from it. To see Jesus' humanity and sense His
   human soul would probably invoke a response similar to His family's
   response: Where did He get this? How can he be God if I know of his
   human origins?

   Does the human side of Jesus detract from His divinity in my
   perception?

   333. Is God The Cause Of Evil?

   (Perverse Thoughts Separate One From God)

   But the evil which consists in the corruption of some things is reduced
   to God as the cause. And this appears as regards both natural things
   and voluntary things. For it was said that some agent inasmuch as it
   produces by its power a form to which follows corruption and defect,
   causes by its power that corruption and defect. But it is manifest that
   the form which God chiefly intends in things created is the good of the
   order of the universe. Now, the order of the universe requires, as was
   said above, that there should be some things that can, and do
   sometimes, fail. And thus God, by causing in things the good of the
   order of the universe, consequently and as it were by accident, causes
   the corruptions of things, according to 1 Kings 2"6: "The Lord killeth
   and maketh alive". But when we read that "God hath not made death"
   (Wisdom 1:13), the sense is that God does not will death for its own
   sake. Nevertheless the order of justice belongs to the order the
   universe; and this requires that penalty should be dealt out to
   sinners. And so God is the author of the evil which is penalty, but not
   of the evil which is fault, by reason of what is said above.

   --St. Thomas Aquanis, Summa Theologica, CCEL

   Wisdom 1:1-11

   God does not create evil since He has created all things good and draws
   all things to Himself. He does, however, create correction to bring
   humankind back to Him when they wander away. This correction may feel
   like evil from a human perspective but it is for our ultimate good. How
   can I believe this? Because God, through Jesus, was willing to die for
   me to show His great love for me. I can trust Him.

   Can I believe that what I consider to be evil in my life may really be
   God's method of drawing me near to Him?

   334. The Necessity Of Obedience

   (I Will Enter By The Narrow Gate)

   Now at this time I cannot set forth my meaning more clearly. In all
   that I understand, or feel, or have written, I submit myself to the
   judgement of the saints and of Holy Church; for I wish to live and die
   as a servant of Christ, in the Christian faith, and I desire to be, by
   the grace of God, a life-giving member of Holy Church. And therefore,
   as I told you before, you should beware of those self-deceived men who,
   by means of their idle vacancy, and with their bare and simple gaze
   have found the Divine Essence within themselves in a merely natural
   way; and who pretend to be one with God without the grace of God, and
   without exercise of virtue, and without obedience to God and to Holy
   Church.

   --John of Ruysbroeck, The Book of Supreme Truth, CCEL

   Luke 13:22-30

   There may well be times when entering through the narrow gate and
   exercising virtue may not be in strict accord with the actions of
   Mother Church. The Church's luke-warm response to the Holocaust is an
   example as is the poor stand taken against slavery (except for the
   Quakers). Most recently, the Church's policy of shuffling pedofile
   priests from place to place is legitimately open to severe criticism.
   While I wish to live and die as a disciple of Christ and member of His
   Church, I must remember that there are times when prophetic individuals
   and splintered pieces of the extended Church may be carrying the true
   Gospel message.

   Am I open to the Spirit even if it seems to contradict the actions of
   the "larger" Church?

   335. The Vision Of Constintine

   (The Battle Is The Lord=s)

   Maxentius sorely oppressed the Roman people, treating them as a tyrant
   rather than as a king, shamelessly violating the wives of the nobles,
   putting many innocent persons to death, and perpetrating other similar
   atrocities. The emperor Constantine being informed of this, exerted
   himself to free the Romans from the slavery under him (Maxentius), and
   began immediately to consider by what means he might overthrow the
   tyrant...In this state of uncertainty, as he was marching at the head
   of his troops, a preternatural vision, which transcends all
   description, appeared to him. In fact, about that part of the day when
   the sun after passing the meridian begins to decline towards the west,
   he saw a pillar of light in the heavens, in the form of a cross, on
   which were inscribed these words, By This Conquer. The appearance of
   this sign struck the emperor with amazement and scarcely believing his
   own eyes, he asked those around him if they beheld the same spectacle,
   and as they unanimously declared that they did, the emperor's mind was
   strengthened by this divine and marvelous apparition. On the following
   night in his slumbers he saw Christ who directed him to prepare a
   standard according to the pattern of that which had been seen; and to
   use it against his enemies as an assured trophy of victory. In
   obedience to this divine oracle, he caused a standard in the form of a
   cross to be prepared, which is preserved in the palace even to the
   present time: and proceeding in his measures with greater earnestness,
   he attacked the enemy and vanquished him before the gates of Rome...

   --Socrates Scholasticus, History: Book 1, CCEL

   John 5:13-6:5

   I must explore and pursue the inspiration that I am given. This may not
   be as drastic or have effects as far reaching as that given to Joshua
   or Constintine but, if its my part to play in life's drama, I must do
   it. This, of course, is after the testing of the inspiration against
   Scripture, the advice of other spiritual people and long-term/solid
   Church tradition.

   Am I willing to explore my inspirations or am I more likely to dismiss
   them as inconvenient, crazy or irrelevant?

   336. A Pattern Of A Saintly Life

   (I Am Consecrated To The Lord)

   ...In my present letter, I mean to give you a brief sketch of the life
   of our dear Asella. Please do not read it to her; for she is sure to be
   displeased with eulogies of which she is herself the object. Show it
   rather to the young girls of your acquaintance, that they may guide
   themselves by her example, and may take her behavior as the pattern of
   a perfect life. I pass over the facts that, before her birth, she was
   blessed while still in her mother's womb, and that, virgin-like, she
   was delivered to her father in a dream in a bowl of shining glass
   brighter than a mirror. And I say nothing of her consecration to the
   blessed life of virginity, a ceremony which took place when she was
   hardly more than ten years old, a mere babe still wrapped in swaddling
   clothes...I come now to the life which after her twelfth year she, by
   her own exertion, chose, laid hold of, held fast to , entered upon, and
   fulfilled. Shut up in her narrow cell she roamed through paradise.
   Fasting was her recreation and hunger her refreshment. If she took food
   it was not from love of eating , but because of bodily exhaustion; and
   the bread and salt and cold water to which she restricted herself
   sharpened her appetite more than they appeased it...To the Bridegroom
   she spoke constantly in prayer and psalmody. She hurried to the
   martyr's shrines unnoticed. Such visits gave her pleasure, and the more
   so because she was never recognized...What would perhaps be
   incredible...is that she lived this life until her fiftieth year
   without weakening her digestion or bringing on herself the pain of
   colic. Lying on the dry ground did not affect her limbs, and the rough
   sackcloth that she wore failed to make her skin either foul or rough.
   With a sound body and a still sounder soul she sought all her delight
   in solitude...

   --St. Jerome, Letter 24, To Marcella, CCEL

   1 Samuel 1:19-28

   The stories of how saintly lives are lived is generally transmitted by
   those who knew and whose lives were touched by the saintly person.
   There is no self-proclaiming horn-blowing here! The saintly person is
   retiring and does not want to be noticed except when it is for the
   glory of God. Think of how often Jesus did not want anyone to be told
   about His healings.

   Do I have a need to publicize my attempts at holiness?

   337. Adopted By God

   (I Will Be A Father To You)

   If some eminent and powerful prince, having adopted you for his son and
   co-partner, should forthwith send for you by his ambassador; you would
   break through all difficulties, and the wearisome extent of sea and
   land, that you might appear before him, and have your adoption
   ratified. God Almighty, the Maker and the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and
   all that is in them, calls you to this adoption, and offers unto you
   (if you will receive it) that dear style "a son", by which He calls His
   Only Begotten, and your glorious Redeemer. And will you not be inflamed
   and ravished with His divine love? will you not make haste, and begin
   your journey towards Heaven, lest swift destruction come upon you, and
   the honors offered you be frustrated by a sad and sudden death?

   --Eucherius of Lyons, On Contempt For The World, CCEL

   2 Corinthians 6:18 - 7:1

   Never having been an orphan, I can only imagine what it is like to be
   adopted. What is it like to be wanted and loved for who I am, not just
   accepted as the result of a chance birth? What is it like to become a
   part of a caring family, not just a cog in an institution? What is it
   like to have a share in an inheritance, not just left the crumbs I can
   scrape up or that no one wants? God's call to adoption is infinitely
   more wonderful than anything that I can imagine!

   What does it feel like to be a sibling of Jesus? What does it feel like
   to be a child of Mary?

   338. Can It Be Demonstrated That God Exists?

   (God=s Power Has Been Clearly Seen)

   I answer that, demonstration can be made in two ways: One is through
   the cause, and is called "a priori" and this is to argue from what is
   prior absolutely. The other is through the effect, and is called a
   demonstration "a posteriori"; this is to argue from what is prior
   relatively only to us. When an effect is better known to us than its
   cause, from the effect we proceed to the knowledge of the cause. And
   from every effect the existence of its proper cause can be
   demonstrated, so long as its effects are better known to us; because
   since every effect depends upon its cause, because since every effect
   the existence of its proper cause can be demonstrated, so long as its
   effects are better known to us; because since every effect depends upon
   its cause, if the effect exists, the cause must pre-exist. Hence the
   existence of God, in so far as it is not self-evident to us, can be
   demonstrated from those of His effects which are known to us.

   --St. Thomas Aquanis, Summa Theologica, CCEL

   Romans 1:18-22

   When I see the incredible diversity in nature, and realize that I see
   only the smallest part of it, I am awed! New species of life, new
   secrets to the code of life, new mysteries at the edge of the universe
   are being discovered daily. Can all of this have happened by blind
   chance in the last 12 to 15 billion years? I think that it takes more
   faith to believe that than to believe that an all powerful, all loving
   intelligence brought it all about for His own purpose.

   What are my reasons for doubting the existence of God?

   339. Self-Love

   (I Will Not Pride Myself As Being Better Than I Really Am)

   Whither then at last will this wild and devious affection of men carry
   them? You know how to love accidental and external goods, but cannot
   love your own self. That which you so much long for is abroad, and
   without you; you place your affection upon a foreigner, upon an enemy.
   Return, or retire rather into yourself, and be you dearer and nearer to
   your own heart then those things which you call yours. Certainly if
   some wise man, and skillful in the affairs of this world, should
   converse and come to be intimate with you, it would better please you,
   that he should affect your person, than affect your goods; and you
   would choose, that he should rather love you for your self, than for
   your riches; you would have him to be faithful unto man, not to his
   money. What you would have another to perform towards you, that do for
   yourself, who ought to be the most faithful to your self. Our selves,
   our selves we should love, not those things which we ... call ours. And
   let this suffice to have been spoken against riches.

   --Eucherius of Lyons, On Contempt For The World, CCEL

   Romans 12:3, 9-13

   In my 20's and early 30's I did everything I could to prove my
   lovability and indispensability to others but made no real efforts to
   truly love and know myself. In fact, I often ran from myself,
   literally, in the hope of leaving myself behind. At times I would even
   watch myself, from the outside, laughing and acting out a life which
   felt like I was an actor in a play. I hated to look inside and see the
   despair, loneliness, sadness and lack of love. While it is infinitely
   better today, I still have times when I need to fight with myself to
   show that I love and respect myself more than I care about what others
   think about me.

   In what ways do I prove that I genuinely love myself?

   340. The Importance Of Tradition

   (I Believe In The Traditions Of The Holy Spirit)

   I have often then inquired earnestly and attentively of very many men
   eminent for sanctity and learning, how and by what sure and so to speak
   universal rule I may be able to distinguish the truth of Catholic faith
   from the falsehood of heretical pravity; and I have always, and in
   almost every instance, received an answer to this effect: That whether
   I or any one else should wish to detect the frauds and avoid the snares
   of heretics as they rise, and to continue sound and complete in the
   Catholic faith, we must, the Lord helping, fortify our own belief in
   two ways; first, by the authority of the Divine Law, and then, by the
   Tradition of the Catholic Church. But here some one perhaps will ask,
   Since the canon of Scripture is complete, and sufficient of itself for
   everything, and more than sufficient, what need is there to join with
   it the authority of the Church's interpretation? For this reason,
   -because owing to the depth of Holy Scripture, all do not accept it in
   one and the same sense, but one understands its words in one way,
   another in another; so that it seems to be capable of as many
   interpretations as there are interpreters...Therefore, it is very
   necessary, on account of so great intricacies of such various error,
   that the rule for the right understanding of the prophets and apostles
   should be framed in accordance with the standard of Ecclesiastical and
   Catholic interpretation.

   --Vincent of Lerins, A Commonitory: For the Antiquity and Universality
   of the Catholic Faith Against the Profane Novelties of All Heresies,
   CCEL

   Mark 7:6-9

   The words of Vincent of Lerins and Jesus seem to contradict each other
   but they don't. Jesus rejects traditions which attempt to circumvent
   the spirit of love contained in the words of the Law. Jesus would
   accept Vincent's purpose for tradition which is to seek to fulfill the
   spirit of love behind the words of the Law.

   In what ways do I try to circumvent the spirit of laws, whether they
   are secular or spiritual?

   341. The Reversing Of Values

   (I Will Live A Life Of Service To The Spirit)

   Francis! Everything you have loved and desired in the flesh it is your
   duty to despise and hate, if you wish to know my will. And when you
   have begun this, all that now seems sweet and lovely to you will become
   intolerable and bitter, but all that you used to avoid will turn itself
   to great sweetness and exceeding joy.

   --St. Francis of Assisi, SOTD

   Romans 7:1-6

   May You change me, Lord: from acting on fear to acting on love, from
   self-centered actions to other directed actions, from acting out of
   slavery to the body and ego to acting in conformance with the
   nourishing of my soul. Amen.

   Are my values being reversed? In what ways?

   342. Discerning The Truth

   (Jesus Bears Witness To The Truth)

   What then will a Catholic Christian do, if a small portion of the
   Church have cut itself off from the communion of the universal faith?
   What, surely, but prefer the soundness of the whole body to the
   unsoundness of a pestilent and corrupt member? What, if some novel
   contagion seek to infect not merely and insignificant portion of the
   Church, but the whole? Then it will be his care to cleave to antiquity,
   which at this day cannot possible be seduced by any fraud of novelty.
   But what, if in antiquity itself there be found error on the part of
   two or three men, or at any rate of a city or even of a province? Then
   it will be his care by all means, to prefer the decrees, if such there
   be, of an ancient General Council to the rashness and ignorance of a
   few. But what if some error should spring up on which no such decree is
   found to bear? Then he must collate and consult and interrogate the
   opinions of the ancients, of those, namely, who, though living in
   divers times and places, yet continuing in the communion and faith of
   the one Catholic Church, stand forth acknowledged and approved
   authorities: and whatsoever he shall ascertain to have been held,
   written, taught, not by one or two of these only, but by all, equally,
   with one consent , openly, frequently, persistently, that he must
   understand that he himself also is to believe without any doubt or
   hesitation.

   --Vincent of Lerins, A Commonitory: For the Antiquity and Universality
   of the Catholic Faith Against the Profane Novelties of All Heresies,
   CCEL

   John 18:28-38

   What is truth? Pilate's reply, while probably said sarcastically,
   implies that truth is relative, that there is no absolute truth. Jesus
   responds that there is an absolute truth behind all that we perceive to
   be reality. Vincent of Lerins indicates that it may take some work to
   get to this truth on specific matters and even offers a method for
   discerning it. What is the core of his faith? God is love. He loves His
   creation so much that He is willing to die for it.

   Can any truth be more awesome than this?

   343. Infant Death

   (Number Of Years Is Not The True Measure Of Life)

   What wisdom, than, can we trace in the following? A human being enters
   on the scene of life, draws in the air, beginning the process of living
   with a cry of pain, pays the tribute of a tear to Nature, just tastes
   life's sorrows, before any of its sweets have been his, before his
   feelings have gained any strength; still loose in all his joints,
   tender, pulpy , unset; in a word, before he is even human (if the gift
   of reason is man's peculiarity; and he has never had it in him), such
   an one, with no advantage over the embryo in the womb except that he
   has seen the air, so short-lived, dies and goes to pieces again, being
   either exposed or suffocated, or else of his own accord ceasing to live
   from weakness. What are we to think about him? How are we to feel about
   such deaths? Will a soul such as that behold its Judge? Will it stand
   with the rest before the tribunal? will it undergo its trials for deeds
   done in life?...But in the cases of infants prematurely dying there is
   nothing of that sort; but they pass to the blessed lot at once, if
   those who take this view of the matter speak true.

   --Eunomius, On Infant's Early Deaths, CCEL

   Wisdom 4:7-19

   As a Christian, I believe that all are alive in God in eternity. What I
   call life is a temporary span that is meant to train me for my future
   role in the Kingdom of God. When I have completed my training here,
   from the Lord's perspective, I will be ready to leave and go on to the
   next class, whatever that may be. Part of the lesson is experiencing
   death so that I can see first hand, from the transition, that I am
   already in the stream of eternity and God's love.

   When I have learned my lesson here, will I be ready to move on? If a
   major part of my lesson is experiencing death, is there any major
   reason to delay the lesson?

   344. The Fruits Of A Prophet

   (I Will Beware Those That Twist The Straight Forward Ways Of God)

   We declare to you, the, that these first prophetesses, as soon as they
   wee filled with the spirit, left their husbands.. Do you not think that
   all Scripture forbids a prophet to receive gifts and money? When,
   therefore, I see that the prophetess has received gold and silver and
   expensive articles of dress, how can I avoid treating her with
   disapproval?....For we shall show that those among them who are called
   prophets and martyrs obtain money not only from the rich, but also from
   the poor, from orphans and widows....If they deny that their prophets
   have taken gifts, let them confess thus much, that if they be convicted
   of having taken them, they are not prophets; and we will adduce ten
   thousand proofs that they have. It is proper, too, that all the fruits
   of a prophet should be examined. Tell me: does a prophet dye his hair?
   Does a prophet use stibium on his eyes? Is a prophet fond of dress?
   Does a prophet play at gaming-tables and dice? Does a prophet lend
   money on interest? Let them confess whether these things are allowable
   or not. For my part, I will prove that these practices have occurred
   among them.

   --Apollinous, Concerning Montanism, CCEL

   Acts 13:4-12

   Is it proper for me to earn a living using my spiritual gifts? All of
   my talents and gifts are from God and are to be used for His glory.
   Jesus indicates that the laborer is worth his wage and that there is
   nothing wrong with earning my living using my God given talents.
   However, the more spiritual gifts are, to paraphrase Jesus, given to me
   without cost and are to be used by me for others without cost. While it
   is OK for St. Paul to earn a living making tents, it would not be OK
   for him to make a living from raising people from the dead.

   Do I use my spiritual gifts purely for the glory of God?

   345. The Calling Of A Family

   (Holiness Is Passed On By Example)

   Moreover, I also, Polycrates, who am the least of you all, in
   accordance with the tradition of my relatives, some of whom I have
   succeeded-seven of my relatives were bishops, and I am the eighth, and
   my relatives always observed the day when the people put away the
   leaven-I myself, brethren, I say, who am sixty-five years old in the
   Lord, and have fallen in with the brethren in all parts of the world,
   and have read through all Holy Scripture, am not frightened at the
   things which are said to terrify us. For those who are greater than I
   have said: We ought to obey God rather than men.

   --Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, Epistle to Victor, CCEL

   2 Maccabees 7:1-41

   I doubt that holiness is transmitted through the genes but the thought
   of eight bishops in one family!! This holiness is evidently taught and
   transmitted in the family. A similar case is found in the family of St.
   Therese of Lisieux where she, her two sisters and at least one close
   cousin became nuns.

   Do I recognize the power of holiness in my own life and its potential
   for being passed on to those close to me?

   346. James The Just: His Life

   (The Peace Sown Brings A Harvest Of Justice)

   James, the Lord's brother, succeeds to the government of the Church, in
   conjunction with the apostles. He has been universally called the Just,
   from the days of the Lord down to the present time. For many bore the
   name of James, but this one was holy from his mother's womb. He drank
   no wine or other intoxicating liquor, nor did he eat flesh; no razor
   came upon his head; he did not anoint himself with oil, nor make use of
   the bath. He alone was permitted to enter the holy place: for he did
   not wear any woolen garment, but fine linen only. He alone, I say, was
   wont to go into the temple: and he used to be found kneeling on his
   knees, begging forgiveness for the people-so that the skin of his knees
   became horny like that of a camel's, by reason of his constantly
   bending the knees in adoration to God, and begging forgiveness for the
   people...

   --Hegesippus, Books of Commentaries on the Acts of the Church, CCEL

   James 3:13-18

   James the Just was an actual relative of Jesus (perhaps a
   half-brother), was the elder of the Jerusalem community and is the
   author of the epistle of James (which is one of only a few books in the
   New Testament that I wish was longer in length). He taught much about
   the relationship between peace and justice, and fought for fair
   treatment of the poor by the rich. His message was used by Caesar
   Chavez for this purpose in the Grapes of Wrath which fought for the
   fair treatment of migrant farmers.

   Do I practice what I preach or do I mostly pay lip service to the hard
   task of working toward justice in my community?

   347. James The Just: His Death

   (I Will Be Patient Until The Lord=s Coming)

   They came, therefore, in a body to James, and said: "We entreat thee,
   restrain the people: for they are gone astray in their opinions about
   Jesus, as if he were the Christ."...The aforesaid scribes and Pharisees
   accordingly set James on the summit of the temple, and cried aloud to
   him, and said: "O just one, whom we are all bound to obey, forasmuch as
   the people is in error, and follows Jesus the crucified, do thou tell
   us what is the door of Jesus, the crucified." And he answered with a
   loud voice: "Why ask ye me concerning Jesus the Son of man? He Himself
   sittith in heaven, at the right hand of te Great Power, and shall come
   on the clouds of heaven."...Then again the said Pharisees and
   scribes...cried aloud and said"Oh, Oh, the just man himself is in
   error."...So they went up and threw down the just man, and said to one
   another: "Let us stone James the Just." And they began to stone him:
   for he was not killed by the fall; but he turned, and kneeled down, and
   said: "I beseech Thee, Lord God our father, forgive them; for they know
   not what they do." And while they were thus stoning him to death, one
   of the priests, the sons of Rechab, the son of Rechabim....began to cry
   aloud, saying: "Cease, what do ye? The just man is praying for us." but
   one among them, one of the fullers, took the staff with which he was
   accustomed to wring out the garments he dyed, and hurled it at the head
   of the just man. And so he suffered martyrdom.....

   --Hegesippus, Books of Commentaries on the Acts of the Church, CCEL

   James 5:7-15

   James the Just died as he lived by praying for his people and patiently
   waiting for the Lord=s coming.

   Do I have the courage to do the same?

   348. Eyes Open To See Truth

   (I Will See With Spiritual Eyes)

   But why this world was made, and why it passes away, and why the body
   exists, and why it falls to decay, and why it continues, thou canst not
   know until thou hast raised thy head from this sleep in which thou art
   sunk, and hast opened thine eyes and seen that God is One, the Lord of
   all, and hast come to serve Him with all thy heart. Then will He grant
   thee to know His will: for every one that is severed from the knowledge
   of the living god is dead and buried even while in his body. Therefore
   is it that thou dost wallow on the ground before demons and shadows,
   and askest vain petitions from that which has not anything to give. But
   thou, stand thou up...and offer thou for thy imperishable soul
   petitions for that which decayeth not, to God who suffers no decay-and
   thy freedom will be at once apparent; and be thou careful of it, and
   give thanks to God who made thee, and gave thee the mind of the free;
   that thou mightest shape thy conduct even as thou wilt. He hath set
   before thee all these things, and showeth thee that , if thou follow
   after evil, thou shall be condemned for thy evil deeds; but that, if
   after goodness, thou shall receive from Him abundant good, together
   with immortal life for ever.

   --Melito the Philosopher, Discourse in the Presence of Antoninus
   Caesar, CCEL

   Numbers 22:22-35

   A friend of mine thinks that animals are more spiritual than people
   since they live in the moment and see/hear at ranges that are beyond
   the range of the human senses. Baalam=s donkey is a perfect case in
   point. He was able to see spiritual realities that his master could not
   see and acted in a way that saved Baalam=s life. The donkey was able to
   see with spiritual eyes and was able to know God=s will.

   Can I learn any spiritual qualities from my pets?

   349. Relatives Of Jesus

   (This Is Your Son)

   Some of these heretics, forsooth, laid an information against Symeon
   the son of Clopas, as being of the family of David, and a Christian.
   And on these charges he suffered martyrdom when he was 120 years old,
   in the reign of Trajan Caesar, when Atticus was consular legate in
   Syria. And it so happened, says the same writer, that , while inquiry
   was then being made for those belonging to the royal tribe of the Jews,
   the accusers themselves were convicted of belonging to it. With show of
   reason could it be said that Symeon was one of those who actually saw
   and heard the Lord, on the ground of his great age, and also because
   the Scripture of the Gospels makes mention of Mary the daughter of
   Clopas, who, as our narrative has shown already, was his father...And
   after James the Just had suffered martyrdom, as has the Lord also and
   on the same account, again Symeon the son of Clopas, descended from the
   Lord's uncle, is made bishop, his election being promoted by all as
   being a kinsman of the Lord.

   --Hegesippus, Books of Commentaries on the Acts of the Church, CCEL

   John 19:25-27

   Symeon, descendent of an uncle of Jesus, may well have known the Lord.
   His mother was at the Cross of Jesus along with Mary, the mother of
   Jesus. She would have heard Jesus telling his mother that Athis is your
   son@ in reference to St. John. I=m sure that the story was passed on in
   the family for many generations. At some point, however, the family
   story was lost. It does not matter. By making John, a representative of
   the Church, Mary=s son, we have all become children of Mary and
   siblings of Jesus.

   What does Jesus= expression that those who do his father=s will are his
   family mean to me?

   350. Untrustworthy Shepherds

   (The Lord Will Look After His Flock)

   For we may say, to anticipate a little what we intend to write below,
   that he does not wish to acknowledge that the Son of God came down from
   heaven. And this is a statement which shall not be made to depend on
   simple assertion; for it is proved abundantly by those memoranda which
   we sent you, and not least in that passage in which he says that Jesus
   Christ is from below. And they who sing his praise and eulogize him
   among the people, declare that their impious teacher has come down as
   an angel from heaven. And such utterances the haughty man does not
   check, but is present even when they are made. And then again there are
   these women-these adopted sisters, as the people of Antioch call
   them-who are kept by him and by the presbyters and deacons with
   him.....We have been compelled, therefore, to excommunicate this man,
   who has opposed God Himself, and refuses submission, and appoint in his
   place another bishop for the Church Catholic.....

   --Malchion, Epistle In Name of the Synod of Antioch Against Paul of
   Samosata, CCEL

   Ezekiel 34:1-31

   Those in positions of authority and power, especially those with
   spiritual power, will be judged most severely on how they lead their
   flock. Since a bishop has the potential to lead so many astray and
   cannot pretend to be acting out of ignorance, he will be judged more
   severely than virtually anyone. While I may not have the authority or
   power of a bishop, I do act as an example to many around me and will be
   judged accordingly.

   Do I lead others astray with the power and authority that I possess?
   How so?
     __________________________________________________________________

   351. An Unholy Alliance

   (I Will Not Allow Sin To Reign Over My Body)

   I saw, said the saint, a Soul and a Body conversing with one another,
   and first, the Soul said: my Body, god has created me to love, and to
   enjoy myself; I wish, therefore, to go where I can best accomplish this
   design; and to have you accompany me in a friendly way, since it will
   be to your advantage also. We will go through the world; if I find
   anything which pleases me, I will enjoy it; you can do the same when
   you find anything which pleases you; and let him do better that can.
   The Body answered: Though I may be obliged to do whatever pleases you,
   yet I see that you cannot accomplish all that you wish without me.
   Therefore, if we are to set forth together let us come to a perfect
   understanding before we start in order that we may not fall out by the
   way...To prevent this (trouble), I think it would be well to take with
   us a third companion, some just person who has no share in our
   partnership, and to whom all of our differences could be referred.
   ...Let it be Self-love, who lives with us both; he will see that I have
   what belongs to me, and I shall enjoy with him. He will do the same for
   you, and thus, both will be satisfied.....Self Love: I consent, and
   shall find it greatly to my advantage. I shall give each of you what
   belongs to him, for this will not injure me; and thus I shall live on
   equal terms with both. But if either of you should wrong me, and
   deprive me of my support, I shall immediately have recourse to the
   other, for on no account would I be deprived of my own subsistence.

   --St. Catherine of Genoa, Concerning the Discourse of the Soul With the
   Body and Self-Love , and Also of the Spirit With Humanity, CCEL

   Romans 6:8-14

   The only way for this alliance to work is for the soul to be imbued
   with the Holy Spirit and for Self-love to recognize that its ultimate
   happiness is in listening to the leading of the Soul. The Body will
   complain for awhile, but it will submit. The worst case would be to
   have either the Body or an undisciplined Self-love running the show.

   What coalition of body, soul and self-love controls my life? Am I happy
   with the result? Can I change it?

   352. Love And Virtue

   (Anyone Who Loves Jesus Will Keep His Word)

   Having thus spoken of the good works of these, he again recurs to His
   grace....Because this comes not of any pains, nor of any good works of
   ours, but of love, and yet not of love alone, but of our virtue also.
   For if indeed of love alone, it would follow that all must be saved;
   whereas again were it the result of our virtue alone, then were His
   coming needless, and the whole dispensation. But it is the result
   neither of His love alone, nor yet of our virtue, but of both...For
   tell me, what would Paul have profited, how would he have exhibited
   what he has exhibited, if God had not both called him from the
   beginning, and, in that He loved him, drawn him to Himself? But
   besides, His vouchsafing us so great privileges, was the effect of His
   love, not of our virtue. Because our being rendered virtuous, and
   believing, and coming nigh unto Him, even this again was the work of
   Him that called us tp Himself, and yet, notwithstanding, it is ours
   also. But that on our coming nigh unto Him, He should vouchsafe us so
   high privileges, as to bring us at once from a state of enmity, to the
   adoption of children, this is indeed the work of a really transcendent
   love.

   --St. John Chrysostom, Homily 1 On Epistle to Ephesians, CCEL

   John 14:21-24

   Lord Jesus, I thank you for Your great love for me. May You enable me
   to respond to Your love with holy action, both interior and exterior.
   While all that is holy is You, and comes from You, teach me, Lord, to
   have the right attitude, the right will and the right discipline to
   cooperate with Your love. Amen.

   While God=s love is unconditional, do I recognize that my response to
   Him is anything but unconditional? If God did not discipline me, could
   it be said that He really loved me? Do I expect God to ignore my
   rebellion against His love?

   353. Evil Is As Evil Does

   (I Will Not Rebel Against The Lord)

   I must beg you also to consider that, if you represent some other being
   as the cause of evil to men, he also, in so far as he acts in them, and
   incites them to do evil, is himself evil, by reason of the things he
   does. For he too is said to be evil, for the simple reason that he is
   the doer of evil things, but the things which a being does are not the
   being himself, but his actions, from which he receives his appellation,
   and is called evil. For if we should say that the things he does are
   himself, and these consist in murder and adultery, and theft and
   such-like , these things will be himself. And if these things are
   himself, and if when they take place they get to have a substantial
   existence, but by not taking place thy also cease to exist, and if
   these things are done by men, -men will be the doers of these things,
   and the causes of existing and of no longer existing. But, if you
   affirm that these things are his actions, he gets to be evil from the
   things he does, not from those things of which the substance of him
   consists.

   --Maximus, Bishop of Jerusalem, From the Book Concerning Matter, or in
   Defense of the Proposition that Matter Is Created, and is Not the Cause
   of Evil, CCEL

   Isaiah 1:2-9

   God created all things and they are good. Only man has the power of
   free-will and can choose to do good or evil. But, as Isaiah says, Athe
   whole head is sick, the whole heart is diseased@. If I go to the great
   healer, I can choose to renounce evil and instead, choose to do the
   good which God created me to be and do.

   How do I justify the evil things that I do? How can I renounce these
   behaviors?

   354. Rejoicing In Adversity

   (I Give Thanks For You To God)

   Holy indeed are all the Epistles of Paul: but some advantage have those
   which he sent after he was in bonds: those, for instance, to the
   Ephesians and Philemon: that to Timothy, that to the Philippians, and
   the one before us (Collosians): for this also was sent when he was a
   prisoner....But why do I say that these Epistles have some advantage
   over the rest in this respect, because he writes while in bonds? As if
   a champion were to write in the midst of carnage and victory; so also
   in truth did he. For himself too was aware that his was a great
   thing....And this he said, that we should not be dispirited when in
   adversity, but even rejoice.

   --St. John Chrysostom, Homily 1 on Epistle to Collosians, CCEL

   Colosians 1:1-13

   Even in prison, Paul gave thanks to God for the faith of the Church=s
   and remembered them in his prayers. Why was he able to do this? Because
   God Ahas rescued us from the ruling forces of darkness and transferred
   us to the Kingdom of the Son that He loves, and in Him we enjoy our
   freedom...@. Even if I am in bodily shackles, I can still be
   spiritually free.

   Do I sense the freedom that Jesus has won for me even in the midst of
   adversity? How can I increase this sense of freedom?

   355. The Soul=s Plight

   (I Am No Longer A Slave But A Child Of God)

   And thus they went traveling through the world, each seeking to gratify
   his own desires, and living according to his own pleasure. the Soul
   looked after the Body, and granted it many things that it esteemed
   necessary; but , day by day, its appetites increased, incited by
   Self-Love, which bound them closely together, that they might not
   become divided. Everything appeared to them reasonable and necessary.
   They were never willing to deny themselves anything, and if they were
   not permitted to obtain every day something new, some fresh
   nourishment, they murmured, and complained that they were injured. Thus
   was the Soul finally led into an unfathomable sea of earthly love and
   delight, which effected in her so great a transformation, that she
   could no longer think or speak of anything, except according to the
   will of the Body and Self-Love. If she wished to turn to her own
   concerns, overpowered by her disorderly appetites, she dared not speak;
   and, in her discontent, she reflected within herself: I am greatly
   displeased and dissatisfied to be obliged to condescend, in so many
   things, to the Body; and I fear that feeding it, under this plea of
   necessity, will lead to my taking part in its gratifications, and thus
   finally losing the greater for the less. Seeing both of you so craving,
   makes me fear that you will give me so much to do, that you will change
   me from spiritual into earthly; for, after tasting earthly things, I
   shall lose my relish for heavenly ones. I fear, too, lest the intellect
   should be defiled and the will corrupted. Help me, O my God!

   --St. Catherine of Genoa, Containing the Discourse of the Soul with the
   Body and Self-Love; and also of the Spirit with Humanity, CCEL

   Galatians 4:1-11

   It comes down to this: Who do I want to be my master? Who do I want to
   serve? If I want to serve the body and the ego, I will get temporary
   pleasure but long-term misery and dissatisfaction. Ultimately, it will
   lead me to spiritual death and my life shall have been no different
   than that of an ox or other dumb beast. Even worse, the ox has no power
   of free-will, but I have chosen to be a dumb beast and have no one to
   blame but myself. If I want to serve the soul, I will get temporary
   pain and complaint from the body but long-term satisfaction and joy.
   Ultimately, it will lead me to eternal life; a life I have chosen but a
   life enabled by Christ. Life or Death. Fire or Water. Joy or Misery.

   What do I choose?

   356. Self-Mutilation

   (My Righteousness Must Surpass That Of The Law)

   If any one in sickness has been subjected by physicians to a surgical
   operation, or if he has been castrated by barbarians, let him remain
   among the clergy, but, if any one in sound health has castrated
   himself, it behoves that such an one, if (already) enrolled among the
   clergy, should cease (from his ministry), and that from henceforth no
   such person should be promoted. But, as it is evident that this is said
   of those who wilfully do the thing and presume to castrate themselves,
   so if any have been made eunuchs by barbarians, or by their masters,
   and should otherwise be found worthy, such men the Canon admits to the
   clergy.

   --The Canons of the 318 Holy Fathers Assembled in the City of Nice, in
   Bithynia, CCEL

   Matthew 5:29-30

   While the reading from the Canons and Matthew refer to physical
   self-mutilation, is emotional self-mutilation any better? I remember as
   a child trying desperately not to feel what I was feeling in reference
   to my alcoholic father. I also remember as an adolescent desperately
   trying not to feel my emerging sexual feelings. I am not convinced that
   either attempt has made me a holier or healthier person, just more
   neurotic.

   In what ways have I emotionally self-mutilated myself?

   357. Zeal For Truth

   (God Will Grant A Covenant Of Peace)

   But since he that hath begun a good work will finish it, faint not in
   furthering the Spirit's power, nor leave half-won the victory over the
   assailants of Christ's glory, but imitate thy true father who, like the
   zealot Phineas, pierced with one stroke of his Answer both master and
   pupil. Plunge with thy intellectual arm the sword of the Spirit through
   both these heretical pamphlets, lest, though broken on the head, the
   serpent affright the simpler sort by still quivering in the tail. When
   the first arguments have been answered, should the last remain
   unnoticed, the many will suspect that they still retain some strength
   against the truth.

   --Peter, Bishop of Sebasteia, to Gregory of Nyssa, Letter 2, CCEL

   Numbers 25:1-18

   While zeal for God is a good thing, I think that it can be completely
   misused. Is being God=s Aavenging angel@ a holy and noble cause whether
   it is as a Christian crusader or a Muslim suicide bomber? Anyone that
   acts out of fear, hatred or self-regard is not acting from Godly
   motivation but from the ego and the devil.

   In what ways has my zeal for God become a smokescreen for intolerance
   and fear?

   358. Illness: Spiritual Vs. Bodily

   (I Will Be Made Clean Both Inside And Out)

   What squeamishness is this, pray, that thou canst not sit down in
   company with the poor? What sayest thou? He is unclean and filthy? Then
   wash him, and lead him up to thy table. But he has filthy garments?
   Then change them, and give him clean apparel. Seest thou not how great
   the gain is? Christ cometh unto thee through him, and dost thou make
   petty calculations of such things? When thou art inviting the King to
   thy table, dost thou fear because of such things as these? ...If thou
   will consider also the guests themselves, thou wilt see that the one
   are within (the prideful wealthy) just what the others are without;
   blind, maimed, lame; and as are the bodies of these, such are the souls
   of those, laboring under dropsy and inflammation. For of such sort is
   pride, for after the luxurious gratification a maiming takes place; of
   such sort is surfeiting and drunkenness, making men lame and maimed.
   And those who live in giving of thanks, who seek nothing beyond a
   sufficiency, they whose philosophy is of this sort are in all
   brightness.

   --St. John Chrysostom, Homily 1 on the Epistle to the Colosians, CCEL

   Matthew 23:25-26

   Many of those I judge beneath me or shun due to their outer appearance,
   like the destitute and homeless, may well be beautiful souls on the
   inside who can teach me much. Many of those that I admire due to their
   outer appearance, like the rich and powerful, may well have very
   deformed and abused souls and I should not try to emulate them. I
   should never judge someone by surface appearances but by their actions
   and character.

   How can I counteract my tendency to judge others, whether positively or
   negatively, by their appearance or what they own?

   359. Discerning God In The World

   (I Will Open Myself At The Prompting Of The Will Of God)

   What shall I say of those two brethren who lived beyond that desert of
   the Thebaiid where once the blessed Antony dwelt, and , not being
   sufficiently influenced by careful discrimination, when they were going
   through the vast and extended waste determined not to take any food
   with them, except such as the Lord Himself might provide for them. And
   when as they wandered through the deserts and were already fainting
   from hunger they were spied at a distance by the Mazices (a race which
   is even more savage and ferocious than almost all wild tribes, for they
   are not driven to shed blood, as other tribes are, from desire of spoil
   but from simple ferocity of mind), and when these acting contrary to
   their natural ferocity, met them with bread, one of the two as
   discretion came to his aid, received it with delight and thankfulness
   as if it were offered to him by the Lord, thinking that the food had
   been divinely provided for him, and that it was God's doing that those
   who always delighted in bloodshed had offered the staff of life to men
   who wee already fainting and dying; but the other refused the food
   because it was offered to him by men and died of starvation. And though
   this sprang in the first instance from a persuasion that was
   blame-worthy yet one of them by the help of discretion got the better
   of the idea which he had rashly and carelessly conceived, but the other
   persisting in his obstinate folly, and being utterly lacking in
   discretion, brought upon himself that death which the Lord would have
   averted, as he would not believe that it was owing to a Divine impulse
   that the fierce barbarians forgot their natural ferocity and offered
   them bread instead of a sword.

   --Abbot Moses, The Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   2 Corinthians 8:1-15

   God mostly acts through ordinary channels like people and nature, and
   rarely through agencies that defy natural law. Reflection and
   meditation are ways of discerning God=s voice telling me to act.

   Do I feel the tug of motivation to do it? Do I have the means to do it?
   Does the thought of doing it bring me joy? Is it in accordance with
   God=s will? What is preventing me from doing it?

   360. Cleaning My Own Closet

   (Physician, Heal Thyself)

   And in truth it is a greater miracle to root out from one's own flesh
   the incentives to wantonness than to cast out unclean spirits from the
   bodies of others, and it is a grander sign to restrain the fierce
   passions of anger by the virtue of patience than to command the powers
   of the air, and it is a greater thing to have shut out the devouring
   pangs of gloominess from one's own heart than to have expelled the
   sickness of another and the fever of his body. finally it is in many
   ways a grander virtue and a more splendid achievement to cure the
   weaknesses of one's own soul than those of the body of another. for
   just as the soul is higher than the flesh, so is its salvation of more
   importance , and as its nature is more precious and excellent, so is
   its destruction more grievous and dangerous.

   --Abbot Nesteros, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Luke 4:23-24

   When I try to Aclean someone=s closet@ (point out their flaws and try
   to heal them), I must be very careful that I am not projecting my own
   distaste for cleaning my own closet. A recent example concerns a friend
   of mine. His wife is a bit of a Aclutter bug@ and sharply pointed out
   the fact that he left a few coffee grounds on the kitchen counter. She
   did not realize the irony of her remarks and my friend just smiled and
   lovingly pointed out the humor of her comment. They both had a good
   laugh.

   In what way do I still need to clean my closet? (These are the areas
   where I must not try to fix others.)

   361. Intentions

   (Whether For False Motive Or True, Christ Is Proclaimed)

   In every case, as we said, we must look not at the progress of the work
   but at the intention of the worker, nor must we inquire to begin with
   what a man has done, but with what purpose, so that we may find that
   some have been condemned for those deeds from which good has afterwards
   arisen, and on the other hand that some have arrived by means of acts
   in themselves reprehensible at the height of righteousness. And in the
   case of the former the good result of their actions was of no avail to
   them as they took the matter in and with an evil purpose, and wanted to
   bring about-not the good which actually resulted, but something of the
   opposite character, nor was the bad beginning injurious to the latter,
   as he put up with the necessity of a blameworthy start; not out of
   disregard for God, or with the purpose of doing wrong, but with an eye
   to a needful and holy end.

   --Abbot Joseph, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Philipians 1:12-20

   While God can, and will, bring ultimate good out of circumstances, my
   own motives will determine whether I receive the benefits of this
   goodness (defined as growth in my character and holiness). If my
   motives are wrong, I will experience confusion, frustration and
   unhappiness. If my motives are good, I will experience clarity, peace
   and joy.

   In what ways have my actions resulted in blessings in spite of my
   reasons for acting?

   362. Interior Vs. Exterior Cleanliness

   (God=s House Should Be A Place Of Prayer)

   First, we certainly must not think that the (ancient Greek)
   philosophers such chastity of soul , as is required of us, on whom it
   is enjoined that not fornication only, but uncleanness be not so much
   as named among us. But they had a sort of merikh, i.e. some particle of
   chastity; viz. continence of the flesh, by which they could restrain
   their lust from carnal intercourse : but this internal purity of mind
   and continual purity of body they could not attain. I will not say, in
   act, but even in thought. Finally Socrates, the most famous of them
   all, as they themselves esteem him, was not ashamed to profess this of
   himself. for when one who judged a man's character by his looks looked
   at him, and said "the eyes of a corrupter of boys", and his scholars
   rushed at him, and brought him to their master and wanted to avenge the
   insult, it is said that he checked their indignation with these words:
   Stop my friends, for I am, but I restrain myself. It is then quite
   clearly shown not only by our assertions but actually by their own
   admissions that it was only the performance of indecent acts, i.e., the
   disgrace of intercourse, that was by force of necessity checked by
   them, and that the desire and delight in this passion was not shut out
   from their hearts.

   --Abbot Chaeremon, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Matthew 21:12-17

   While Abbot Chaeremon may well be correct in his assessment of the
   spiritual condition of the more saintly AGreeks@ or heathen, I don=t
   think that it is entirely fair. I don=t think that Socretes was
   restraining his natural inclinations to win the praises of his fellows
   or to hide his faults but to attain sanctity. I think that he wished to
   have his curse lifted, as did St. Paul with his Athorn in the flesh@.
   Even as a Christian, I must restrain some of my natural inclinations
   that just don=t go away because I want them to. It requires work on my
   part, and grace on God=s part, to slowly transform my body-temple from
   Aa den of thieves@ to a Ahouse of prayer@.

   In what ways have my natural inclinations been transformed by the grace
   of God? What areas of my life still require transformation?

   363. A Call For Mercy

   (I Am Bound To Have Pity On My Fellow Servants)

   Those sainted martyrs, accordingly, who were once with us, and who now
   are seated with Christ, and are sharers in His kingdom, and partakers
   with Him in His judgement, and who act as His judicial assessors,
   received there certain of the brethren who had fallen away, and who had
   become chargeable with sacrificing to the idols. And as they saw that
   the conversion and repentance of such might be acceptable to Him who
   desires not at all the death of the sinner, but rather his repentance,
   they proved their sincerity, and received them, and brought them
   together again, and assembled with them, and had fellowship with them
   in their prayers and at their festivals. What advice then, brethren, do
   you give us as regards these? What should we do? Are we to stand forth
   and act with the decision and judgement which those (martyrs) formed,
   and to observe the same graciousness with them, and to deal so kindly
   with those toward whom they showed such compassion? Or are we to treat
   their decision as an unrighteous one, and to constitute ourselves
   judges of their opinion on such subjects, and to throw clemency into
   tears, and to overturn the established order?

   --Dionysius, To Fabius Bishop of Antioch, CCEL

   Matthew 18:21-35

   When Jesus indicates that I should be forgiving, it should be as God
   forgives, which is unconditionally and forgetfully. As long as the hurt
   comes to mind, I have not forgiven. As long as I add Aifs@ to my
   Acontract of forgiveness@, I have not forgiven. If I do not forgive in
   the way Jesus indicated, I am merely feeding my ego=s desire to be
   self-righteous and holding my own happiness at bay by still expecting
   my proverbial Apound of flesh@ in payment for the wrong done to me.

   If I desire unconditional love and forgiveness for myself, what right
   do I have to prohibit the same for others? Do I realize that by not
   forgiving I am primarily hurting myself?

   364. Chrism Of Healing

   (Be Opened!)

   Why also need I mention the acts of Abbot Abraham, who was surnamed the
   simple from the simplicity of his life and his innocence. This man when
   he had gone from the desert to Egypt for the harvest in the season of
   Quinquagesima was pestered with tears and prayers by a woman who
   brought her little child, already pining away and half dead from lack
   of milk,; he gave her a coup of water to drink signed with the sign of
   the cross, and when she had drunk it at once most marvelously her
   breasts that had been till then utterly dry flowed with a copious
   abundance of milk. Or the same man as he went to a village was
   surrounded by mocking crowds, who sneered at him and showed him a man
   who was for many years deprived of the power of walking from a
   contracted knee, and crawled from a weakness of long standing, they
   tempted him and said, "Show us, father Abraham, if you are the servant
   of God, and restore this man to his former health, that we may believe
   that the name of Christ, whom you worship, is not vain." Then he at
   once invoked the name of Christ and stooped down and laid hold of the
   man's withered foot and pulled it. And immediately at his touch the
   dried and bent knee was straightened, and he got back the use of his
   legs, which he had forgotten how to use in his long years of weakness,
   and went away rejoicing.

   --Abbot Nesteros, Conferences of John Cassain, CCEL

   Mark 7:31-37

   I wonder what happened to this woman and man after they were healed.
   Besides increasing their faith, I imagine that they put their faith
   into practice using the areas of their lives that were healed. I can
   see the woman helping other women with young children, perhaps becoming
   a wet-nurse. I can picture the man helping others convalescing from
   joint problems, perhaps as an early example of a physical therapist.

   How have I used the healed areas of my life for the glory of God and
   the benefit of others?

   365. The Superiority of Unity

   (I Will Be Perfectly United In My Beliefs And Judgements)

   Dionysius to Novatus his brother, greeting. If you were carried on
   against your will, as you say, you will show that such has been the
   case by your voluntary retirement. For it would have been but dutiful
   to have suffered any kind of ill, so as to avoid rending the Church of
   God. And a martyrdom borne for the sake of preventing a division of the
   Church, would not have been more inglorious than one endured for
   refusing to worship idols, may, in my opinion at least, the former
   would have been a nobler thing than the latter. For in the one case a
   person gives such a testimony simply for his own individual soul,
   whereas in the other case he is a witness for the whole Church. And
   now, if you can persuade or constrain the brethren to come to be of one
   mind again, your uprightness will be superior to your error; and the
   latter will not be charged against you, while the former will be
   commended in you. But if you cannot prevail so far with your recusant
   brethren, see to it that you save your own soul. My wish is, that in
   the Lord you may fare well as you study peace.

   --Dionysius, To Novatus, CCEL

   1 Corinthians 1:10-13

   Jesus, I thank you for allowing me to prepare this anthology and
   meditation book. May it be used for your glory. May You use it to
   promote peace and unity among the various Christian groups and may it
   bring others knowledge of the Christian faith. Amen.

   In what ways does my life promote unity in my family and community?

   366. Penance And Mercy

   (God Sees My Efforts To Renounce My Evil Ways)

   Concerning wilful murderers let them remain protractors; but at the end
   o life let them be indulged with full communion. Concerning involuntary
   homicides, a former decree directs that they be received to full
   communion after seven years (of penance), according to the prescribed
   degrees; but this second one that they fulfil a term of five years.

   -Canon 22 and 23, CCEL

   Jonah 3:4-10

   The holy life requires a changed and purified character. This requires
   effort including repentance and the making of amends. While I may not
   have to publicly humiliate myself and beat myself with a proverbial
   stick, I still need to show sorrow for my shortcomings, be willing to
   make restitution for my wrongs, and to suffer whatever legitimate
   consequences my activities may bring upon me.

   Do I show sorrow for my shortcomings? Am I willing to ask God for the
   grace to change from the inside out?
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:1-31   [2]1:26-31   [3]2   [4]3   [5]4:1-16   [6]4:3-8   [7]15:6
   [8]18:20-33   [9]19   [10]21:1-7   [11]28:10-19   [12]39

   Exodus

   [13]12:13   [14]22   [15]24   [16]34:29-35

   Leviticus

   [17]17:11

   Numbers

   [18]21:4-9   [19]22:22-35   [20]25:1-18

   Deuteronomy

   [21]6:4-9   [22]10:12-13   [23]20:10-18   [24]21   [25]30:15-20

   Joshua

   [26]1   [27]7   [28]24:15

   Judges

   [29]6   [30]11:29-40

   1 Samuel

   [31]1:1-20   [32]1:19-28   [33]5:1-12   [34]15:4-23   [35]17
   [36]19:19-24   [37]28:8-19

   1 Kings

   [38]2   [39]3   [40]11   [41]18:20-40   [42]19:9-16   [43]19:19-21
   [44]22

   2 Kings

   [45]4:18-37   [46]13:20-21   [47]20:1-11

   1 Chronicles

   [48]16   [49]38:8-10

   2 Chronicles

   [50]10:1-19   [51]20:15-17   [52]33:1-18

   Nehemiah

   [53]1   [54]8:1-12

   Esther

   [55]4:17

   Job

   [56]5:17-18

   Psalms

   [57]1   [58]1   [59]1:1-6   [60]8   [61]17:6-9   [62]17:15
   [63]19:1-6   [64]19:7-14   [65]22   [66]22:1-31   [67]23   [68]23
   [69]24   [70]26   [71]27:1   [72]27:5   [73]27:7-10   [74]34
   [75]37:25-26   [76]39:1-13   [77]40:1   [78]40:1-4   [79]50   [80]62
   [81]63:1-5   [82]68   [83]73:1   [84]78:1-2   [85]78:2   [86]78:5-6
   [87]84:11   [88]90:1-17   [89]91:9-13   [90]91:14-16   [91]92
   [92]103   [93]103   [94]103:1-5   [95]103:13-18   [96]118
   [97]119:1-5   [98]121:1-8   [99]125   [100]127:1-2   [101]130:1-8
   [102]131   [103]131   [104]133   [105]136   [106]139   [107]139:1-18
   [108]145:13-18

   Proverbs

   [109]2:3-11   [110]3:5-6   [111]3:11-12   [112]5:1-14   [113]10
   [114]21

   Ecclesiastes

   [115]1:2   [116]1:12-18   [117]2:18-23   [118]5:19-20   [119]11

   Isaiah

   [120]1:2-9   [121]1:16-18   [122]5:1-6   [123]26:19   [124]30:20-21
   [125]40:31   [126]49:6   [127]54:10   [128]55   [129]55:3   [130]55:6
   [131]55:8-9   [132]57:15   [133]58:5-11   [134]65

   Jeremiah

   [135]1:5   [136]2   [137]3:22   [138]6:19   [139]12:1-3   [140]15
   [141]17   [142]29   [143]29:11   [144]31

   Ezekiel

   [145]1:1-28   [146]14:12-20   [147]34:1-31   [148]36:26-27   [149]37
   [150]37:1-14

   Daniel

   [151]3:52-63   [152]10:5-6

   Hosea

   [153]11:1-4   [154]11:8-9

   Amos

   [155]6

   Jonah

   [156]3:1-5   [157]3:4   [158]3:4-10

   Micah

   [159]2   [160]6:6-8

   Habakkuk

   [161]1:2   [162]1:2-3

   Zephaniah

   [163]2:3   [164]2:3

   Matthew

   [165]2   [166]4   [167]4:11   [168]5   [169]5:1-12   [170]5:11-12
   [171]5:14   [172]5:14-16   [173]5:21-22   [174]5:25-26   [175]5:29-30
   [176]5:43-48   [177]5:48   [178]6:5-6   [179]6:5-15   [180]6:7-8
   [181]6:13   [182]6:19-21   [183]6:22-23   [184]6:22-23   [185]6:24
   [186]6:25-34   [187]7   [188]7:1-15   [189]7:7-13   [190]7:24-27
   [191]8:5-11   [192]9:9-13   [193]10:17-20   [194]11:2-6
   [195]11:28-30   [196]13   [197]13:34   [198]13:34-35   [199]16:24-26
   [200]17:1-8   [201]17:24-27   [202]18:1-7   [203]18:19-20
   [204]18:21-22   [205]18:21-35   [206]18:23-25   [207]20:20-28
   [208]21:12-17   [209]22   [210]22:34-40   [211]23:1-3   [212]23:25-26
   [213]25:14-18   [214]26:38   [215]27   [216]27:45-50   [217]28:16-20

   Mark

   [218]1:21-28   [219]1:31-39   [220]1:35-39   [221]2   [222]2:9-11
   [223]2:28-30   [224]4:18-20   [225]4:30-32   [226]5:1-20
   [227]6:17-20   [228]7:6-9   [229]7:31-37   [230]8:34-37   [231]10
   [232]10:23-27   [233]14:22-25   [234]15   [235]16:14-15

   Luke

   [236]1   [237]1:1-4   [238]2:25-35   [239]3:10-14   [240]4:1-13
   [241]4:23-24   [242]6   [243]6:38   [244]7:36-48   [245]7:47
   [246]8:16-18   [247]8:40-48   [248]9   [249]10   [250]11   [251]11
   [252]11:27-28   [253]13:22-30   [254]15:4-10   [255]15:11-32
   [256]16:8   [257]17:9-10   [258]18:1-8   [259]18:8   [260]18:9-14
   [261]18:11-14   [262]18:18-23   [263]18:24-27   [264]20
   [265]22:39-46   [266]23

   John

   [267]1   [268]1:1   [269]1:1-5   [270]1:9-14   [271]1:35-39
   [272]1:51   [273]3   [274]3:5-8   [275]3:8   [276]3:16   [277]3:19-21
   [278]4   [279]4:21-24   [280]5:13-6:5   [281]6:1-14   [282]6:10
   [283]6:14-16   [284]6:35   [285]8:12   [286]8:12   [287]11
   [288]13:12-17   [289]14:4-7   [290]14:16   [291]14:21-24   [292]14:27
   [293]15   [294]15:4-5   [295]15:4-7   [296]16:4   [297]17:1-5
   [298]17:6-19   [299]17:20-26   [300]18:28-38   [301]19:1-3
   [302]19:16-18   [303]19:25-27   [304]19:28-30   [305]19:32-34
   [306]21

   Acts

   [307]2:22-25   [308]2:42-47   [309]3   [310]3:1-10   [311]4   [312]5
   [313]6   [314]7:55-60   [315]10:36-42   [316]12:1-11   [317]12:22-23
   [318]13:4-12   [319]15:1-12   [320]15:22-36   [321]16:6-10
   [322]17:22-28   [323]19   [324]19:1-7   [325]25:13

   Romans

   [326]1:8-12   [327]1:18-22   [328]3:21-27   [329]5:1-5   [330]6:8-14
   [331]6:15-19   [332]7   [333]7:1-6   [334]7:14-25   [335]8:1-13
   [336]8:2-13   [337]8:10   [338]8:14-17   [339]8:28-30   [340]8:37
   [341]10:9-11   [342]12   [343]12:1-2   [344]12:3   [345]12:9-13
   [346]13:11-14   [347]14

   1 Corinthians

   [348]1:10-13   [349]1:18-25   [350]1:26-29   [351]1:26-31   [352]3:18
   [353]4   [354]4   [355]5:1-5   [356]6   [357]6   [358]8:1-3   [359]9
   [360]10   [361]10   [362]12:4-11   [363]12:18-27   [364]13:1-13
   [365]14   [366]15   [367]15   [368]15:1-8

   2 Corinthians

   [369]1   [370]5:1-10   [371]6:18   [372]8:1-15   [373]11
   [374]12:1-4   [375]12:7-10   [376]12:8-10   [377]13:5   [378]13:11

   Galatians

   [379]1:15-16   [380]2   [381]4:1-11   [382]5:1   [383]5:5-6
   [384]5:13-21   [385]5:22-25   [386]6:1-5   [387]6:7-9   [388]6:17

   Ephesians

   [389]1:3-14   [390]1:3-14   [391]1:7-10   [392]2   [393]2   [394]2:19
   [395]4   [396]4   [397]5   [398]5:6-20   [399]5:29-32   [400]6:4

   Philippians

   [401]4:6-7   [402]4:11-13

   Colossians

   [403]1:15-20   [404]2:3   [405]2:9-10   [406]3:1-3   [407]3:3-17
   [408]3:23

   1 Thessalonians

   [409]4:13-18

   2 Thessalonians

   [410]3:6-15

   1 Timothy

   [411]1:18-20   [412]3   [413]3:14-16   [414]4:12-16   [415]6
   [416]6:10

   2 Timothy

   [417]1   [418]1:15-18   [419]2:11-13   [420]2:13   [421]3:10-12
   [422]3:14-17   [423]4:1-5

   Titus

   [424]1   [425]1   [426]1:10-14   [427]2:1-6   [428]3:4-8

   Hebrews

   [429]2:14-18   [430]4:5   [431]4:14-16   [432]11   [433]11:1
   [434]11:1-40   [435]12   [436]12   [437]13:5-8   [438]13:18

   James

   [439]1:2-4   [440]1:12-15   [441]2:1-13   [442]2:14-17   [443]2:18-23
   [444]2:24-26   [445]3:13-18   [446]4:6-10   [447]4:13-17   [448]5:1-6
   [449]5:7-15   [450]5:16-18

   1 Peter

   [451]1:13-15   [452]4   [453]4:10-11   [454]5

   2 Peter

   [455]1:3-9   [456]2:1-3   [457]3:14-16

   1 John

   [458]1:5-10   [459]2:15-17   [460]2:29-3:2   [461]3   [462]4
   [463]4:1-4   [464]5:1-11   [465]5:14-15

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [466]1:1-11   [467]1:2   [468]1:12-16   [469]1:13   [470]4:7-19
   [471]7   [472]7:22-30   [473]9:13-18

   2 Maccabees

   [474]6   [475]7:1-41   [476]15:11-16

   Sirach

   [477]44:16-45:6
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p244.1
   2. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii-p709.1
   3. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=0#viii-p176.1
   4. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vii-p185.1
   5. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v-p341.1
   6. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv-p716.2
   7. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#vi-p422.1
   8. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=20#ii_1-p344.1
   9. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=0#vii-p394.2
  10. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v-p113.1
  11. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=10#iii-p391.1
  12. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=0#vii-p313.1
  13. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v-p180.2
  14. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=0#vi-p360.1
  15. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=24&scrV=0#viii-p140.1
  16. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=29#iii-p759.2
  17. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=11#v-p180.1
  18. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=4#iii-p726.1
  19. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=22#viii-p427.1
  20. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=25&scrV=1#ix-p60.1
  21. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v-p135.2
  22. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=10&scrV=12#vi-p324.2
  23. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=20&scrV=10#v-p429.1
  24. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=21&scrV=0#vii-p367.1
  25. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=15#iv-p345.1
  26. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p295.1
  27. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=0#viii-p140.2
  28. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=15#iii-p347.1
  29. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vi-p183.2
  30. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iv-p46.2
  31. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p420.1
  32. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=19#viii-p320.1
  33. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v-p411.1
  34. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=4#iv-p46.1
  35. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=0#vii-p222.1
  36. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=19&scrV=19#iv-p63.1
  37. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=8#v-p279.1
  38. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=0#viii-p291.1
  39. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vi-p219.1
  40. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vi-p386.1
  41. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=20#viii-p275.1
  42. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=9#ii_1-p153.1
  43. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=19#ii_1-p550.1
  44. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=0#vii-p203.2
  45. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=18#ii_1-p364.1
  46. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=20#iii-p813.2
  47. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=1#ii_1-p440.1
  48. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=16&scrV=0#vii-p340.1
  49. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=38&scrV=8#iv-p716.1
  50. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v-p27.3
  51. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=20&scrV=15#v-p18.1
  52. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=33&scrV=1#v-p153.1
  53. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p171.1
  54. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iv-p291.2
  55. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=4&scrV=17#ii_1-p507.1
  56. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iv-p468.2
  57. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi-p164.1
  58. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi-p173.1
  59. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii_1-p299.1
  60. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii-p502.1
  61. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=6#v-p162.1
  62. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#v-p162.2
  63. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#iii-p421.1
  64. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=7#iii-p558.1
  65. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=0#ii_1-p669.1
  66. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=1#ii_1-p667.1
  67. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=0#iv-p305.1
  68. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=0#iv-p307.1
  69. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=0#vi-p156.1
  70. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=0#vi-p174.2
  71. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=1#iv-p154.1
  72. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=5#iv-p154.2
  73. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=7#iv-p588.1
  74. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=0#vi-p377.2
  75. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=25#vi-p413.1
  76. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=1#ii_1-p563.1
  77. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=1#iv-p798.3
  78. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=1#v-p208.1
  79. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=0#vii-p50.2
  80. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=0#ii-p2.1
  81. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=1#iv-p604.1
  82. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=0#vi-p360.2
  83. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=1#vi-p156.2
  84. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=1#v-p144.2
  85. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=2#v-p142.1
  86. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=5#v-p135.3
  87. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=11#iv-p744.1
  88. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=1#ii_1-p485.1
  89. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=9#vi-p377.1
  90. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=14#vi-p431.1
  91. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=92&scrV=0#vi-p174.1
  92. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=0#v-p376.1
  93. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=0#vi-p94.1
  94. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=1#vi-p93.1
  95. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=13#vi-p93.2
  96. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=0#vii-p268.1
  97. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=1#viii-p231.1
  98. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=1#iv-p620.1
  99. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=125&scrV=0#iii-p78.1
 100. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=1#ii_1-p32.1
 101. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=1#v-p208.2
 102. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=131&scrV=0#iv-p865.1
 103. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=131&scrV=0#iv-p867.1
 104. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=133&scrV=0#vii-p140.1
 105. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=136&scrV=0#iii-p405.1
 106. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=0#ii_1-p609.1
 107. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=1#ii_1-p607.1
 108. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=13#v-p438.1
 109. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v-p234.2
 110. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vi-p324.1
 111. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv-p112.1
 112. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=1#viii-p6.1
 113. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vi-p228.1
 114. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=21&scrV=0#v-p253.2
 115. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv-p12.2
 116. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v-p234.1
 117. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v-p253.1
 118. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iv-p730.2
 119. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=11&scrV=0#viii-p186.1
 120. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=2#ix-p24.1
 121. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v-p367.1
 122. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=1#viii-p231.2
 123. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=19#v-p288.2
 124. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=20#vii-p32.1
 125. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=31#iv-p657.1
 126. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=6#v-p411.2
 127. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=10#iv-p730.1
 128. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=0#vi-p404.2
 129. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=3#iii-p682.1
 130. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=6#iii-p682.2
 131. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=8#iii-p682.3
 132. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#v-p153.2
 133. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=5#vi-p147.1
 134. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=0#vii-p122.1
 135. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v-p190.1
 136. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=0#ii-p2.2
 137. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=22#v-p367.2
 138. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii-p50.1
 139. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iv-p229.3
 140. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=15&scrV=0#vii-p403.1
 141. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=0#viii-p167.1
 142. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=0#viii-p131.1
 143. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=11#iv-p657.2
 144. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=0#vii-p394.1
 145. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p726.2
 146. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=12#iv-p345.2
 147. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=1#viii-p445.1
 148. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#iv-p776.2
 149. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=0#ii-p2.3
 150. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=1#v-p288.1
 151. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=52#v-p297.1
 152. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iii-p759.1
 153. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=1#ii_1-p272.1
 154. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=8#ii_1-p272.2
 155. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vii-p448.1
 156. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv-p674.1
 157. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv-p674.2
 158. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=4#ix-p141.1
 159. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi-p41.2
 160. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iii-p845.1
 161. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv-p798.2
 162. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv-p798.1
 163. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi-p138.1
 164. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi-p138.2
 165. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi-p6.2
 166. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vii-p104.1
 167. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii-p793.2
 168. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vii-p323.1
 169. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v-p465.1
 170. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=11#ii_1-p453.1
 171. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi-p15.2
 172. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii-p591.1
 173. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv-p139.1
 174. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vi-p279.1
 175. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=29#ix-p51.1
 176. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=43#ii_1-p213.1
 177. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#iv-p127.2
 178. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#i-p32.1
 179. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#ii_1-p183.1
 180. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vi-p261.1
 181. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii-p160.2
 182. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=19#v-p27.1
 183. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=22#iii-p160.1
 184. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=22#iii-p572.1
 185. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#iv-p698.2
 186. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=25#ii_1-p169.1
 187. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii-p2.4
 188. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=1#ii_1-p470.1
 189. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#ii_1-p242.1
 190. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=24#ii_1-p258.1
 191. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=5#v-p199.1
 192. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=9#iii-p242.1
 193. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vi-p431.2
 194. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=2#ii_1-p635.1
 195. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#iii-p638.1
 196. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vii-p386.1
 197. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=34#v-p142.2
 198. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=34#v-p144.1
 199. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#iii-p94.1
 200. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#iii-p9.1
 201. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=24#vi-p351.2
 202. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=1#iv-p383.1
 203. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=19#ii_1-p751.1
 204. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=21#ii_1-p412.1
 205. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=21#ix-p114.1
 206. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=23#ii_1-p520.1
 207. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=20#v-p225.1
 208. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=12#ix-p105.1
 209. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=0#vi-p351.1
 210. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=34#vi-p440.1
 211. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=1#vii-p385.2
 212. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=25#ix-p69.1
 213. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=14#v-p102.1
 214. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=38#viii-p284.1
 215. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=0#vii-p77.1
 216. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=45#ii_1-p651.1
 217. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=16#iv-p261.1
 218. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v-p402.2
 219. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=31#iv-p429.1
 220. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=35#ii_1-p140.1
 221. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vii-p304.1
 222. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv-p558.1
 223. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=28#viii-p104.1
 224. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv-p846.3
 225. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=30#v-p92.1
 226. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi-p297.1
 227. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vi-p32.1
 228. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=6#viii-p356.1
 229. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=31#ix-p123.1
 230. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iv-p26.1
 231. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vi-p6.1
 232. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=23#iv-p588.2
 233. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=22#v-p44.1
 234. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=0#vi-p395.1
 235. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv-p261.2
 236. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p240.1
 237. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=1#viii-p240.1
 238. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=25#v-p358.2
 239. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii-p54.1
 240. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=1#ii_1-p847.1
 241. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=23#ix-p87.1
 242. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v-p438.2
 243. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=38#vi-p219.2
 244. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=36#iii-p317.1
 245. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#ii_1-p237.1
 246. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=16#vi-p342.1
 247. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=40#iii-p696.1
 248. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=0#vii-p113.1
 249. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vii-p258.1
 250. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vi-p15.1
 251. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vi-p288.1
 252. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=27#v-p358.1
 253. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=22#viii-p302.1
 254. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=4#iii-p32.1
 255. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=11#iii-p331.1
 256. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vi-p270.1
 257. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=9#iv-p127.1
 258. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#v-p7.1
 259. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=8#v-p9.1
 260. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=9#v-p420.2
 261. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=11#iv-p12.1
 262. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=18#ii_1-p819.1
 263. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=24#ii_1-p835.1
 264. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=0#vi-p333.1
 265. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=39#ii_1-p95.1
 266. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=0#v-p217.1
 267. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p349.1
 268. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p244.2
 269. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p318.1
 270. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv-p318.2
 271. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=35#iii-p228.1
 272. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#iii-p793.1
 273. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#ii-p2.6
 274. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv-p762.1
 275. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v-p402.1
 276. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ii_1-p111.1
 277. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv-p762.2
 278. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#ii-p2.5
 279. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v-p135.1
 280. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=13#viii-p311.1
 281. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=1#ii_1-p381.1
 282. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iii-p258.2
 283. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v-p270.1
 284. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=35#iii-p258.1
 285. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iv-p421.1
 286. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vi-p342.2
 287. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vii-p286.1
 288. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=12#ii_1-p534.1
 289. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi-p102.1
 290. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#iv-p552.1
 291. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#ix-p15.1
 292. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=27#iv-p822.1
 293. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=0#vii-p167.1
 294. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=4#iii-p208.1
 295. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=4#iv-p698.1
 296. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=4#v-p350.1
 297. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#v-p315.1
 298. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=6#viii-p86.2
 299. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=20#v-p306.1
 300. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=28#viii-p374.1
 301. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=1#ii_1-p581.1
 302. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=16#ii_1-p581.2
 303. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=25#viii-p436.1
 304. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=28#ii_1-p581.3
 305. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=32#ii_1-p581.4
 306. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=0#viii-p86.1
 307. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=22#ii_1-p428.1
 308. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=42#iii-p747.1
 309. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vi-p306.1
 310. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=1#ii_1-p315.1
 311. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vi-p147.2
 312. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vii-p194.1
 313. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=0#viii-p122.1
 314. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=55#ii_1-p199.1
 315. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=36#iv-p429.2
 316. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=1#ii_1-p620.1
 317. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=22#v-p27.2
 318. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=4#viii-p392.1
 319. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=1#vi-p75.1
 320. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vi-p75.2
 321. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=6#iv-p248.1
 322. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=22#iv-p637.1
 323. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#viii-p113.1
 324. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=1#iv-p574.1
 325. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=25&scrV=13#vi-p32.2
 326. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v-p333.1
 327. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=18#viii-p338.1
 328. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv-p451.1
 329. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vii-p249.1
 330. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=8#ix-p6.1
 331. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=15#iv-p528.1
 332. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#viii-p158.1
 333. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=1#viii-p365.1
 334. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iv-p332.1
 335. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii-p112.1
 336. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iv-p846.1
 337. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=10#iv-p511.2
 338. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#ii_1-p57.1
 339. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#ii_1-p57.2
 340. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=37#iv-p846.2
 341. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=9#iv-p776.1
 342. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vii-p430.1
 343. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii-p303.1
 344. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=3#viii-p347.1
 345. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=9#viii-p347.2
 346. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=11#v-p124.1
 347. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v-p270.2
 348. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=10#ix-p132.1
 349. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v-p69.1
 350. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii-p651.1
 351. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=26#vi-p138.3
 352. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v-p36.1
 353. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vi-p84.2
 354. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=0#viii-p149.1
 355. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv-p542.1
 356. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vii-p358.1
 357. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=0#viii-p204.1
 358. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vii-p277.1
 359. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=0#vii-p59.1
 360. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vi-p183.1
 361. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vii-p322.1
 362. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iii-p192.1
 363. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=18#iii-p526.1
 364. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v-p80.1
 365. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=0#viii-p213.1
 366. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#vii-p376.1
 367. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#vii-p439.1
 368. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=1#ii_1-p683.1
 369. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p23.1
 370. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v-p262.1
 371. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#viii-p329.1
 372. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#ix-p78.1
 373. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vi-p84.1
 374. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii-p668.1
 375. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii-p362.1
 376. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iv-p170.1
 377. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iii-p388.1
 378. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iv-p822.2
 379. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v-p190.2
 380. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi-p449.1
 381. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#ix-p42.1
 382. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi-p66.1
 383. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vi-p66.2
 384. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vi-p66.3
 385. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iii-p445.1
 386. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv-p364.1
 387. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=7#iv-p364.2
 388. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iii-p813.1
 389. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ii-p0.3
 390. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v-p393.1
 391. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv-p93.1
 392. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vii-p86.1
 393. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vii-p212.1
 394. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii-p544.1
 395. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vii-p105.1
 396. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vii-p231.1
 397. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=0#viii-p95.1
 398. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=6#viii-p77.1
 399. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=29#iii-p608.1
 400. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv-p383.2
 401. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv-p229.1
 402. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv-p229.2
 403. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ii_1-p702.1
 404. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv-p274.1
 405. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv-p191.1
 406. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv-p511.1
 407. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#ii_1-p715.1
 408. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv-p487.1
 409. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii-p830.1
 410. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii-p65.1
 411. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv-p542.2
 412. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vi-p129.1
 413. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii-p129.1
 414. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv-p397.1
 415. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vii-p105.2
 416. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vi-p404.1
 417. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p95.1
 418. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#viii-p222.1
 419. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv-p412.1
 420. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii-p41.1
 421. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii-p6.1
 422. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv-p291.1
 423. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv-p397.2
 424. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p331.1
 425. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p385.1
 426. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi-p41.1
 427. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=1#viii-p68.1
 428. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi-p111.1
 429. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi-p120.1
 430. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=5#ii_1-p227.2
 431. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=14#ii_1-p227.1
 432. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vii-p412.1
 433. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vi-p422.2
 434. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iv-p154.3
 435. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v-p385.1
 436. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vii-p131.1
 437. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v-p324.1
 438. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=18#vii-p331.2
 439. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv-p468.1
 440. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv-p139.2
 441. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii-p80.1
 442. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=14#ii_1-p124.1
 443. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=18#viii-p240.2
 444. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=24#ii_1-p124.2
 445. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=13#viii-p410.1
 446. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv-p80.1
 447. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi-p249.1
 448. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi-p210.1
 449. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=7#viii-p418.1
 450. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#viii-p59.1
 451. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii-p421.2
 452. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v-p447.1
 453. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=10#viii-p266.1
 454. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vii-p203.1
 455. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p773.1
 456. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#viii-p23.1
 457. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#vi-p458.1
 458. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii-p281.1
 459. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv-p332.2
 460. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=29#ii_1-p330.1
 461. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p341.2
 462. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vii-p158.1
 463. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii-p375.1
 464. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#viii-p15.1
 465. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v-p57.1
 466. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=1#viii-p293.1
 467. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=2#ii_1-p806.2
 468. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=12#ii_1-p806.1
 469. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=13#viii-p291.2
 470. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=7#viii-p383.1
 471. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii_1-p14.1
 472. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=22#ii_1-p12.1
 473. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=13#iv-p318.3
 474. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vi-p201.1
 475. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=7&scrV=1#viii-p401.1
 476. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=15&scrV=11#iii-p625.1
 477. file:///ccel/p/pasko/saints/cache/saints.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=44&scrV=16#viii-p248.1
