     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Stones Rolled Away and Other Addresses to Young Men
      Creator(s): Drummond, Henry
     Print Basis: London: Samuel Bagster and Sons Limited
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
      LC Call no: BV4501.D755
     LC Subjects:

                  Practical theology

                  Practical religion. The Christian life
     __________________________________________________________________

                               STONES ROLLED AWAY

  AND

  OTHER ADDRESSES TO YOUNG MEN

  BY

  HENRY DRUMMOND, F.R.S.E., F.G.S., LL.D.

AUTHOR OF "NATURAL LAW IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD", "THE ASCENT
OF MAN", "THE GREATEST THING IN THE WORLD",
"TROPICAL AFRICA" , ETC.

   THIRTIETH THOUSAND

   LONDON: SAMUEL BAGSTER AND SONS LIMITED

   NEW YORK: JAMES POTT AND CO.
     __________________________________________________________________

CONTENTS

   INTRODUCTION

  PART I.

   STONES ROLLED AWAY

  PART II.

   THE MAN WHO IS DOWN

  PART III.

   ONE WAY TO HELP BOYS

  PART IV.

   AN APPEAL TO THE OUTSIDER:
   OR, THE CLAIMS OF CHRISTIANITY

  PART V.

   LIFE ON THE TOP FLOOR

  PART VI.

   THE KINGDOM OF GOD AND YOUR PART IN IT

  PART VII.

   THE THREE ELEMENTS OF A COMPLETE LIFE
     __________________________________________________________________

INTRODUCTION

   Any one who had read "The Greatest Thing in the World" could not help
   but desire to see and hear its author; and, when Professor Drummond
   visited Boston in the spring of 1893, the capacity of lecture halls was
   taxed to the utmost. To accommodate thousands turned away, he repeated
   some of his lectures in the Lowell Institute Course, Boston. It was a
   crowded Boylston Hall or Appleton Chapel that invariably faced him when
   he addressed the students of Harvard University. He drew young men as
   few men can. He loved life and nature. He studied and knew men. He had
   read much. He had travelled in Europe, America, Africa, Australia and
   the New Hebrides, with eyes and ears wide open. With a charming
   personality and a rare grace of manner, he was a most attractive
   speaker and character, whether on the platform or in the quiet hour.

   *  ?   *  ?   *  ?   *  ?   *  ?   *

   The student, the evangelist and pastor, the professor and lecturer, the
   traveller and writer, has passed away; but his words, his writing and
   his influence cannot. He willingly gave his life to help others. Many a
   soul was brought into a higher life. Many a life was led into the top
   flat. Many a one was shown his part in the Kingdom of God. Many a man
   who was down was set upon his feet. Many a stone of difficulty was
   rolled away.

   The addresses here given to the public in permanent form for the first
   time, as they have already helped some, may yet help many more.

   The first four were delivered to students of Harvard University, in
   April, 1893. The remaining three addresses were delivered at the
   World's Bible Students' Conference, Northfield, Mass., in July, 1893.

   LUTHER HESS WARING.

   Scranton, Penna.
     __________________________________________________________________

I

STONES ROLLED AWAY

   Gentlemen, I am very much astonished at this spectacle. I told you last
   night it was against our principles in Scotland to have religious
   meetings on a week night. It seems to me that if you come to a meeting
   of this kind you mean business, and you may just as well own it. If a
   man comes to a shorthand class, it means that he wants to learn
   shorthand; and, if a man turns up at what I suppose I must call a
   religious meeting, it means that he is less or more interested in the
   subject.

   Now I should say that I think a man has to give himself the benefit of
   that desire, and he should not be ashamed of it. The facts of religion
   are real; and, as mere students of life, you and I are bound to take
   cognizance of them. Of course, many very fair minded men are kept away
   from going into this subject as they would like by a number of
   exceedingly surface reasons. I cannot help calling them surface
   reasons. For instance, you meet a man who tells you that he doesn't
   like Christians, that they always put his back up.

   Now, Christians often put my back up. There are many of them I find,
   with whom it takes all my time to get along. But that is not peculiar
   with Christians. It is only peculiar to peculiar Christians, and there
   are just as many of the other sort. A man might just as well say, I
   don't like sinners. A man might just as well keep out of the world
   because he doesn't like some people in the world, as to keep out of
   Christian circles because there are some objectionable creatures in it.
   We cannot be too fastidious. We cannot join any sect without having the
   weaker brethren in it. We cannot get on in this world entirely by
   ourselves. We must join this thing and that if we are going to be of
   any service at all, so that I think the difficulty of having to join
   ourselves with objectionable men applies pretty much all around.

   Other men are kept away from Christianity by what I might call its
   phrases. A great many people, not so much in your country as in ours,
   talk in a dialect. The older people especially, our grandmothers, have
   a set of phrases in which all their religion is imbedded, and they
   can't talk to us about religion without using those phrases; and when
   we talk to them, if we do not use those phrases, we are put out of the
   synagogue. Now what we can do in this case is to translate their
   dialect into our own language, and then translate into their dialect
   when we speak back. It is a different dialect. We would put it upon a
   different basis; but after all we mean pretty much the same thing, and
   if we can once get into this habit of translating our more modern way
   of putting things into this antique language that those worthy people
   use to us we will find ourselves more at one with them than we think.

   I meet another set of men who tell me that they don't like churches,
   that they find sermons stale, flat and unprofitable. Now, if any man
   here hates a dull sermon, I am with him. I have intense sympathy with
   any man who hates dullness. I think the world is far too dull, and that
   is one of the greatest reasons why the brightest men should throw
   themselves into Christianity to give it a broader phase to other
   people. One must confess that some church work, at all events, is not
   of a very cheerful or lively order. But of course that is not an
   argument why one should abstain from religious service. There are many
   reasons why we should even sacrifice ourselves and submit to a little
   dullness now and again if it is going to gain for us a greater good.
   After all, we live by institutions, and by fixed institutions. There
   are very few men who are able to get along without steady institutions
   of one kind and another. Some men are so tremendously free that they
   hate to be tied down to hours, to places and to seasons; but there are
   very few men big enough to stand that for a long time. If we look about
   for it, we will find some place that we can go and get some good. When
   a man goes to church really hungry and goes because he is hungry, he
   will pick up something, no matter where it is. Christ himself went to
   church, and even if we know something more than the minister knows, the
   fellowship, the sense of the solidarity of the Christian church
   throughout the whole world, the prayer and the inspiration of the hymn
   and the reading will at least do us some good. I do not say that a man
   cannot be very religious without that. There are tens of thousands of
   Christians who never go to church; and there are tens of thousands who
   go to church who are not Christians. But, as with substantial meals
   taken at intervals, man is no worse and may be much better for it.

   The religious life needs keeping up just as the other parts of our life
   need keeping up. There is nothing more impossible than for a man to
   live a religious life on an hour's work or an hour's thought a week. A
   man could not learn French, German or Latin by giving an hour per week
   to it; and how can we expect a man to get in this great world of the
   spirit, this great moral world, this great ideal region, and learn
   anything about it by merely dabbling in it now and again? We must make
   it a regular business, and, if the religious part is a vital part of
   the whole nature, we may as well attend to it.

   You may remember a passage in Mr. Darwin's life. He says: "In one
   respect my mind has changed during the last twenty or thirty years. Up
   to the age of thirty, or beyond it, the poetry of many kinds, such as
   the works of Milton, Gray, Byron, Coleridge and Shelley, gave me great
   pleasure; and even as a school boy I took intense delight in
   Shakespeare, and especially in the historical plays. I have always said
   that pictures gave me considerable, and music very great, delight. But
   now for many years I cannot endure to read a line of poetry. I have
   tried lately to read Shakespeare, but found it so intolerably dull that
   it nauseated me. I have also lost my taste for pictures and music. My
   mind seems to have become a kind of machine for grinding general laws
   out of large collections of facts. But why this should have caused the
   atrophy of that part of the brain, I cannot conceive. If I had my life
   to live over again" (this is the point) "I would have made the rule to
   read some poetry and listen to some music at least once every week."
   There is the greatest authority on degeneration confessing to his own
   personal degeneration, and in the same paragraph telling us how we may
   avoid it. He says by leaving these things out of his life for so many
   years, although he had a real liking for them, his nature at these
   points began to atrophy, and when he went back to them he found that
   they disgusted him; and then he says that, if he had his life to live
   again, he would have made it a rule to read some poetry and listen to
   some music at least once a week, and that would have kept the thing up.
   There is nothing magical about religion. If a man is to keep it up, he
   must use the means, just as he would use the means to keep up the
   violin, or his interest in art of any kind.

   I find another set of men who have never got beyond this difficulty,
   that they find the Bible a somewhat arid and slow book. Now, in the
   first place, I want to say that I have, again, great sympathy with that
   objector because, as a matter of fact, there are whole tracts of the
   Bible which are distinctly dull, which are written in an archaic
   language, and about departments of history in the past which haven't
   any great living interest for us now. One must remember that the Bible
   is not a book, but a library consisting of a large number of books. By
   an accident, we have these books bound up in one as if they were one
   book; and to say that all the books of the Bible are dull is simply to
   pass a literary judgment which is incorrect. It is not true, as a
   matter of fact, that all these books of the Bible are dull. Of course a
   sailing directory is very flat on the shore; but when a man is at sea
   and wants to steer his way through difficult and dangerous wastes,
   where the currents are strong and the passages narrow, he wants the
   best chart he can get, and he wants to use it as carefully as he can;
   and when a man wakens up to the difficulty of life and the reality of
   its temptations, he wants some such chart as he gets in that book to
   help him through.

   As a mere literary work, there are books there that are unsurpassed in
   the English tongue, and for their teaching, for their beauty and for
   their truth they have never been surpassed. Christ's words, of course,
   are beyond comparison; but even Paul had a far greater brain than
   almost any writer of history.

   John's writing is far deeper and more beautiful than Emerson's, for
   instance. Let the man who is in love with Emerson, as I am happy to say
   I am, take up the book of John just as he would take up Emerson, and
   see if he doesn't get in it a great deal that Emerson has, and a great
   deal more. If a man doesn't like the Bible, it is because he has never
   struck the best parts of it, or because he has never felt any great
   need in his own life for its teaching. As a matter of fact, however,
   reading the Bible is a new thing. There were Christians for hundreds
   and hundreds of years before there was any people's Bible; so that it
   is not even essential, if you can't overcome this matter of taste, that
   you should read the Bible. There are hundreds of Christians at this
   moment who cannot read the Bible. There are Christians in heathen lands
   in whose language there is as yet no Bible; so that you see there is no
   absolute connection between these two things. Besides that, the Bible
   has now become diffused through literature to such an extent that you
   can often get the heart of the Bible in a very bright and living and
   practical form through other forms of literature. If you don't care to
   get it direct from the book itself, you can get it from our modern
   poetry, even from our modern novel; and Christianity has now been so
   long in the world and is diffused over so many things that it reflects
   itself in almost everything in life. Some one was once trying to
   convince a certain lady of that point as they were sitting at dinner;
   and he said to her that in the pudding which they had just eaten there
   was an egg, and that that morning at breakfast he had also eaten an
   egg. He saw the egg at breakfast, but he did not see the egg in the
   pudding; yet he had no doubt the egg in the pudding would nourish him
   just as much as the one he had for breakfast.

   A man may get his nourishment straight out of the Bible. He may see it
   there, shell and all; but he may also get his nourishment mixed up with
   other ingredients, and it will do him just as much good.

   There is another class of men, however, whom none of these minor
   difficulties touch--men who have come up to college, and who have got
   upset on almost all the main doctrines of Christianity. Now, I want to
   confess to you that, so far as I know my old friends, they have all
   passed through that stage. Every man who is worth a button passes
   through that stage. He loses all the forms of truth which he got in the
   Sunday School; and, if he is true to himself, gains them all back again
   in a richer and larger and more permanent form. But, between the loss
   and the gain, there is sometimes a very painful and dismal interlude,
   during which the man thinks that he is never going to believe again,
   when everything lies in ruin, and he doesn't see where any
   reconstruction is to come in. These are dark days and dark years in a
   man's life, and they are inevitable to every man who thinks. They are
   inevitable, because we are all born doubters. We came into the world
   asking questions. The world itself is a sphinx and tempts us to keep on
   asking questions. There are no great truths in the world which are not
   to some extent doubtable; and the instrument with which we look at
   truth is largely impaired, and has to be corrected by long years of
   experience for its early aberration. So that when we look at truth we
   only see part of it, and we see that part of it distorted. The result
   is a certain amount of twilight where we expected full day. One
   consolation to give that man is to tell him that we have all been
   through that. We take it like the measles. It lasts a certain number of
   months or years, and then we come out with our constitutions better
   than ever. There is a real rationale for that. Everything in the world
   passes through these stages, provided it be growing. You remember how
   the philosophers describe it. They describe the three great stages as
   position, opposition and composition. Position: Somebody lays down a
   truth, you look at it and say, "Yes, that is truth." I heard a
   clergyman say that when I was a boy, and I believed it. Then, one day,
   you read a book or hear some one else talk, and he put a query on it;
   and then there came the revolt against it, and for a long time your
   mind was seething with opposition to this original thing which was
   positive. And then you went on and put all these contradictory things
   together and composed them into a unity again. You reached the third
   stage--that of composition.

   It is the same with everything. You begin to learn the piano, and after
   you have played about a year you think you know all about it; and you
   tackle the most difficult pieces, dash away at them, and think you can
   do it as well as anybody. Then you go into Boston and hear some great
   pianist, and come home a sad man. You see you know nothing about it.
   For the next six months you do not touch a single piece. You play
   scales day after day and practice finger exercises. Then, after six
   months, you say: "What is the use of playing scales? Music does not
   exist for scales;" and you turn to your old pieces and play them over
   again in an entirely different way. You have got it all back again.
   There are men here going through the scale period with regard to
   religious questions. What is the use of all this opposition? Is it not
   time to go back again, you ask, and put all this experience into
   something, and get at some truth at the other side? You see the same
   truth in a novel. Volume I., they will. Volume II., they won't. Volume
   III., they do.

   We see the same thing in art. A man paints a picture. He thinks he has
   painted a grand one. After a few months, some one comes along and says:
   "Look here! Look at that boat! You don't call that a boat? And look at
   that leaf! That is not a leaf." And you discover that you have never
   looked at a boat and never seen a leaf. You are disheartened and do
   nothing the next six months but draw boats and leaves; and, after you
   have drawn boats and leaves until you are sick, you say: "What is the
   use of drawing boats and leaves?" and try again and produce your first
   landscape. But it is altogether a different thing from the picture you
   painted before. Now, when a man is working over the details of the
   Christian religion and struggling to get one thing adjusted and
   another, he will very soon find out that that does not amount to much.
   It is a useful thing, and he has to go through it, but he has to come
   out the other side also and put these things together.

   The best advice, I think, that can be given to a man who is in this
   difficulty is, in the first place, to read the best authorities on the
   subject; not to put himself off with cheap tracts and popular sermons,
   but to go to the scientific authorities. There are as great scientific
   authorities in Germany, in England and in America on all the subject
   matter of theology as there are on the subject matter of chemistry or
   geology. Go to the authorities. You may not agree with them when you
   have read them. But if a man reads all the books on the opposition side
   he will very naturally get a distorted view of it. So, for every book
   he reads on the one side, he should, in justice, read a book on the
   other side.

   Next, let a man remember that the great thing is not to think about
   religion, but to do it. We do not live in a "think" world. It is a real
   world. You do not believe that botany lies in the pages of Sachs.
   Botany lies out there in the flowers and in the trees, and it is
   living. And religion does not live in the pages of the doctrinal books,
   but in human life--in conflict with our own temptations, and in the
   conduct and character of our fellow beings. When we abandon this
   "think-world" of ours and get out into the real world, we will find
   that, after all, these doubts are not of such immense importance, and
   that we can do a great deal of good in the world.

   For my part, I have as many doubts on all the great subjects connected
   with theology as probably any one here; but they do not interfere in
   the very slightest with my trying, in what humble way I can, to follow
   out the religion of Christ. They do not even touch that region; and I
   don't want to lose these doubts. I don't want any man to rob me of my
   problem. I have no liking and little respect for the cock-sure
   Christian--a man who can demonstrate some of the most tremendous
   verities of the faith, as he can the Fifth Book of Euclid. I want a
   religion and theology with some of the infinite about it, and some of
   the shadow as well as some of the light; and if, by reading up one of
   the great doctrines for five or six years, I get some little light upon
   it, it is only to find there are a hundred upon which I could spend
   another hundred lives. And if I should try to meet some specific point
   upon which you are at sea to-night, it would not do you much good.
   To-morrow a new difficulty would start in your mind, and you would be
   simply where you were. I would be stopping up only one of your wells.
   You would open another out of the first book you read. Try to separate
   theological doctrine from practical religion. Believe me that you can
   follow Christ in this University without having solved any of these
   problems. Why, there was a skeptic among the first twelve disciples,
   and one of the best of them, and one of the most loyal of them. That
   man sat down at the first Lord's table, and Christ never said any hard
   words against him. He tried to teach him. That is the only attitude, it
   seems to me, we can take to Christ still. We can enter His school as
   scholars, and sit at His feet and learn what we can; and by doing His
   will in the practical things of life, we shall know of this and that
   doctrine, whether it be of God. The only use of truth is that it can do
   somebody some good. The only use of truth is in its sanctifying power;
   and that is the peculiarity of the truth of Christianity, that it has
   this sanctifying power and makes men better.

   Now you say: "What am I to do? If I am to block up this avenue and am
   not to expect very much along the line of mere belief, in what
   direction am I to shape my Christian life?" Well, I cannot in the least
   answer that. Every man must shape his Christian life for himself,
   according as his own talents may lead him; but the great thing to do is
   simply to become a follower of Christ. That is to become a Christian.
   There is nothing difficult or mysterious about it. A Darwinian is a man
   who follows Darwin, studies his books, accepts his views and says, "I
   am a Darwinian." You look into Christ's life, into His influence; you
   look at the needs of the world; you see how the one meets the other;
   you look into your own life and see how Christ's life meets your life;
   and you say, "I shall follow this teacher and leader until I get a
   better." From the time you do that, you are a Christian. You may be a
   very poor one. A man who enlists is a very poor soldier for the first
   few years, but he is a soldier from the moment he enlists; and the
   moment a man takes Christ to be the center of his life that man becomes
   a Christian. Of course that makes a great change in his life. His
   friends will know it to-morrow. On the steam engine you have seen the
   apparatus at the side called the eccentric. It has a different center
   from all the other wheels. Now, the Christian man is to some extent an
   eccentric. His life revolves around a different center from many people
   round about him. Of course, it is the other people who are eccentric
   because the true center of life is the most perfect life, the most
   perfect man, the most perfect ideal; and the man who is circulating
   around that is living the most perfect. At the same time, that man's
   life will to some extent be different from the lives round about him,
   and to some extent he will be a marked man.

   But what difference will it make to a man himself? For one thing, it
   will keep you straight. I fancy most of the men here are living
   straight lives as it is; but it is impossible that every man here is.
   Well, I will tell you how to keep your life straight from this
   time--how your hunger after righteousness can be met. If you become a
   Christian, you will lead a straight life. That is not all. If you
   become a Christian, you will help other men to lead straight lives.
   Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness. The only chance
   that this world has of becoming a righteous world is by the contagion
   of the Christian men in it. I do not know any country with the splendid
   pretensions and achievements of America where there is so much
   unrighteousness in politics and to some extent in commerce, and where
   shady things are not only winked at, but admired. That is acknowledged
   and deplored by every right thinking man in the country. I get it, not
   from observation, but from yourselves. There is not a day passes that I
   do not find men deploring political corruption and the want of
   commercial integrity, in some districts of this country, at all events.
   Now nothing can change that state of affairs unless such men as
   yourselves throw your influence on to the side of righteousness and
   determine that you will live to make this country a little straighter
   than you found it.

   There is a career in Christianity as well as an individual life. How do
   you test the greatness of a career? You test it by its influence. Well,
   can you point me to any influence in the world in the past which has
   had anything like the influence of the name to which I have asked you
   to give your life's adherence? That life started without a chance of
   succeeding in anything, according to the received theories of a
   successful life. Christ was born in a manger. If you and I had been
   born in a manger, the shame of it would have accompanied us through our
   whole lives; and yet there is not one of us born to-day who is not
   baptized in the name of Christ and who has not a Christian name. Christ
   went to no university, and had no education; and there is not a
   university in Europe or in America which is not founded in the name of
   Christ. This university was founded in the name of Christ. Aye, and the
   very money which has gone to build the universities of the world has
   come from the followers of Christ. The education of the world,
   gentlemen, has been done by the followers of Jesus Christ. Christ had
   no political influence, and sought none; yet there is not a President
   placed in the White House, there is not a sovereign in Europe placed
   upon a throne, but acknowledges, in the doing of it and in public, that
   the power to do it has come from Christ, and that the object in doing
   it is to secure the coming of Christ's kingdom. Take it in any
   direction, and you will find that this influence, judged from mere
   worldly standards of success, has been supreme.

   Napoleon said, "I do not understand that man. He must have been more
   than human. I used to be able," he said on St. Helena, "to get people
   to die for me. I got hundreds of thousands of them, but I had to be
   there. Now that I am here on this island, I can't get a man. But He,"
   said he, "gets hundreds of thousands of the best men in the world to
   lay down their whole lives for Him every day." Judged as mere influence
   from the standpoint of an ambitious man like Napoleon, you see that
   that Life was supreme.

   You remember the dinner that Charles Lamb gave to some literary men,
   and how they were discussing after dinner what their attitude would be
   if certain great figures of the past were to come into their dining
   room. After they had all spoken, Lamb said:

   "Well, it looks to me like this, that if Shakespeare entered the room I
   should rise up to greet him; but if Christ entered the room, I should
   kneel down and keep silent."

   And so I ask you if you have feelings of that kind about any figure in
   history compared to the feelings that spring into your mind when you
   try to contemplate that Life. Some of you have never read Christ's
   life. You have picked up a parable here and a miracle there, and a
   scrap of history between; but you have never read that biography as you
   have read the biography of Washington, Webster, or the life of
   Columbus. Read it. Go home and read one of the four little books which
   tell you about His life. Take Matthew, for instance; and if you don't
   run aground in the 5th chapter and find yourself compelled to spend a
   week over it, you haven't much moral nature left. I have known men who
   have tried that experiment, who have begun to read the gospel of
   Matthew, and by the time they had finished reading the 5th chapter,
   they had thrown in their lot with the Person who forms the subject of
   that book. There is no other way of getting to know about Christ unless
   you read His life, at least as a beginning. If you want to become a
   Christian you must read up, and that is the thing to read. If you like,
   after that you can read the other lives of Christ. How do men get to
   know one another? They simply take to one another. Two men meet here
   to-night. They go downstairs and exchange greetings. To-morrow night
   they meet in each other's rooms. By the end of a month they have got to
   know each other a little, and after another year of college life they
   have become sworn friends.

   A man becomes a little attracted to Christ. That grows and grows, into
   a brighter friendship, and that grows into a great passion, and the man
   gives his life to Christ's interest. He counts it the highest ambition
   he can have to become a man such as Christ was. You see there is
   nothing profound about a religion of that kind. It is a religion that
   lies in the line of the ideals a young man forms, and that all the
   reading that he meets with from day to day fashions. In fact, it is a
   man's ideal turning up, and the man who turns his back upon that is
   simply turning his back upon his one chance of happiness in life and of
   making anything off life. Every life that is not lived in that time is
   out of the true current of history, to say nothing else. It is out of
   the stream --the main stream that is running through the ages, and that
   is going to sweep everything before it. A man who does not live that
   life may not be a bad man. The Bible does not say that everybody who is
   not a Christian is a notorious sinner; but it says that the man who
   lives outside that is wasting his life. He may not be doing wrong, but
   his life is lost. "He that loveth his life," Christ said, "shall lose
   it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life
   eternal." I am not ashamed to quote that to you; and I ask you to
   regard it with the same validity, and more, that you will give to any
   other quotation.

   You will not accuse me of cant because I have used sacred words in this
   talk. There are technical terms in religion just as in science and
   philosophy. Just as in science I should speak of protoplasm, of oxygen
   or carbonic acid gas, so in talking of religion I must talk about faith
   and Jesus Christ. Just as I should quote authorities in speaking of
   chemistry or political economy, so I must use authorities in speaking
   about Christ. You will not take the words that I have said tonight as a
   mere expression of phraseology of a cant description, because it is not
   that; and I would ask those of you who are very much frightened to use
   such words to consider whether it is not a rational thing and a
   necessary thing, if you speak at all on this subject, to use these
   words. We must not be too fastidious, or thin-skinned, or particular on
   a point like that. While we are not in any degree to advertise our
   Christianity by our language, there are occasions, and this is one,
   when these things are necessary.

   I want to say, in closing, that I hear almost extraordinary accounts of
   you Harvard men. Robert Browning once came to the Edinburgh students to
   talk to them; and he said, after he had gone away, that he had never in
   his life seen such a body of young men. Now I have no acquaintance with
   you whatever; but I have been asking up and down this district what
   sort of men the Harvard men are, and I want to let you know that you
   have a fairly good character. So far as I can learn, you have a
   character such as none of our Scotch universities have. Now live up to
   it. Let this university in the years to come be famous over America not
   only for its education, but for its sense of honor and manliness, and
   purity and Christianity. Seek first the kingdom of God. You know the
   whole truth. Live it. Want of interest in religion does not acquit you
   of taking your share in it. Why should I be here to talk to you? A
   Scotchman hates talking. I believe an American is dying to talk all the
   time. Well, I say want of religion does not absolve you from taking
   your share of it. The fact that you do not care about Christ does not
   alter the fact that Christ cares about you, that He wants you men, and
   that His kingdom cannot go on unless He gets such men as you. Are we to
   leave the greatest scheme that has ever been propounded to be carried
   out by duffers? It is easier, somebody says, to criticise the greatest
   scheme superbly than to do the smallest thing possible. The man who is
   looking on from the outside sees things in the game that the players do
   not see. He sees this bit of bad play and that. Well, stop criticising
   the game. Take off your coat, and come and help us. Our side is strong,
   and it is getting stronger; but we want the best men. Christianity
   ought to have the superlative men here in every department--in
   classics, in poetry, in literature, in humor, in everything that goes
   to the making of a man. The best gifts should be given to Christ. We
   are apt to despise Christianity and keep away from it because there are
   many weak-minded people in it. That is one reason why we ought to take
   off our coats and throw ourselves into it, heart and soul. And I leave
   you with that appeal. I appeal to the strong men here to consider their
   position and see if they can do anything better with their life than to
   help on this great cause.
     __________________________________________________________________

II

AN ADDRESS TO THE MAN WHO IS DOWN

   To-night I want to talk to the man who is down, to the man who has his
   back to the wall, and who is being embattled by his own temptations. It
   is, perhaps, not an academic subject, but it is the greatest of all
   subjects on which one can speak to young men. There are men here who
   are lost in the abyss; but there are more men who are on the brink of
   the precipice. Temptation is a universal experience--the one thing that
   makes every man his brother, and creates within any one who thinks
   about it a grave sense of tenderness as he thinks of those around him,
   when he remembers that every man he meets has the same black spot in
   his nature that he has, and the same terrible fight going on from day
   to day. But, gentlemen, temptation is more than a universal experience.
   It is an individual thing. Just as you have your own handwriting, your
   own face, or your own walk, you have your own temptation-- different in
   every case, but generally some one temptation which means everything to
   you, which sums up the whole battle of life, and which, if you could
   conquer, you would conquer the world. That temptation follows you
   wherever you go like your shadow. I have gone into the heart of Africa.
   When I opened the curtains of my tent in the morning, the first face I
   saw was the hideous face of my own temptation. Go where you like, you
   cannot avoid that. It will follow you wherever you go, and lie with you
   in the grave. Temptation is not only a universal experience and a
   personal experience, but you have doubtless noticed this about it, that
   it is very lonely. It cuts a man off in a moment from all his
   fellowmen; and in the silence of his own heart he finds himself
   fighting out that battle on which the issues of life hang. Christ trod
   the wine press alone, and so do you and I. That is one of the things
   that makes it harder, because there is no one to blame us when we go
   wrong, and there is no one to applaud us when we do right.

   More than that, temptation is a pitiless thing. It goes into the church
   and picks off the man in the pulpit. It goes into the university and
   picks off the flower of the class. It goes into the Senate and picks
   off the great man. Let him that thinketh he standeth, however high up,
   however sheltered, take heed lest he fall. Why is it that we have to
   run the gauntlet of temptation all our lives, and what does it mean?
   Can we analyze it? We have seen its strength. Can we find out whence it
   comes and how to meet it? There are many theories as to how it came
   into our nature. Some think there is a virus in human nature somewhere,
   a bias towards wrong; but I don't think we need to look very far for
   the origin at least of a great many of our temptations. We have in our
   bodies the residua of the animal creation. We have bones and muscles
   and organs which are now mere curiosities, but which once played a
   great part in the life of our progenitor; and I suppose it is now
   accepted as a scientific fact, at all events so far as the body is
   concerned, that it has come down the long ladder from the invertebrate
   world. That is to say, we have in our nature a part of the animal; and
   if we have an animal's body in us, we have to a certain extent the
   residua of an animal's mind, of an animal's proclivities and passions.
   Whether that is the origin of them or not, it is certain every man
   among us has a certain residuum of the animal in him. After passing
   through the animal stage, it is believed that man passed through a
   long, long discipline in the savage state; so that, in addition to the
   animal, relics of the savage are still left in our nature.

   There are two great classes of sins--sins of the body and sins of the
   disposition. The prodigal son is a typical instance of sins of the
   body; and the elder brother a typical illustration of sins of the
   disposition. He was just as bad as the prodigal, probably worse. The
   one set of temptations comes from the animal and the other from the
   savage. What are the characteristics of the savage? Laziness for one
   thing, and selfishness for another. The savage does nothing but lie in
   the sun all day and allow the fruits to drop into his mouth. He has no
   struggle for life. Nature has been so kind as to supply all his wants;
   and he is, above all, characteristic of selfishness. He has no one to
   think about or care for, nor has he any capacity. A great preacher said
   not long ago to his congregation that he would tell them the mark of
   the beast, and that he also knew its number. He said the mark of the
   beast was selfishness, and its number was No. 1. Now the mark of the
   beast, selfishness, is in every man's breast, less or more. We are
   built in three stories --the bottom, the animal; a little higher up,
   the savage; and on the top, the man. That is the old Pauline
   trichotomy--body, soul, spirit. Paul spoke of this body of death.
   Science speaks of it in almost precisely the same language. Whatever
   the origin, that is the construction of a man. He is built in those
   three layers. With this analysis, it is perhaps easier to see how
   temptation may be met.

   Many a man goes through life hanging his head with shame and living
   without his self-respect because he has never discovered the
   distinction between temptation and sin. It is only when a man sees
   temptation coming and goes out to meet it, welcomes it, plays with it
   and invites it to be his guest that it passes from temptation into sin;
   but, until he has opened the door of his own accord and let it in, he
   has done no wrong. He has been a tempted man--not a sinful man. The
   proof, of course, that temptation is no sin is that Christ was tempted
   in all points like as we are, yet without sin. Many a man is thrown
   back in his attempts to live a new life by the clinging to him of this
   residua of his past; and he does not discover until perhaps too late
   that there is nothing wrong in these things until they have passed a
   certain point. If he sees them coming and turns his back upon them, he
   has not sinned. Indeed, temptation is not only not sin, but it is the
   most valuable ingredient in human nature. Who was it that said, "The
   greatest of all temptations is to be without any" ? The man who has no
   temptation has no chance of becoming a man at all. The only way to get
   character is to have temptation. If a man never exercises his muscle,
   he will get no muscle. If a man never exercises his moral nature in
   opposing temptation, he will get no muscle in his character. Temptation
   is an opportunity of virtue. What makes a good picture? Practice. What
   makes a good oarsman? Practice. What makes a good cricketer? Practice.
   Temptation is the practice of the soul; and the man who has most
   temptations has most practice. I fancy we all imagine we have more
   temptations than anybody else. That is a universal delusion. But,
   instead of praying to be delivered from our temptations, we ought to
   try to understand their essential place in the moral world. Taken from
   us, these would leave us without a chance of becoming strong men. We
   should be insipid characters, flaxen and useless. That is why the New
   Testament says the almost astonishing thing: "Count it all joy when ye
   fall into divers temptations." We are apt to call it hard lines because
   we are tempted. James says, count it joy; congratulate yourself because
   of your own temptation. It is the struggle for life almost solely which
   has helped on the evolution of the animal kingdom, passing on into the
   moral region and giving you practice in growth.

   Now, then, granting that this discipline is to be ours, that every day
   of our lives we have to face temptation, how are we to set about it? We
   have seen that temptation lies in the projection on the human area of
   our life of the animal and of the savage. I think the first thing we
   have to do is to deal decisively with those two parts of our nature.
   The animal body was finished thousands and thousands of years ago.
   Nature took a long time to work it out, then stopped and went on to
   develop the mind. Let us recognize the development of the body as a
   fact in the past, and have no more to do with it. The body is finished.
   The hand of creation is done working at it. That is what Paul meant
   very largely when he gave it as his advice to men to get over
   temptation, "Reckon ye yourselves dead." Reckon that all beneath. It is
   not only wrong to allow the body to prevail in a man's life, but it is
   a denial of his development. It is unnatural and irrational. It is
   contrary to the teachings of science, borrowed altogether from the
   teachings of religion. Therefore, the first thing a man must do is to
   make up his mind that the body which is prompting him is a dead thing
   and is to be taken as a dead thing. If we can give our animal nature
   its true place, we will soon learn to rise above it. What did Cato do
   when he was buffeted? Ask Seneca. He did not strike back, fly into a
   passion: he did not resent it, but denied that it had been done. That
   is to say, the body being nothing, nothing had happened.

   But that is not enough. We cannot live negatively. It is not enough to
   forsake the old life, the old habit; but we must take another piece of
   advice which I think the New Testament also sums up for us in language
   of exceeding simplicity and yet of absolute scientific accuracy. Paul
   says: "Walk in the spirit." Live in the top flat. You find yourself
   living in the animal part of your being. Escape and get into the upper
   story, where the roof is open to God, and where you can move amongst
   beautiful things, and amongst holy memories and amongst high ideals.
   Walk in the spirit and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. A
   man can't do it. That is to say, he has to evolve the past, the animal
   and the savage, and develop the new nature. The new nature is renewed
   from day to day, little by little. Just as the body is built up,
   microscopic cell by microscopic cell, so the new nature is built up by
   a long series of crucifixions of the old nature, by taking in food from
   the higher world and getting those things built into our nature which
   work for righteousness and truth and beauty and purity.

   Now, the man who encourages the higher part of his nature continuously
   will get an absolute victory over the lower parts of his being. He will
   come to live in those higher parts of his being. It will become as
   habitual to live there as it was to live in the lower; and, while this
   building up is going on within, there will be the degeneration of the
   old nature. How has man evolved past the animal and the savage, and how
   has so much that is in them passed away from him? By mere disuse. And
   so, by the mere disuse of the propensities of the body and the
   discouragement of selfish and petty interests, by merely giving up the
   animal ways and the animal passions, and the savage tempers and the
   savage laziness, the impulse, the function which makes these things,
   will wither--atrophy. As the one goes on, the other inevitably follows.
   As the old man passes away, the new man is renewed in righteousness.
   That can be explained not only in the language of development but in
   the language of psychology as a perfectly rational principle. A man
   cannot have two things in consciousness at the same moment. Suppose a
   man has been lost out in the West and wandered away from the railway
   depot where he had put up at a hotel. Perhaps he has been four or five
   days on the prairie. One day he staggers back, almost dropping with
   hunger and calls out for food; but finds lying upon his table, while
   waiting for food, a telegram reporting the sudden death of his wife.
   The hunger is gone, completely gone. The man who was perishing a few
   moments ago is now absolutely above it; and if I could keep up the
   emotion of sorrow, I could keep down forever the appetite of hunger. If
   you want to get over an appetite on philosophical principles, not to
   speak of religion, the thing to do is to pass into another region, and
   let your mind be preoccupied with something higher. Unless you take in
   the higher, it is tremendously difficult to crush out the lower. The
   new man can only be put on as the old man is put off.

   You remember Augustine's history of temptation in four
   words--cogitatio, imaginatio, delectatio and assensio: a thought, a
   picture, a fascination, and a fall. You can cut off the series between
   the first and second. Between the second and third, it is almost
   impossible. Between the third and fourth, it is absolutely impossible.
   When the image is thrown upon the screen and you are delighting in it
   and it is just beginning to enthrall you, you can still do one thing.
   You can suddenly throw another image on the screen and look at that. If
   you look for two seconds at the first image you are lost; but if you
   look one second you are not yet lost, and there is still a chance to be
   saved. You can throw another image over it and let the first dissolve
   away; and, by the mere possession of consciousness, you have got over
   that temptation.

   You see, then, how, upon merely natural principles, it is possible to
   fight temptation. If we simply walk in the spirit, we shall not fulfill
   the lusts of the flesh. We must evolve past them, in plain words. By
   cultivating ideals of all kinds and by strengthening our moral nature
   by all the opportunities we can get in society, in literature and in
   the church, we will gradually accumulate a body, a higher body, of life
   and mind and truth, in which we can live; and the old tenements in
   which we lived will not only be uninhabited but uninhabitable. Hence
   the value of everything that is beautiful and pure and lovely and
   wholesome in the world; and not only their use as auxiliaries to the
   religious life, but as indispensable to it; because all these are
   things in the higher nature, and the man who cultivates them is
   building up a region in which he can live. A man must live. He must
   live in the body, in the savage or in the man. At every moment he must
   live, and so at every moment he must make his choice. He cannot
   suppress it. If you take this subject in terms of energy, you will find
   that the energy which leads to sin must not be suppressed, but must be
   transformed into an energy which leads to virtue; so that when the
   desire to do something wrong comes in, instead of trying to suppress
   that desire, we have simply to turn the helm in the right direction;
   and in the new channel it will not only save us from a fall which we
   would have had, if we had allowed it to go the other way, but it will
   carry us higher towards the new life.

   Now I have tried to explain the way in which any man here can rise
   above himself and be a man. I care not how far he has dropped. It is an
   historical fact that a man can be saved to the uttermost. You say to
   me, is there no religion in all this? It is all religion. You say, do I
   not need to put more religion into it? The more the better. I have
   spoken of walking in the spirit. I have spoken of ideals. I know no
   ideal that will act so promptly as the ideal of the perfect Man. I know
   no picture that you can throw upon the screen which will fascinate more
   immediately than the picture of the character of Christ. You may throw
   people upon the screen, a line of poetry, an epigram from a moralist, a
   memory of your mother, a warning of some one you love, and all these
   are reflections in some form of Christ; and they will all be effective
   up to a point. But most of all effective is the power of Christ
   Himself; and, unless a man has a moral environment which is full of
   these things, he cannot live. There is no hope for his new life, unless
   he has that. No man can live without these things morally. Take that
   gas which gives us light. The light is not in the gas. It is half in
   the air and half in the gas. Take away the half from the air, and the
   gas goes out. "Without me, ye can do nothing." Your life will go out.
   Without Me, whether as the Light of the world itself, or as diffused
   through books, and through men and through churches, without that your
   life will come to nothing; but, if you take that and all the
   reflections of it, and let these constitute a spiritual atmosphere
   about you, your redemption from this hour is a certainty. There is no
   haphazard about Christianity. It is based upon the laws of nature and
   the laws of the human mind.

   The man who lives in Christ cannot go wrong. He will be kept. In the
   nature of things, he must be kept. He cannot sin. You remember John
   said: "Whosoever sinneth hath not seen Him, neither known Him." John's
   Friend was such, so inspiring and so influential, that it was
   inconceivable to John that anybody could ever have met Him without
   forevermore trying to live like Him. Sin is abashed in the presence of
   the purity of Jesus Christ. There are many heroes in life. They will
   all help a man; but we will get on better and quicker by giving
   ourselves to Christ.

   I have just two things to add. The first is: if any man here to-night
   takes this seriously and means business; if he means for the future not
   to keep up the sham fight that he has been pretending to wage, and
   means to get to the bottom of things, let me ask him for a few days
   from this time to treat himself as a man who has been very ill and dare
   not do anything. Let him consider himself as a convalescent for a few
   weeks and take care where he goes, what he reads, what he looks at, and
   the people he speaks to. He is not strong enough for the outer air.
   When he first begins the new life, he is young and tender. Therefore,
   let him beware of the first few days. Mortality is greatest amongst
   children for the first few hours: then it is greater for the first few
   days; then it is great for the next few months, and lessens as the
   children grow older. If you are careful not to catch cold for the first
   few weeks after you begin to lead a new life, you will succeed; but, if
   you do to-morrow what you did to-day, you will go wrong, because you
   are not strong enough to resist. You will have to build up this new
   body cell by cell, day by day, just as the old body of temptation has
   been built up. If any man here knows any other man who is in that
   convalescent condition, let him take care, and neither by jest, or
   word, or temptation, throw that man back. Stand by him, if you know
   such a man. If you are such a man, do not be ashamed to get somebody
   else to back you and go along with you. Very few men can live a
   solitary Christian life. You will find it a great source of strength to
   get another man's life wound about you. You can help each other.

   The other thing I want to say is this: Do not imagine that you can get
   deliverance from sin alone--I mean without getting other things, and
   without doing other things. Deliverance from sin is only a part of the
   Christian life--by no means the whole. It is only one wing of the new
   nature; but no man can get on with one wing. Deliverance from
   temptation is only one function of the new nature. Therefore, you must
   consecrate your whole life to Christianity, and go into it wholly and
   with a whole heart, if you expect to get deliverance in this one
   direction; and the best way you can do that is to make up your mind
   that you will give much of your life to Christianity, to purify the air
   of the world, so that other men will feel less temptation than you do.
   Sin is a kind of bacillus, and it cannot take root in the world unless
   there is a soil, and it is our business to make the world's soil pure
   and sanitarily sweet, so that the disease of sin cannot exist.
     __________________________________________________________________

III

ONE WAY TO HELP BOYS

   I am very much pleased to find the Boys' Brigade receiving University
   recognition. I am not aware that it has had this honor before in its
   history.

   The idea of the Brigade is this. It is a new movement for turning out
   boys, instead of savages. The average boy, as you know, is a pure
   animal. He is not evolved; and, unless he is taken in hand by somebody
   who cares for him and who understands him, he will be very apt to make
   a mess of his life--not to speak of the lives of other people. We
   endeavor to get hold of this animal. You do not have the article here,
   and do not quite understand the boy I mean. The large cities of the old
   world are infested by hundreds and thousands of these ragamuffins, as
   we call them--young roughs who have nobody to look after them. The
   Sunday-school cannot handle these boys. The old method was for somebody
   to form them into a class and try to get even attention from them. Half
   the time was spent in securing order.

   The new method is simply this: You get a dozen boys together, and,
   instead of forming them into a class, you get them into some little
   hall and put upon every boy's head a little military cap that costs in
   our country something like twenty cents, and you put around his waist a
   belt that costs about the same sum, and you call him a soldier. You
   tell him, "Now, Private Hopkins, stand up. Hold up your head. Put your
   feet together." And you can order that boy about till he is black in
   the face, just because he has a cap on his head and a belt around his
   waist. The week before you could do nothing with him. If he likes it,
   you are coming next Thursday night. He is not doing any favor by
   coming. You are doing him a favor; and if he does not turn up at eight
   o 'clock, to the second, the door will be locked. If his hair is not
   brushed and his face washed, he cannot enter. Military discipline is
   established from the first moment. You give the boys three-fourths of
   an hour's drill again, and in a short time you have introduced quite a
   number of virtues into that boy's character. You have taught him
   instant obedience. If he is not obedient, you put him into the guard
   house, or tell him he will be drummed out of the regiment; and he will
   never again disobey. If he is punctual and does his drill thoroughly,
   tell him that at the end of the year he will get a stripe. He will get
   a cent's worth of braid. You have his obedience, punctuality,
   intelligence and attention for a year for one cent. Then you have
   taught him courtesy. He salutes you and feels a head taller. Everything
   is done as if you were a real captain and he a real private. He calls
   you "Captain." Each boy has a rifle that costs a dollar; but there is
   no firing. There is a bayonet drill without a bayonet. The first year
   they have military drill, and the second year bayonet exercises--an
   absolute copy of the army drill. The Brigade inculcates a martial, but
   not a warlike, spirit. The only inducement to bring the boys together
   at first is the drill. You might think it is a very poor one; but it is
   about the strongest inducement you could offer.

   That is the outward machinery; but it is a mere take-in. The boy
   doesn't know it. The real object of the Brigade is to win that boy for
   Christianity--to put it quite plainly. It does not make the slightest
   secret of its aims.

   On all its literature is: "The object of the Brigade shall be the
   advancement of Christ's Kingdom among boys, and the promotion of habits
   of reverence, discipline, self-respect, and all that tends toward a
   true Christian manhood."

   After you have your boy and are sure of him, every drill is opened with
   a couple of minutes of prayer. The boys stand in line at "attention,"
   with caps off, while a sort of blessing is asked. Then drill for
   three-fourths of an hour. After that the Captain gives them a little
   talk about anything--business prosperity, courtesy, courage,
   temptation, or anything. After that, all repeat the Lord's Prayer and
   dismiss. Then on Sunday almost all the companies have Bible class, with
   the same punctuality, interest and attention as during the week day.
   The boy treats his Captain as before. They sit like statues during the
   Bible lesson; and, if they are not there to the minute, they are shut
   out. Having influence over them, the Captain maintains it, and how much
   more apt the boys will be to pick up what he says. The thorough-going
   Captain will of course do a great deal more than in the Bible class;
   and very few stop at that. Some men get up football clubs and get
   fields, give up their own Saturday afternoons --which are a great
   holiday with us--to act as umpire for the boys' matches. Our captains
   are just one remove from the boys whom they teach, so that the boys are
   not at all afraid of them. The presence of the captain on the athletic
   field means, in the first place, that there will be no foul language
   and no foul play. And he, of course, thus increases his influence over
   them tenfold. Then in many cases they start a boys' club where they
   have a room open every night, where they have debates, newspapers and
   books. Then the captain gets to know the boys personally. He has them
   up to tea now and then, and gets to know their people.

   In addition to that general work, there are one or two additions which
   are thrown in by special companies according to their own inclination.
   A great many have started military bands. Ambulance classes are
   becoming exceedingly popular. After drilling two or three winters the
   work gets flat; so they invent new things. Boys cannot join this
   Brigade until they are twelve years of age, and cannot clear out until
   they are seventeen. The boys hate to clear out; and the fact that they
   will have to leave induces them to make better use of their time. Of
   course they are not turned adrift. The captain sees that they get into
   good hands. Then every year, in a city of the size of Boston, for
   instance, all the boys belonging to the Brigade would be gathered
   together for a church service. If too many for one church, two would be
   secured, and the boys would assemble and march to the service and get a
   boys' sermon. At Christmas, every boy in the Brigade gets from his
   officer a little two-cent book. And there are a number of other little
   things that link the captain and the boys together and the different
   companies together.

   This organization was started within a mile of where I live in Glasgow
   in 1883, by a Mr. Smith, who was a soldier, and who was not making much
   of a Sunday-school class he taught, and who conceived the idea of
   giving them military discipline. In our country we have grown to such
   an extent that already there are, I think, 22,000 boys belonging to the
   Brigade, and I think between 1,100 and 1,200 officers--captains and
   lieutenants. This Brigade has been worth starting for the sake of the
   officers alone.

   Perhaps one thousand of these officers would have belonged to the
   unemployed rich and educated, if they had not struck this particular
   line of work. There are multitudes of young men who do not go to prayer
   meeting or see their way to teach in Sunday-school. Many are extremely
   fastidious as to what particular work they will do, and many are not
   cut out for these recognized fields. But here is a work that does not
   make any particular strain on any part of his nature. He simply gives
   himself and his muscular Christianity. So we think this has been worth
   pushing for the sake of the officers alone. We know a great many men
   have been made for life simply by a year or two of contact with these
   boys. If they develop the boys, the boys develop them.

   Now, you have this movement started in America. I find the most crass
   ignorance on this subject here; but in some respects you are ahead of
   us. One of the first things you do with the boys is to start a
   newspaper. The conflagration has broken out in a somewhat remarkable
   way in California, and they must have a great many companies. As usual,
   when you take up anything in this country from anywhere else, you
   improve upon it or carry it to development in other directions.

   Now, you do some things here we do not do, and of which I am not
   perfectly sure we would wholly approve. They strike us as being
   slightly against some of the fundamental principles for which we work.
   For instance, I notice that the boys here have a uniform, and that the
   officers have a uniform. We can make a boy for about fifty cents, not
   including the brass in his face; but here in America the uniform costs
   as follows

   (See Boys' Brigade Manual, U. S. of A.)

   Fatigue blouses (I suppose they have paid duty on these blouses) $3.35

   Pants 3.35

   Fatigue caps, first quality 0.75

   Belts 0.75

   Plain bugles 0.25

   Signal service 1.20

   U. S. Army bunting flags 9.50

   Silk cord for same3.50

   Bugler's stripes for pants 1.50

   Extra fine officers' fatigue blouses 6.75

   Pants with stripes 6.50

   U. S. Army officers' overcoats with hoods $27 to 32.00

   Well, you see that means business at any rate. But what we dislike
   about it is that it emphasizes the military side too much. We have
   refused to admit any company into the Brigade that wears a uniform.
   There are one or two in the country, but we don't have them. We don't
   want the boys to feel soldiers beyond the point that we need them to
   feel soldiers. We don't want them to thirst for blood and come over
   here and fight you or anybody else. We simply want to get them
   disciplined. I suppose there must be in this country quite a number of
   companies equipped at very considerable expense. These boys cannot
   afford to buy these uniforms for themselves, and they are very
   frequently bought by subscription.

   This organization in America is almost always organized within the
   church. In the old country every organization must be associated, not
   necessarily with the church, but with some stable body that will be
   back of it and be a sponsor for it. It is usually the church--sometimes
   the Y. M. C. A. In this country the initiatory is frequently taken by
   the minister. I find the ministers here preserve the dew of their youth
   and the freshness of their manhood, and they are not at all the starchy
   kind of people one meets in some other countries. It is not because
   they are not fit for this, but the ministers must not have all the
   plums. They have enough to do. Here and there we have some keen
   ministers at this work, but, as a rule, we try to keep it among the
   laity.

   In this country you make the boys promise that as long as they are
   members of the Boys' Brigade they will not use liquor and tobacco, will
   obey the rules and set an example of good conduct. The question is
   whether pledges are right fair to a boy at all. I very much question
   whether it is wise to put a strong pledge like that upon anybody. We
   exact no pledge whatever. It seems to me to be the difference between
   compulsory chapel attendance and optional, as it is here, to make a boy
   not smoke by compulsion. If he can be made moral by the influences that
   are brought to bear upon him, it is more apt to last.

   Now I suppose I was asked to present this subject to you in behalf of
   enlisting one or two of you in the service. I do not know myself of any
   bit of work to which I would rather give what spare time I have than
   this. The boy is open to receive impressions in a way that is marked.
   It is possible to get hold of him. There are thousands of these boys
   who have been turned outside in. I have watched them. I remember the
   annual inspection of one of the first companies. When the prizes were
   given, it was my duty to pin the medals on the two leading boys'
   breasts. When the first boy came up, there was scarcely a place on his
   coat strong enough to bear the pin. His coat was one mass of patches
   that could scarcely hold together. He was clean. The next year I
   noticed he had on a much better coat, and I am sure he is now on his
   way to turn out to be a good man. I do not know anything that would pay
   any of you better than this. It lies near a young man's nature to take
   up such work. I do not think there is anything easier than to win a
   boy. You get him wound about you, and he lives through your spectacles
   and tries to please you. Adapt it any way you please; but I should like
   very much if after to-night some of you would write for some of this
   literature and take the trouble to spread it.

   We gave the boys books each Christmas. Two years ago I wrote a book and
   offered fifty-three prizes. The boys competing were to write a letter
   addressed to "My Dear Baxter," and answer the question, "What are a
   Boy's Temptations, and How is He to Meet Them?" Well, I got about 450
   dissections of the boys in answer to that offer. One of the thirty
   prizes went to California. I never saw such a revelation of the
   interior of a boy as I saw after reading those letters. Every boy,
   almost, out of the lot, pleaded guilty to four sins. Every boy,
   apparently, is a liar and a thief. These were the first two things that
   they all confessed. The third confession was that they all swore; and
   the fourth great temptation or sin to a boy was smoking--which is not a
   sin at all. It showed me that the boys were very badly taught, and that
   they have no definite conception of sin.

   Every one of these Brigades, almost without an exception, is connected
   with the church. The Bible class is held in the church; and the drill
   is usually there, too. It is thoroughly under the wing of the church.
   The movement is so religious that there is never any religious
   opposition to it, and it is entirely undenominational.
     __________________________________________________________________

IV

AN APPEAL TO THE OUTSIDER; OR, THE CLAIMS OF CHRISTIANITY

   I am asked to talk specially to what we call in Scotland "the outsider"
   --the man who has not seen his way to throw in his lot with Christian
   men. We have made a specialty of the outsider in our university work in
   the old country. We have laid all our plans to interest him. He is
   generally the best man in the university; and for some years we have
   arranged all our Christian work and worship with a view to that type of
   man. We have laid down one or two principles. The first one is that
   none of us in any shape or form shall encourage cant. By that I mean
   sanctimoniousness, anything that is falsetto, any unreal expression of
   emotion or exaggeration of feeling. A second principle we have had to
   lay down is that no religious man shall interfere in any shape or form
   with the university amusements. Time after time I have seen at our
   religious meetings twelve out of the fifteen university football team;
   and we have always had amongst our foremost men the best athletes in
   the university. We have also laid it down as a principle that we shall
   not interfere with any university work. We have tried to get hold of
   the busiest men and interest them in whatever is going on, believing
   that a man may do his university work thoroughly and yet do something
   in the way of helping on the Christian life of his fellow students. In
   the Medical Faculty, where we have from 1,800 to 2,000 students, and
   which is our largest faculty in Edinburgh University, at the end of the
   four years' course we have the "Blue Ribbon Medical Course"
   scholarship. It is given to the man who has stood first all along the
   line for four years. Now the man who for the last four years has taken
   this scholarship has been not only one of the most active workers in
   the Christian community, but actually the secretary of the movement. I
   do not mean that one man has done that for four years; but the last
   four men have been not only the leading men in the scientific and
   professional studies, but the leading men in the Christian life of the
   place. With such a record as that you can understand that Christianity
   is, at all events, respected.

   We never have any religious meetings on week days. We do not want the
   professors to say we are taking up the time the men ought to give other
   things. We believe a man's business at a college, and his religion,
   too, is to do his work. The meetings we have had, therefore, were on
   Sundays.

   Another rule that we have had to make is never to interfere with a
   man's views. We want a man's life. We do not want his opinion. We do
   not start a man with a creed. We believe that the man arrives at a
   creed; and we take into our ranks any man who has any desire to seek
   the Kingdom of God. That, of course, had widened the door to a very
   large number of men who would have kept out, if we had been exclusive.
   But while we do not underrate a creed, while we believe that
   theological doctrines are just as scientific doctrines; yet religion is
   an art, and we can get men to practice the art who will arrive, we
   hope, in their future life, at something of the scientific principles
   which underlie it; but we make it a barrier to no man at the start that
   he knows little. In fact, a man enters the school of Christ as he
   enters a university. That is to say, he enters, not as a professor, but
   as a student. He comes to learn; and we believe the best way to learn
   is to let the man matriculate and begin.

   If you ask me what obstacles we find specially in the way, I think the
   chief obstacle we meet is the revolt in thinking men's minds against
   popular and spurious and weak forms of Christianity. Men come to the
   institution who have been very strictly brought up, and they are not
   able, after a few months' college discipline, to believe the things
   they used to believe. A gentleman in Boston said to me a few days ago
   that he had a son at Harvard and that the young man had the audacity to
   come to him not long ago and tell him that he didn't believe so and so.
   I said to him: "Sir, what a splendid fellow your son must be." He
   preferred truth to comfort. A man is to be encouraged to think about
   religious matters. If Christianity cannot bear thinking about, it is
   not worth going in for.

   One other thing that one finds is the idea many men have that it is a
   dull thing to go in for Christianity. Now, of course, that is simply
   not true. It is not true in fact, and it is not true in theory. It has,
   doubtless, more concern for a man's temperament and body than his
   creed; but if there is anything that can put sunniness or brightness
   into a man's life, it is Christianity. Christianity professes to cure
   dullness. Some of the greatest words in the Bible are "joy," " rest," "
   comfort." Christianity cures depression and gloom by removing the
   causes of it. What makes men depressed? Self-concentration, as a rule.
   When a man is wrapped up in himself, seeking only his own, he finds he
   is seeking a very shallow object, and very soon gets to the end of it;
   hence all the springs of life have nothing to act upon, and depression
   follows. Now, Christianity cures that by trying to take a man out of
   himself, and by showing him that his true life is in living out of
   himself.

   Another source of dullness is the thwarting of the ambitions that we
   have. We get down in spirits because we do not get the recognition we
   think we deserve, because we are snubbed and slighted, because we are
   not at the top. Christianity cures that by a single sentence. It says:
   "The meek shall inherit the earth." There is no connection between
   Christianity and a dull life. It is the want of Christianity that makes
   any life dull. Christianity offers a young man, or an old man, or any
   man, a more abundant life than the life he is living--more life as life
   goes, more happiness in life, more intensity in life, more worthiness
   in life.

   That, however, is perhaps not so great an obstacle, comparatively a
   trifling one, as the thought many men have that it is an unscientific
   thing in these days to endorse Christianity. Now it may be unscientific
   to endorse some forms in which Christianity is presented, but
   Christianity itself is a thoroughly scientific thing. There is nothing
   the least narrow about anything that Christ ever said. On the contrary,
   Christ said the broadest things that have ever been said; and he never
   rebuked breadth, but constantly rebuked narrowness. In His day there
   were three great philosophical, theological schools. There were the
   Pharisees, who were so narrow that they could not see spirit for form.
   There were the Sadducees, who were so narrow that they could not see
   spirit for matter. And there were the Essenes, who could not see matter
   for spirit. Christ was always rebuking these sects simply on account of
   their narrowness. His own view of life was as broad as the heavens. He
   took in every man and every part of every man. His religion was not
   kept back by any geographical or ethnographical limits. It was the
   religion of humanity.

   You say, "But it is well known that many scientific men are opposed to
   Christianity." I ask you to give me their names. If you run over the
   names of the large figures in science at this moment, you will find
   that the majority are not only in favor of Christianity, but have
   expressed themselves in favor of it.

   Mr. Huxley has never said anything against Christianity. He has defined
   the position of science. He says, "Science is not Christianity, nor is
   it anti-Christianity. It is extra-Christianity." He has thrown an
   arrow, with a little poison on it, perhaps, at some of the outworks of
   Christianity; but he has never said one word against Christ or the
   words or spirit of Christ. And it matters little what a man does to the
   outworks so long as he respects and is compelled to respect Christ; and
   Christianity is always respected, however humbly it is lived, by the
   wisest men.

   The other day I came upon a statement by a Fellow of the Royal Society
   with regard to this subject, a sentence of which I should like to read
   to you. The Royal Society of London, as you know, is probably one of
   the first scientific bodies in the world. This man says: "I have known
   the British Association for the Advancement of Science under forty-one
   different presidents--all leading men of science. On looking over these
   forty-one names, I count twenty, who, judged by their public utterances
   or private communications, are men of Christian belief and character;
   while, judged by the same test, only four disbelieve in direct divine
   revelation."

   You point to Mr. Darwin. Mr. Darwin never had, and never gave himself,
   a chance. He was brought up on Paley's Natural Theology--a great book
   in its day, but a book which Darwin himself made it impossible to read
   to-day; and he was bombarded with that book, and with religion along
   that line; and we have no evidence that he ever studied Christianity in
   any other form. But wherever he saw it, he respected it. When he was on
   the Island of Terra del Fuego, he saw the lowest subjects in the world.
   He told the missionaries they might go home. It was an impossibility,
   from the point of view of science, that these men could ever be
   elevated. A very few years after, Mr. Darwin wrote a letter to the
   secretary of that missionary society saying that he had found out what
   a great change had come over these islands--a certain amount of
   civilization had been introduced, and morality had been established;
   and he would like to withdraw what he had said. He enclosed a check for
   twenty five dollars for the work of the society; and he continued
   sending in his annual contribution to the end of his life.

   Perhaps the greatest name known to you in the old country is that of
   Sir William Thompson, now Lord Kelvin, Professor of Physics in Glasgow
   University. If you go into his class room any day you like, you will
   hear him open his lecture with prayer.

   It is not true that the scientific men have given up Christianity. Many
   of them have given up imitations of Christianity, spurious forms of it;
   but the thing itself stands untouched.

   You ask me, "What, then, do you retain? Do you dilute Christianity
   until it means little or nothing--so little that anybody can call
   himself a Christian?" On the contrary, we make it the most severe
   thing, the most definite thing, that a man could choose for his object
   in life. We make it a necessity that a man shall be turning, that he
   shall seek first the Kingdom of God. He may choose his own way of doing
   it; but he must put that before him as an ambition and as his career to
   seek first the Kingdom of God. We say nothing to those men about saving
   their souls. We say to them: "Gentlemen, save your lives. Do something
   with your life. Let that energy, that talent, go out to some purpose.
   The world needs the knowledge you have, the impulses you can give; aye,
   and the criticisms that you can offer upon the religious forms round
   about. It needs all these things. Save your lives. Do something with
   them." The Kingdom of God, according to Christ's own definition, is
   leaven; it is salt; it is light. Can you tell me what is going to raise
   this country, for instance, if it is not to be Christianity? If you
   take the Christianity out of Boston, weak as some of it may be, and
   inconsistent as some of it may be, in fifty years it will be
   uninhabitable by a respectable man or woman. Was it Mr. Lowell who
   said: "Show me ten square miles in any part of the world, outside of
   Christianity, where the life of man and the purity of woman are safe,
   and I will give up Christianity" ? There are no such ten square miles
   in any part of the world. Many things can lift society a little; but,
   as a matter of fact and history, the thing that has lifted the nations
   of the world to their present level has been, in some form or other,
   direct or diffused, the Christianity of Christ. Christian men are to be
   not only the leaven of the world, but they are to be the salt of the
   earth. The world is not only sunken, needing to be raised, but it is
   rotten, and needing to be purified. Salt is that which saves from
   corruption. Christianity is the salt of the earth. It is the great
   antiseptic of society. Christian men are the light of the world. The
   light of Christ was the light of men; and other men are to catch that
   light and radiate it upon the world.

   You point me to other teachers, many of them very great, many of them
   with great messages for the world--Socrates, Plato--a long list of
   names; but, allowing all their goodness, can one of them be put beside
   Christ as a mere teacher? Socrates went about the world asking
   questions. Christ went about the world answering questions. That was
   the difference. Socrates was looking for truth. Christ said truth is in
   living. I am the truth; and the man who lives like Me will live true,
   and all the wrong in the mind will be corrected. You cannot help seeing
   truth.

   Now, gentlemen, what do you think of that for a life, for a career? You
   do not know what to do with yourself. What do you think of being a
   crystal of salt in a community such as this city, or a little cell of
   leaven which cannot help, by the mere contagion of its presence,
   passing on influence and life to things round about it, or being a
   light to the dark people, perhaps the dark Christians, if you like,
   round about, too?

   Do the workingmen of this country not need light? What is to alter the
   critical condition of the working classes in this country, if it is not
   to be the teaching of Christianity in some form? What is to guide these
   labor movements and to work upon the minds in all directions, to make
   this country continuously prosperous? Men who have looked deepest into
   these problems have either given them up or seen only one solution, and
   that is in the teaching of Christ and the application of His principles
   to common life. These principles are not in the air. They are justified
   by every fact and law of nature.

   I believe in Christianity, first of all, not because I believe in this
   book. I believe in this book because I believe in Christianity.
   Religion does not come out of the Bible. The Bible comes out of
   religion. I believe in Christianity because I believe in evolution.
   Christianity is to me further evolution. I know no better definition of
   it than that. The forces of nature carry a man up to a certain point
   and there they stop. Then the psychic forces carry him up another point
   to the evolution of mind. Then the moral forces come in and carry him
   up a little further. Then the vis a tergo, the struggle for life that
   pushes him on, is reinforced by a vis a fronto; and he sees ideals
   before him, and is drawn up higher and higher, from strength to
   strength, until he reaches the fullness of the stature of the perfect
   man. That is pure evolution, the evolution of the man toward the ideal,
   toward the perfect man Jesus Christ. This principle of which I have
   been speaking, of a man giving his life to other people, to help on his
   country, is in the very, heart of nature. There are two great
   principles in nature by which all things work and by which all things
   are moved. The one is the struggle for life. Every plant and animal
   starts out to nourish itself. That struggle goes on along the line of
   the function of nutrition. There is the struggle for the life of
   others--the function of reproduction. These two functions make up life.
   Now, most of us live along the line of the first. All our lives,
   nearly, are centered in that; but that is only one half of the life
   appointed by nature. There is the struggle for the life of others, the
   function of reproduction, and in its higher forms everything that is
   high lies. All the happiness in life, in reality, has come along the
   second of these two lines, and not along the first. All the life of the
   world, in reality, lies on the side of reproduction. A plant takes a
   little bit of itself and gives it away. It lives by death. It dies; the
   life goes on. This chapel is built upon death. That book is death.
   Those pillars are the death of men. Those clothes are the death of
   animals. Every part of life and everything in life is kept alive by
   death. The animal gives off a part of itself and dies. Its life goes
   on--has passed on; and I say all the comfort and happiness and beauty
   and luxury of life come along that line. Three-fourths of the world at
   this moment live upon rice. What is rice? It is a seed --a fruit,
   therefore, of reproduction. The world lives upon this altruistic
   principle. All the fruits of the world are the gifts of reproduction.
   All the drinks of the world are the fruits of reproduction --the milk
   of the cow, the sprouting grain, the malted liquor, the withered hop,
   the fruit of the vine, wine itself. All the beauty of the world comes
   along the line of reproduction--the feathers of the bird, the fire of
   the glow-worm, the face of a woman. All the music of the world is love
   music--the chorus of the insect, the song of the nightingale, the
   serenade of the lover. We live by what the function of reproduction has
   done for us; and the man who gives his life for what is going on in
   that line is living for the highest end in nature.

   The struggle for life is waning every century, and by and by it will
   give place entirely to this other. Therefore, when Christ said, "Seek
   first the Kingdom of God," he propounded a perfectly scientific
   doctrine. He was offering man a life which would include all other
   lives, to which all other things would be heir.

   Let me give you an illustration of what I mean. You are here at the
   university. You can't yet begin to do anything for your country, as you
   might. What you can do now is to leaven this university. What you can
   do is to get hold of some one man, whose life is of no account, and
   which is apparently not going to be of any account, and save that man,
   not for his own sake only, but because that is a piece of energy which
   has gone off but can be brought in and reclaimed and utilized for the
   good of man.

   There was a medical student in Edinburgh University in his second year
   (our course is four years), who saw that he had been living there
   eighteen months entirely for himself. He had never done a hand's turn
   to be of any good or use to any one, and it hurt him. One day he
   determined that he would do something to help another man, and he
   remembered another undergraduate, who had come from the same country
   town as himself, and who had gone to pieces. He hunted him up. He found
   him half drunk in a very poor and shabby lodging. He told him that he
   would like him to come and live in his rooms; that he had nice rooms,
   and it was snugger than where he was. The other man stated he was in
   debt and could not leave. No. 1 went out of the room, paid the man's
   bill, sent for a carriage, bundled up his friend's things--and a
   newspaper held them all--and took him off to his own lodgings. The next
   morning he said: "Now, you and I are going to live together. Let us
   make a contract and both sign it."

   There were four articles in it.

   "First, neither one of us is to go out alone, unless absolutely
   necessary.

   "Second, twenty minutes to be allowed to go from room to college for
   recitations. Overtime to be accounted for.

   "Third, one hour to be given every night to recreation.

   "Fourth, bygones to be bygones."

   They both signed it. Everything went on well. They had lived together
   for six weeks when one night No. 2 sprang up, shut his book with a bang
   and said: "I can't stand this slow life. I must have a bust." "Very
   well," said No. 1, "you shall bust here. What do you want?" "I want
   some drink." "Well, you shall have it," said No. 1, and he got him
   something to drink and brought it to the room. No. 2 took it. Do you
   say it was a risk? His thirst was allayed and the wild beast was
   calmed. He settled down to his books for six weeks again, when the wild
   beast once more asserted itself. No. 1 gave it a meal to satisfy it, as
   before. No. 2 worked faithfully this time for three months before
   another outbreak. And so the thing went on. A year afterward No. 2 said
   to No. 1: "You never tell me what you are reading at the recreation
   hour. I think I see you read the Bible sometimes. You never talked to
   me on that subject." Talked to him about it! What was the use of
   talking to a man about Christianity when he was living it every hour of
   his life? He had done his work without ever having said a word. No. 2
   was dying to learn his secret. I need not detail the rest. These two
   men passed out of the University at the end of their course. No. 1
   passed a fairly good examination. No. 2, the man who was lost,
   graduated with honors and took the medal for his thesis. The last time
   I heard of No. 1 he was filling an important appointment in London, and
   No. 2 is known as "the Christian Doctor" of a village in Wales. Now
   that seems to me to be a thing worth living for; something to look back
   upon after one's college life is over.

   No one knew anything about this. No. 1 was never known as a specially
   religious man, and yet, in his quiet way, he was living Christ in every
   direction; and he left more fragrance behind him when he was gone than
   a dozen of the noisier men.

   I ask you, gentlemen, to save your lives, to save your college days,
   and I appeal to the generous side of you and ask you to remember your
   fellow men. Remember the man who is going to pieces; remember the man
   who is down, the man who is tempted. Perhaps if you would stand by him
   you could help him through. You need not make any great profession of
   religion. But, if you do that, you will make a great practice of it. It
   will amount to little, after the college course is over, that you have
   merely done your work and passed. What is the use of your passing, what
   is the use of your getting any degree, unless it is going to be of some
   use to somebody else? There is no particular reason why nine-tenths of
   us should be alive at all; but the man who begins to live for the
   Kingdom of God, who sees a chance to do a good turn here and a little
   one there, and shed a little light here and a little sunniness there,
   has something to live for. That man's life will never be lost. He lives
   a more abundant life. There is no other joy or light in the world
   except that.

   And if you gentlemen are going to seek the Kingdom of God, I want to
   ask you to seek it first. Do not touch it unless you promise to seek it
   first. I promise you a miserable life and influence and a poor, broken,
   lost career, if you seek it second. Seek it first, or let it alone. Do
   not be an amphibian; no man can serve two masters, and, if you only
   knew it, it is a thousand times easier to seek first the Kingdom of God
   than to seek it second. I have not the slightest doubt there are many
   men who are seeking second the Kingdom of God, and their religion is a
   nuisance to them. It is hard to keep up, and they would get rid of it
   if they could. The cure is to seek it first, to make it the helm of
   life. Then only can a man's life go straight, and then only can he
   fulfill the destiny for which God has put him into the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

V.

LIFE ON THE TOP FLOOR

   You have had a great time on the mountains, but remember the mountain
   is not a place to live on. The Mount of Transfiguration is an episode,
   coming to a man from time to time; but it is not in the ordinary course
   of nature that a man should always live on the top of the mountain. The
   mountain is of use to send streams into the valley of our ordinary
   life, to fertilize and nourish what is there. Perhaps it is not
   possible that we shall all be living at the same pitch at which you
   have lived during the days of this week. Before the sacramental wine
   was dry on the lips of Peter he was untrue to his Saviour. A breakdown
   to the moral life is just as natural, and just as much a matter of law
   as the breakdown of an engine. It is important to get to the bottom of
   these causes. One of the most important things for us to study is the
   anatomy of the soul, the anatomy of temptation, and the physiology of
   sin.

   You will not agree with me, perhaps, but I have a strong suspicion that
   the evolutionists are on the right track when they tell us that man's
   body has come up through the animal creation. Bone for bone, muscle for
   muscle and nerve for nerve, you and I are exactly the same as the
   higher vertebrae of the animal kingdom; and after we passed through the
   animal kingdom, it is supposed by the theorists, we underwent a long
   probation in which we were somewhat in the condition of the red Indian;
   and, just as we had the bodies of animals, we had to some extent the
   minds of animals and the dispositions of savages. If the animal has
   left me as its legacy a vertebral column and certain nerves, why should
   it not leave me a legacy of its modes and passions? And if I have once
   had as my ancestors a long race of savages, why should not the modes
   and predilections of the savage nature be still in my blood? If I have
   the blood of the tiger, shall I not have to some extent the spirit of a
   tiger? If I have the blood of a shark, shall I not be inclined
   sometimes to play the shark? If I have the blood of a fox, shall I not
   be inclined sometimes to be foxy? Well, it doesn't matter in the least
   whether that is true or not, but I appeal to you if it is not a fact
   that you find in yourselves the residuum of many animals and the
   disposition of many savages. If there is a man who has nothing of the
   animal in him, I should like you to introduce me to him. It doesn't
   matter where it came from. It is there, as a matter of fact. That is to
   say, man is built in three stories. He is a three-storied structure. On
   the ground floor there dwells the animal. Above that, on the second
   story, there is the savage. And on the third floor there is the man.
   Now, my brother, when you go wrong, it is not you who goes wrong, it is
   the man who lives in the bottom story. And when you collapse, when you
   imagine that it is impossible for you to recover again, remember that
   the true man in you is still there; and that although temptations may
   come to you from these lower parts of your nature, it is not essential
   that you should live in idle acquiescence to them. By taking to pieces
   the moral nature, one sees very clearly what temptation really is. It
   is the appeal of the animal to the man; and it is no sin for man to
   hear that appeal. It is no sin for a man to be tempted. In virtue of
   his nature, man must be tempted. It is when a man leaves the top story
   and deliberately walks down and spends an hour in the cellar that
   temptation passes from temptation into sin.

   In the same way, one sees very clearly from that little piece of
   anatomy, how it is possible to overcome temptation. The remedy, of
   course, is simply to decline ever to move in the lower regions of one's
   being at all, to regard that as a thing evolved past, and to live
   constantly in the higher regions. When a man does that, it is
   impossible for him to break down. Put it in this way. An image is
   thrown upon the screen of your mind and you look at it. How can you
   dismiss it? You can only dismiss it by throwing another image on the
   screen which will be more beautiful, more pure and more attractive, and
   which, above all, will pre-occupy your mind so that the other image
   will fade away. It is impossible, I think, in most cases, for the man
   to deliberately fight the temptation when it comes in certain forms.
   The only thing he can do is to replace that form by another form. You
   can do something with temptation at its first stage. You can do
   everything with it. You can do a little with it at the second stage,
   but you can do nothing with it after it passes to the third stage. If
   you let it pass that, you are over Niagara. You must fight it, not by
   direct fight, but by flight to the higher regions. Paul summed it up in
   a single sentence, where he said: "Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not
   fulfill the lusts of the flesh." In plain English, walk in the fourth
   flat, and you will not do the things that people do in the cellar. You
   cannot be in two places at once. If you make up your mind to live
   continuously in the spirit, ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
   flesh. Spirit is there contrasted with flesh. It does not mean
   primarily the Holy Spirit, although it includes that. It is here
   contrasted primarily with the flesh. Either live a cellar or a
   top-story life, a dog life or a man life. Walk among spiritual things,
   among high people--not necessarily religious things, but spiritual
   things. Look not on the things which are seen, but the things which are
   unseen. Be in the company of good books, beautiful pictures, and
   charming, delightful and inspiring music; and let all that one hears,
   sees, reads and thinks lift and inspire the higher. The man who does
   that is kept above the lower nature. Many and many a thing which is not
   directly religious, therefore, comes in to make up a part of the
   nourishment of the spiritual life.

   We can always live a high life. We can always have before us beautiful,
   divine ideals, and the sudden attempt to get from the lower to the
   higher is the transition between the life of the flesh and the life of
   the spirit, and the passing from the one region into the other is done
   by a sudden act, by a sudden mental movement, by a transference of
   one's interests from one region to another. That mental movement, I
   think, may be dignified with the name of prayer. That sudden appeal to
   the purer image which is to displace the other and let it fade away is
   the spasmodic act of prayer, which instantly places one in the
   spiritual region; and that is one of the highest uses of prayer, not to
   get something directly from heaven, but to switch everything up, and
   not down. If you could keep a Christian and a God-like spirit, it would
   be impossible for you to have the lower appetites again.

   If you want to get a man on his feet again, the thing to do is not to
   preach or read the Bible to him, but to get him out of the cellar in
   which he lives. Take him by the hand, and he will be led away from his
   former life. Those are psychological principles founded upon the fact
   that the attention cannot be directed to two things at the same moment.
   You see that, upon merely psychological principles, the man who
   understands his nature and applies that remedy for his case when he
   finds himself becoming a lower man than he ought to, is bound to get
   the victory. It is not by magic that men are able to succeed in living
   a high and Christian life. It is by living according to nature and
   according to the revelation of our higher nature. It is by living along
   the line of the laws under which this system of our human nature is
   founded. That is put in other words by Christ, where he says, "Abide in
   me" --the same thing on a still higher plane. The man who lives with
   Christ cannot sin. "If any man sin," John says, "he hath not known
   Christ." Sin is abashed in the presence of Christ. The man who lives in
   Christ as his ideal finds in Him a continuous living Saviour, drawing
   him away from himself and making it impossible for him to live for
   himself.

   Let no man here to-night think or say that he can get victory over sin
   alone. He cannot get that out of religion unless he gets a great many
   other things as well, and is compelled to accept them. Deliverance from
   sin is only one of the functions of the new nature; and a man is not a
   new man if he has got only one arm. The one arm is to fight sin. He
   must be a full, perfect man; and the man who has simply got the muscle
   in his spiritual nature which is to deal with sin is not a Christian
   man at all necessarily. The man who attempts to live in one function
   alone will find it impossible. Religion is not a blue ribbon to wear
   against a single set of things. It is not an inoculation against a
   single disease. A man must accept Christ all around, not only as his
   Deliverer from sin, but as his friend and guide, his ideal and Saviour.
   He must walk his whole life, and every day of his life, in the spirit,
   not merely rushing into the top story when temptations are at his
   heels, but dwelling there, in that place where the air is always sweet,
   where the company is always pure, and where there is nothing to hinder
   the soul from communing with God and with the stars. If a man can
   continuously live in that region, he is bound to grow better and
   better. That is the picture of temptation chasing a man who walks in
   the Spirit. He hears its bark and feels its bite, like a dog's; but if
   he is off its ground it cannot touch him. Just in proportion as we live
   in the higher regions are we able to evade temptations.

   In dealing with others, it is not enough to preach to them, to give
   them tracts, texts or prayers: but we must give them a new environment,
   in which the new nature can bud and flower and grow into perfection.
   Gentlemen, it is not such an easy business to save a man as some people
   think. It is not to be done by a few earnest words. That is why so many
   college men have been passed over untouched by our college Y. M. C.
   A.'s. It is not because we do not have meetings enough, not because we
   do not know the Bible well enough, not because we are not earnest
   enough; but it is because we do not proceed rationally enough. It is
   because we do not sow seeds for individuals and live so that they may
   be compelled to live this higher life with us. We do not do our work
   half thoroughly enough. Unless we lay down our lives to save men, we
   are not following the Master as we ought. It is good business to devote
   our lives to individuals. It may not be so picturesque, but individual
   work, where every man singles out his individual to help and save, and
   stands by him, if multiplied through the universities, would soon win
   our universities for Christ.

   Make a continuous effort by will power and prayer power and the power
   of the Spirit of God to walk in the spiritual region; for nature abhors
   a vacuum. If we allow any pause to occur in our high living, if we
   leave this place, the enemy will come upon us, and we will be worse off
   after this Conference than we were before it.
     __________________________________________________________________

VI

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AND YOUR PART IN IT

   "The futility of saving men by speech" is not a whole truth, but it is
   the large part of a truth. Imagine a life-saving crew trying to save
   wrecked mariners simply by calling to them, and not throwing out a life
   line or putting off in a boat after them! It is a case of life for
   life--a man laying down his own life for others, as Christ did.

   In talking to a man you want to win, talk to him in his own language.
   If you want to get hold of an agnostic, try to translate what you have
   to say into simple words--words that will not be in every case the
   words in which you got it. It is not cant. Religion has its technical
   terms just as science, but it can be overdone; and, besides, it is an
   exceedingly valuable discipline for one's self. Take a text and say,
   "What does that mean in 19th century English;" and in doing that you
   will learn the lesson that it is the spirit of truth that does one
   good, and not the form of words. The form does not matter, if it does
   you good and draws you nearer to God. Do not be suspicious of it, if it
   is God's truth, in whatever form it may be.

   One has to do a great deal more than display his Christianity. He must
   not only talk it, but live it. What is the secret of Christianity? It
   is not picking out a man here and a man there and making them fit to go
   to heaven. Christ came to this world, as He Himself said, to found a
   society. Have you ever thought of that conception of Christianity? For
   hundreds of years it has been utterly lost sight of. It is only lately
   that men are getting to see the great Christian doctrine of the Kingdom
   of God. This great phrase was never off Christ's lips. "The Kingdom of
   God" is by far the commonest phrase in His speech. Have you ever given
   a month of your life to find out what Christ meant by "the Kingdom of
   God?" Every day as we pray, "Thy Kingdom come," has our Christian
   consciousness taken in the tremendous sweep of that prayer, and seen
   how it covers the length and breadth of this great world and every
   human being? Christ was continually telling what it was. The Kingdom of
   heaven is like unto this. The kingdom of heaven is like unto that. If
   there is one thing more prominent than another in Christ's language it
   is in explaining what the kingdom of heaven is, and in what the
   subjects of that kingdom are to busy themselves. The kingdom of God is
   a society for the best men working for the best end, with the highest
   motive according to the best principle. The Kingdom of God was to come
   without observation. Christ likened it to leaven, and one cannot get a
   better understanding of the meaning of His phrase than by taking His
   own metaphors. The world is sunken, Christ said, and it must be raised.
   Leaven comes from the same word as lever. It is that which lifts,
   elevates, or raises. Christ founded a society of men for the purpose of
   raising men. This leaven was not to disturb the form of or overturn any
   institution. When you put leaven into a vessel with anything that is to
   be leavened, it does not affect the outward form of it; but it changes
   its spirit.

   The Kingdom of God is like leaven. It is to act, raising men by
   contagion, by the contact of one life with another. Did you ever put a
   little leaven under a microscope? If you did, you found it was a minute
   plant, perhaps one six-thousandth of an inch in diameter, with such an
   amazing power of propagation that, simply in contact with the dough, it
   has the effect of lifting it by means of the life that is in it. And so
   the virtue of the Christian's life, not by tempting it in the way of
   forcing it, but by its spontaneous, natural and beautiful goodness,
   reacts upon others. When men observe the fragrance of Christ and are
   reminded of Him, a longing comes over them to live like Him and breathe
   that air and have that calm, that beauty of character, and all that
   unconscious influence going out as a contagion to others. By these men
   the world is raised.

   But that is not all. The world is not only sunken, it is sinful. Those
   of you who know life even an inch below the surface, know that even in
   this Christian country, in our great cities, the world is rotten. Have
   you ever thought of the sin of the world? Think of the sin in your own
   being. Think that the man in the next house has the same amount of sin
   in him, and all the people in your street are like that. Multiply that
   by the number of all the streets in your city, and that by the number
   of cities in your country, and that by the number of countries in the
   world, and you have a ghastly spectre under which your imagination
   staggers.

   That, however, is only a single glimpse of this sinful world, for the
   sin can be taken away: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the
   sin of the world." How does He do it? By forgiving the sin of the
   world, and by taking it away, through you and me and other subjects of
   His kingdom.

   Christians, the followers of Christ, He said, are the salt of the
   earth, and it is that salt that takes away the rottenness of the world.
   He takes away the guilt and the power of it, and you help Him to remove
   it by being salt in the society in which you live. Salt is that which
   keeps society from becoming rotten. You put salt upon fish or meat to
   prevent it from becoming rotten; and it is the Christian men and women
   in this country who prevent it from becoming absolutely rotten.
   Christianity is the great antiseptic of society. If you were to take
   Christianity out of New York, Chicago, Berlin, or Paris, those cities,
   in a few generations, would go to pieces, even physically, and be swept
   off the earth. Now, we are to be the salt of Chicago, New York and the
   great cities of the world. It is our business to make cities and to
   keep those cities sweet--not only to scavenge away the rottenness after
   it has grown there, but to prevent the new generation that is growing
   up from becoming rotten. The work of salt is to prevent this, as well
   as to cure it. Keep those children pure to the end of their lives. We
   do not emphasize half enough the prevention side of Christian society.
   We do not emphasize half enough the making of Christian environment in
   which a Christ-like life shall be possible--new houses, pure air and
   water, good schools, bringing the influences of sweetest life and
   purity to keep those young lives from succumbing to the influences
   which surround them. The world which you and I have to lift is not only
   the world of the poor; but we have to lift up our country.

   One thing, gentlemen, strikes the stranger in coming to this country.
   He goes to a city like Boston, and finds the merchants of that city
   with their heads buried in their ledgers, wholly occupied with their
   private business, while a few Irishmen, holding the city offices, are
   carrying on their municipal government. Some one has defined dirt as
   matter in the wrong place; and it is matter in the wrong place for a
   company of Irishmen to regulate the affairs of the city of Boston.
   Therefore, gentlemen, if you are the subjects of the Kingdom of God,
   you must give to the world and to your country a reformed Boston, a
   reformed Chicago, above all a reformed New York. You have been taught
   in your schools of your duties as citizens; but you are taught in this
   Book just as plainly your duties as Christian citizens. These cities
   are making the people that are living in them. People will not be
   righteous. In this country there is not only little honesty and
   honorableness in municipal life; but, what is a thousand times worse,
   there is little in its possibility. In my country I have never known or
   heard of a member of the government, either municipal or state, proving
   false to his trust. It is your duty to restore righteousness in the
   high places of this government. Let the people see examples which will
   help them in their Christian life. I cannot speak too strongly about
   that, because I know that the thing in process of time can be done. We
   have had rotten municipal government, and the Christian men of the
   place have taken the thing up and said, we have determined this shall
   not be. In the old cities, they have put man after man into the
   municipal chair simply because they were Christian men, because they
   would deal with the people righteously, and carry out the programme of
   Christianity for the city. Let me tell you of the work of some
   university men in the city of London. They went to a district in the
   East End--a God-forsaken and sunken place, occupied for miles entirely
   by working people. They rented a house and became known as settlers in
   that poor district. They gave themselves no airs of superiority. They
   did not tell the people they had come to do them good. They went in
   there and made friends with the people. The leaven went in among the
   dough. The salt went in beside that which was corrupt. We keep the
   grains of salt all together, and the other things all together; but the
   very place where the salt ought not to be is beside the salt. It ought
   to be scattered over the meat. Well, these men were not in a great
   hurry. They waited some months and got to know a number of the workmen,
   and got to understand one another. They had studied the city, and the
   workingmen were astonished at how much the young fellows knew about
   city government, city life and education, and sanitation, cleansing and
   purity in all directions. One day there came a great war of labor. The
   working men put their heads together and said, "These young fellows
   have heads. Let us go and talk the matter over with them." In a few
   months those young men were the arbiters of a strike, and at a single
   word from them three or four thousand families were saved from being
   thrown out of work on a great strike. Is that not a Christian thing to
   do? If you understand the conception of the Kingdom of God as a society
   of the best men working for the best ends for the amelioration of human
   life, you will agree with me. One of these young men at the next
   election was elected a member of one of the municipal boards, and in a
   few months he was the head of the Board. Another got into the School
   Board, and in a short time was the head of it. These men did not claim
   to be superior. They were elected kings by the people because the
   people felt their kingship. By and by the time came when a member of
   Parliament was to be returned. The workingmen came again to their
   university friends and said, "Whom shall we put in?" Those men told
   them, and they put him in. And so those men have taken possession of
   that city in the name of Jesus Christ, and have been gradually working,
   leavening and salting. First, the blade; then, the ear; and then, the
   full corn in the ear.

   It is coming without observation. It is not the work of a day.
   Christians are the only agents God has for carrying out His purposes.
   Think of that. He could Himself, with a single breath, cleanse the
   whole of London or New York, but he does not do it. It is by the
   members of His body that he carries on His work. We all have different
   parts of that work to do. Some of us are thumbs, some of us are
   fingers, and some of us are only a little bit of the little finger.
   Some, again, are limbs.

   Now, that conception of Christianity as a kingdom is beginning to grow
   throughout Christendom at this hour. Every age has had its peculiar
   side of Christianity emphasized; and the side that is being emphasized
   now is the social side, that large conception of what Christ came to
   do, how He came to save men in the bulk, as it were --by the city and
   by the country; and many of the movements that are going on just now in
   society, in education, in sanitation, in university extension and
   philanthropy, are all working together for good in that direction. Let
   not us, who believe in the salvation of the individual soul as the
   supreme thing, shut our eyes to the Christianity of Christ, to His
   great conception of the Kingdom of God.

   All the activities of Christianity may be classed under one or the
   other of these two heads--entering the kingdom of God ourselves, and
   spreading it to the lives of others. The individual life has been at
   this Conference. How is it to help on this movement for the bringing of
   the world to Christ? I know many of you are puzzled to know in what
   direction you can start off to help Christ. Let me simply say this to
   you. Once in my own life I came to crossroads. I did not know in which
   direction God wanted me to help His kingdom, and I started to read this
   Book to find out what the ideal life was. I knew I had only one life,
   and didn't want to miss it; and I found out that the only thing worth
   doing in the world was to do the will of God. Whether that was done in
   the pulpit or in the slums, whether done in the college class room or
   in the street, didn't matter at all. "My meat and my drink," Christ
   said, "is to do the will of Him that sent me;" and if you make up your
   mind to do the will of God, it matters little in what direction. There
   are more posts waiting for men than there are men waiting for posts.
   Christ needs men in every community and in every land. It makes little
   difference whether we go to foreign lands or stay at home, so it is
   where Gods puts us. I am not jealous of the great missionary movement
   which has swept this country. In my own college, at least one third of
   the men are going to the foreign mission field. I am not jealous of
   that movement. I rejoice in it. But I should like also to bid for men,
   both for my country and for yours, men who will give their lives to the
   Kingdom of God at home.

   You will say, "How am I to know whether to go abroad or stay at home,
   be a lawyer or a Christian doctor?" The first thing is, pray, of
   course. The second thing is, think. Think over all the different lines
   of work--over all your own qualifications. If you are called to the
   missionary field, think of all the different kinds of missionary
   fields. There are some that do not need you at all; and there are
   others for which you are the very man. It is a great mistake to suppose
   that missionary fields are all alike, and that they are the same in
   Africa as in India or China. They are not the same at all. Study the
   field. The third thing is, take the advice of a wise friend, but do not
   regard his decision as final. Nobody can plan your life for you. Do not
   imagine that the most disagreeable of two or three alternative things
   before you is necessarily the will of God.

   God's will does not always lie in the line of the disagreeable. God
   likes to see His children happy just as earthly fathers like to see
   their children happy, and there may be plums waiting for you as well as
   stones. Do not sacrifice to a thing that is disagreeable unless you are
   quite sure it is God's will.

   The next thing is, when the time of decision comes, act, go ahead with
   what light you have. We do not manufacture a decision out of all these
   elements. We arrive at a decision. Some day, in a turn of the road, we
   find we are led. We do not know how. The subject just took shape in our
   minds somehow, and we arrived at a decision.

   Having once decided, the next thing is, never reconsider your decision.
   The day after a man makes a great life's decision, if he reconsiders
   it, he reverses it. Never reconsider such a decision. You will never
   know for months or years whether you have done the right thing; but
   then, you will see that God has led every step of your way. One good
   general rule is to go in the direction of least resistance, if you find
   objections in every line and there is no one line positively drawing
   you out.

   I want to return to the immediate purpose of those of you who are not
   yet out in the mission field, but who have a year or two at college
   before you. I ask you to study what Christianity is, and to spread the
   knowledge of that through your university. There are many men in the
   universities who do not know in the least what Christianity is. When I
   was in the university I thought Christianity was a thing you might put
   on the point of a needle, and that Jesus Christ was a being so small
   that you had to search closely for Him before you found Him; and now I
   know the whole earth is full of His glory. Study the Kingdom of God.
   See what Christ said was life, and how the members of that kingdom are
   to pass it on to others, to the lawyer and the doctor, until we have
   the professions Christianized, and the whole country will follow. It
   begins with you. Give your life for a life.

   I will close with a specific case of one of your own countrymen. One
   night I got a letter from one of the students in the University of
   Edinburgh, with page after page of agnosticism and atheism. I went to
   see him, and spent a whole afternoon with him, but did not make the
   slightest impression. At Edinburgh University we have a students'
   evangelistic meeting Sunday nights, with an attendance of 800 or 1,000
   men. A few nights after my conversation with this young man I saw him
   at one of these meetings. Beside him sat a man I had seen occasionally
   at the meetings, but whose name I did not know. After the meeting I
   spoke to the latter student and asked him if he knew the man sitting
   next to him. He said: "I am a graduate. After I finished my regular
   course of study, I wanted to take a post-graduate course; and last year
   I came to Edinburgh, where, in the dissecting room, I happened to be
   placed near this man. I took a singular liking to him. I found out he
   was not a religious man. A year passed without any change in him. I
   went to pack my trunks to go home at the end of my one year's
   post-graduate work; but I was uncertain whether I should go and take up
   my profession in America, or stay in Edinburgh and try to win that one
   man for Christ. I decided I would stay." " Well," I said, "my young
   fellow, it will pay you. You will get your man." Two or three months
   passed. It came to the night for our students' farewell meeting--a
   service some of you might well imitate. We have men in Edinburgh
   University from every part of the world. Every year five or six hundred
   of them go out never to meet again. In our religious work we get very
   close to one another; and on the last night of the university year we
   sit down together in our common hall to the Lord's Supper. This is
   entirely a students' meeting; but that night the members of the
   Theological Faculty participate, so that things may be done decently
   and in order. There you see hundreds of men--the cream and the youth of
   the world--sitting down to the Lord's table, many of them not members
   of the church, there for the first time pledging themselves to become
   members of the Kingdom of God. I saw one, sitting down, passing the
   communion cup to his American friend. The American had won the agnostic
   for Christ. A week after, he was back to his own country. I do not know
   his name, but he was a subject of Christ's Kingdom doing his Master's
   work. A few weeks passed, and the friend he rescued from agnosticism
   came to see me and said: "I want to tell you that I am going to be a
   medical missionary."

   Before you leave here, make up your mind that, with God's help, you
   will try to land your man. Let us ask God to use us in His work.
     __________________________________________________________________

VII

THE THREE ELEMENTS OF A COMPLETE LIFE

   Students are very often recommended to invest in certain books. I am
   going to take the liberty of suggesting to some of you to buy a certain
   picture which you can get for a very few cents. Most of you have
   already seen it. It is "The Angelus." It is an illuminated text. God
   speaks through you. He also speaks through art. I want to hang up this
   picture as an illuminated text. There are three things in the
   picture--a potato field, a country lad and a country girl standing on
   the ground, and on the far horizon the spire of the village church.
   That is the whole thing. There is no great scenery, no picturesque
   scenery; just a country lad and a country girl. In those Roman Catholic
   countries, at the hour of evening, the church bell rings out to summon
   the people to pray. Some go into the church to pray; and those that are
   caught in the fields when the Angelus rings bow their heads to engage
   for a few moments in silent prayer.

   Now, that picture is a perfect picture of Christian life; and what is
   interesting about it is that it picks out the three great pedestals of
   life. Moody said it was not enough to have the root of the matter, we
   must have the whole thing.

  I

   The first element in life is work Three-fourths of our life is probably
   spent in work. Is that religious, or is it not? What is the meaning of
   it? It means, of course, that our work is just as religious as our
   worship; and unless we can make our work religious, three-fourths of
   our life remains unsanctified. The proof that work is religious is that
   the most of Christ's life was spent in work. It was not the Bible that
   was in His hands during these first thirty years of His life. It was
   the hammer and the plane. He was making chairs and tables and plows and
   yokes. That is to say, the highest conceivable life is in doing work.
   Christ's public ministry occupied only two and a half years. The great
   bulk of His time, He was simply at work; and from that moment work has
   had a new meaning given to it. When Christ came into the world He came
   to men at their work. He appealed to the shepherds, the working classes
   of those days. He also appealed to the wise men, the students of those
   days. Three deputations of the world went out to welcome him--first,
   the shepherds; second, the wise men; third, two old people, Simeon and
   Anna, in the temple. That is to say, Christ comes to men at their work,
   as the shepherds. He comes to men at their books--the wise men. He
   comes to men at their worship--Simeon and Anna. We find Christ,
   therefore, at our work, our books and our worship. But you will notice
   that it was the old people who found Christ at their worship, and, as
   we get older, we will cease to find Christ so much at our work and our
   books. We will then spend more of our time in worship than we are able
   to now, and as we get old we will repair to the prayer meeting and the
   House of God and meet Christ and worship Him as Simeon and Anna. We
   must try, until the time comes when much of our time shall be given to
   direct business, to find Christ in our books and at our common work.

   Why should God have arranged that so many hours of every day should be
   occupied with work? It is because work makes men. A university is not a
   place for making scholars. It is a place for making Christians. A farm
   is not a place for growing grain. It is a place for growing character,
   and a man has no character except what is built up through the medium
   of the things he does from day to day. God's Spirit aids it through the
   actions which he performs during his life-work. The student turns up
   every word in his Latin, instead of consulting the translation. The
   result is that honesty is translated into the student's being. If he
   gets up his mathematics thoroughly he not only becomes a mathematician
   and a learned man, but he becomes a thorough man. If he attends to the
   instructions that are given to him in class intelligently and
   conscientiously he becomes a conscientious man, and it is just by such
   means that thoroughness, conscientiousness and honorableness are
   imbedded in our being. We do not get perfect character in our sleep. It
   comes to us as muscle comes, through doing things. It is the muscle of
   the soul, and it comes by exercising it upon actual things. Hence the
   meaning of our work is that it is the making of us, and it is only by
   and through our work that the great Christian graces are communicated
   to our souls. That is the means God requires for the growing of the
   Christian principles. We cannot have Christian character unless we use
   these means. Hence, gentlemen, the necessity of a student being true,
   first of all, to his work, and letting his Christianity show itself to
   his fellow students and his professors by the integrity and the
   thoroughness of his academic work. Unless he is faithful in that which
   is least, it is impossible for him to be faithful in that which is
   much. The world judges a student by the conscientiousness and
   faithfulness with which he does his college work. I know men who were
   led to pass their examinations simply because they had become
   Christians--men who struggled for years to pass their examinations, but
   who, when they became Christians, got to work and succeeded where they
   had previously failed. Christianity comes out in a man as much in his
   work as in his worship. Our work is not only to be done thoroughly, but
   it is to be done honestly. In dealing with that august thing called
   truth a man must be square with himself, fair to his own mind and to
   the principles and spirit of truth. We are students, and it is our
   business to get to the bottom of difficulties. Perhaps some truths
   which are revealed to us have deeper bottoms than we now know. We will
   get down to nuggets if we go below the surface, as our chairman said
   this morning. Christianity is the most important thing in the world,
   and the student ought to sound it in every direction and see if there
   is deep water and a safe place through which to steer his life. If
   there are shoals, he ought to know them. Therefore, when we come to
   difficulties, let us not be guilty of intellectual sin, jumping lightly
   over them. Let us be honest seekers after truth. We do not ask the
   public to sift doctrines, but it is the business of the student to
   exercise the intellect which God has given him. Faith is never opposed
   to reason in the New Testament. It is often supposed to be so, but it
   is not. Faith is opposed to sight, but never to reason. It is only by
   reason that we can sift and examine and criticise, and be sure of the
   forms of truth which are given us as Christians. Hence a great field of
   work has opened to the student even apart from his academic work. Let
   him be sure that in seeking after truth he is drawing very near Christ.
   "I am the way, the truth and the life." We talk a great deal about
   Christ as the way and about Christ as the life; but there is a side of
   Christ especially for the student, "I am the truth." Every student
   ought to be a truth-learner and a truth-seeker for Christ's sake.

  II

   The second element in life after work--and it ought to be put first in
   importance--is God. The Angelus is perhaps the most religious picture
   painted in this century. You cannot look at it and see that young man
   standing in the field with his hat off, and the girl opposite him with
   her hands clasped and her head bowed on her breast, without feeling a
   sense of God. Gentlemen, do we carry about with us wherever we go a
   sense of God? If not, we have missed the greatest part of life. Do we
   have that feeling and conviction of God's abiding presence wherever we
   are? Does He beset us behind and before? There is nothing more needed
   in this generation than a larger and more scriptural idea of God. A
   great American writer has told us that the conception of God that he
   got, in books and from sermons, when he was a boy, was that of a wise
   and very strict lawyer sitting in his office. I remember very well the
   awful conception I got when I was a boy. I was given a book of Watts'
   hymns, which was illustrated, and, amongst other hymns, there was one
   about God, and it represented a great black, scowling thunder cloud,
   and in the midst of that cloud there was a piercing eye. That was
   placed before my young imagination as God, and I got the idea that God
   was a great detective, playing the spy upon my actions, and, as the
   hymn says, writing now the story of what little children do. That was a
   bad lesson. It has taken years to obliterate it. We think of God as "up
   there." You know there is no such thing as "up there." What would be
   "up there" tonight will be "down there" twelve hours from this time. Do
   not think of God as "up there," because there is no such place. Science
   has been "up there," and it has not seen God. You say God made the
   world six thousand years ago and then He retired. That is the last that
   was seen of Him. He made the world and then went away into space
   somewhere to look on and keep things going. Geology has been away back
   there, and God has gone further and further back. These six thousand
   years have extended back into ages and ages of long, long years. Where
   is God, if He is not back there in time or up there in space? Where is
   He? God is in you. The Kingdom of God is within you and God Himself is
   within men. He is not "up there." When are we to exchange the terrible
   God of our childhood, the far-away God of our childhood, for the
   everywhere-present God of the Bible?

   The God of theology has been largely taken from the old classical
   Christian-Roman writers, such as Augustine, who, great as they were,
   had nothing better to fling their conception of God upon than that of
   the greatest man. The greatest man was the Roman emperor, and therefore
   God became a kind of emperor. The Greeks had a far grander
   conception--the conception of Clement of Alexandria, which is coming
   again into modern theology. The Greek God is the God of this Book; the
   Spirit which moved upon the water; the God in whom we live and move and
   have our being; the God of whom Jesus spake to the woman at the well;
   the God who is a spirit. God is a spirit. Let us gather the conception
   of the immanent God. That is the theological word for it, and it is a
   splendid word. Immanuel, God with us, the inside God, the immanent God.
   You have had singular experiences since you have been here. What is it?
   It is God working in you. Have we really realized that God is in us and
   is working in us? God must be working in us. Long, long ago God made
   matter. Then He made flowers, trees and animals. Then he made man. Did
   He stop? Is God dead? If He lives, if He acts, what is He doing? He is
   making better men. He is carrying on the development of man. "It is God
   which worketh in you." The buds of our nature are not all out yet. The
   sap to make them come out comes from God, from the indwelling immanent
   Christ. Our bodies, therefore, are the temples of the Holy Ghost. We
   must bear Christ with us wherever we go, because the sense of God is
   not kept up by logic but by experience.

   Most of you have heard of Hellen Kellar, the Boston girl who is deaf
   and dumb and blind. Until she was seven years of age her mind was an
   absolute blank. Nothing could get into that blank, because all the
   avenues to the other world were closed. Then, by that great process
   which Boston has discovered, by which the blind see, the deaf hear and
   the mute speak, that girl's soul was opened. Bit by bit they began to
   build up a mind --to give her a certain amount of information and to
   educate her. But no one liked to tell her about religion. They reserved
   that for Phillips Brooks. After some years had passed they took her to
   him and he began to talk to her, through the young lady who had been
   the means of opening her senses, and was able to communicate with her
   by the delicate process of touch. Phillips Brooks began to tell her
   about God, who God was, what He had done, how He loved men and what He
   was to us. The child listened very intently. Then she looked up and
   said: "Mr. Brooks, I knew all that before, but I didn't know His name."
   There was some mysterious pressure, some impelling power, some guide,
   some elevating impulse, within her soul. "It is GOD," said Phillips
   Brooks, "which worketh in you. God is with us and in us."

   I wonder if you have heard the story of the two Americans who were once
   crossing the Atlantic and met in the cabin on Sunday night to sing
   hymns. As they sang the last hymn, "Jesus, Lover of my Soul," one of
   them heard an exceedingly rich and beautiful voice behind him. He
   looked around, and, although he did not know the face, he thought that
   he knew the voice. So, when the music ceased, he turned and asked the
   man if he had been in the Civil War.

   The man replied that he had been a Confederate soldier.

   "Were you at such a place at such a night?" asked the first.

   "Yes," he replied, "and a curious thing happened that night which this
   hymn has recalled to my mind. I was posted on sentry duty near the edge
   of a wood. It was a dark night and very cold, and I was a little
   frightened because the enemy were supposed to be very near. About
   midnight, when everything was very still and I was feeling homesick and
   miserable and weary, I thought that I would comfort myself by praying
   and singing a hymn. I remember singing this hymn:


   "All my trust on Thee is stayed,

   All my help from Thee I bring;

   Cover my defenseless head

   With the shadow of Thy wing.'

   "After singing that a strange peace came down upon me, and through the
   long night I felt no more fear."

   "Now," said the other, "listen to my story. I was a Union soldier and
   was in the wood that night with a party of scouts. I saw you standing,
   although I did not see your face. My men had their rifles focused upon
   you, waiting the word to fire, but when you sang out:


   "Cover my defenseless head

   With the shadow of Thy wing '

   I said: Boys, lower your rifles; we will go home. ' It was God working
   in each of them. Just by such means, by this everywhere-acting,
   mysterious spirit, God keeps His Spirit moving. Hence that second great
   element in life, GOD, without Whom life is a living death.

  III

   A moment or two about the third element in life. The first is "work,"
   the second is "God," the third is "love." You have noticed in that
   picture the sense of companionship, brought out by the young man and
   the young woman. It matters not whether they are brother and sister or
   lover and lover. There you have the idea of friendship, the final
   ingredient in our lives. If the man had been standing in that field
   alone, the scene would be almost weary. If the woman had been standing
   alone it would have been sentimental. You can carry much away from this
   Conference; but we can all carry away with us some enrichment of our
   human friendship, and that will complete our life, because no life is
   complete unless it has that additional element in it. That, after all,
   is the divine element in life, because God is love and because he that
   loveth is born of God. Therefore, gentlemen, after we leave one
   another, let us keep our friendships in repair, as some one says. They
   are worth while spending time on and keeping them up, because they
   constitute a large part of our life. I need not say that we must
   cultivate this spirit of friendship and let it grow into a great love
   not only for our friends, but for all humanity. Some of you are going
   into the mission field. Your mission field will be a failure unless you
   cultivate this element. Two years ago I was wandering about the coral
   islands of the Pacific, and I came to one island far remote from human
   gaze, inhabited solely by cannibals. At one end of the island was a
   missionary and his wife. At the other end of the island was another
   missionary and his wife. They never heard from other parts of the world
   for six months. You would suppose they would see each other every day,
   but they were not on loving terms. They were not on speaking terms.
   They were on war terms. One had actually assaulted the other. What was
   the trouble about? It was a quarrel over the word in the native
   language they should use for "God" in their translation of the New
   Testament. They needed and lacked charity, tenderness, tolerance,
   patience.

   So these three things--work, God, love--form a complete life. If your
   life is not comfortable, if you are ill at ease, ask yourself if you
   are not lacking in one or other of these three things, and pray for
   them and work for them.
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
