     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Unspoken Sermons Third Series
      Creator(s): MacDonald, George (1824-1905)
     Print Basis: London: Longmans, Green and Co., 1889
   CCEL Subjects: Classic; Sermons;
      LC Call no: BV4253
     LC Subjects:

                  Practical theology

                  Pastoral theology

                  Preaching. Homiletics

                  Sermons
     __________________________________________________________________

                         Unspoken Sermons Second Series

By George MacDonald

    London: Longmans, Green & Co.

    1889

   TO MY WIFE

   Sun and wind and rain, the Lord

   Is to seed his Father buried

   For he is the living Word,

   And the quickening Spirit.

   Bordighera:

   May 3, 1889.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE CREATION IN CHRIST.

   All things were made by him, and without him was not anything made that
   was made. In him was life, and the life was the light of men.--John i.
   3, 4.

   It seems to me that any lover of the gospel given to thinking, and
   especially one accustomed to the effort of uttering thought, can hardly
   have failed to feel dissatisfaction, more or less definite, with the
   close of the third verse, as here presented to English readers. It
   seems to me in its feebleness, unlike, and rhetorically unworthy of the
   rest. That it is no worse than pleonastic, that is, redundant,
   therefore only unnecessary, can be no satisfaction to the man who would
   find perfection, if he may, in the words of him who was nearer the Lord
   than any other. The phrase that was made' seems, from its uselessness,
   weak even to foolishness after what precedes: All things were made by
   him, and without him was not anything made that was made.'

   My hope was therefore great when I saw, in reading the Greek, that the
   shifting of a period would rid me of the pleonasm. If thereupon any
   precious result of meaning should follow, the change would not merely
   be justifiable--seeing that points are of no authority with anyone
   accustomed to the vagaries of scribes, editors, and printers--but one
   for which to give thanks to God. And I found the change did unfold such
   a truth as showed the rhetoric itself in accordance with the highest
   thought of the apostle. So glad was I, that it added little to my
   satisfaction to find the change supported by the best manuscripts and
   versions. It could add none to learn that the passage had been, in
   respect of the two readings, a cause of much disputation: the ground of
   argument on the side of the common reading, seemed to me worse than
   worthless.

   Let us then look at the passage as I think it ought to be translated,
   and after that, seek the meaning for the sake of which it was written.
   It is a meaning indeed by no means dependent for its revelation on this
   passage, belonging as it does to the very truth as it is in Jesus; but
   it is therein magnificently expressed by the apostle, and differently
   from anywhere else--that is, if I am right in the interpretation which
   suggested itself the moment I saw the probable rhetorical relation of
   the words.

   All things were made through him, and without him was made not one
   thing. That which was made in him was life, and the life was the light
   of men.'

   Note the antithesis of the through and the in.

   In this grand assertion seems to me to lie, more than shadowed, the
   germ of creation and redemption--of all the divine in its relation to
   all the human.

   In attempting to set forth what I find in it, I write with no desire to
   provoke controversy, which I loathe, but with some hope of presenting
   to the minds of such as have become capable of seeing it, the glory of
   the truth of the Father and the Son, as uttered by this first of seers,
   after the grandest fashion of his insight. I am as indifferent to a
   reputation for orthodoxy as I despise the championship of novelty. To
   the untrue, the truth itself must seem unsound, for the light that is
   in them is darkness.

   I believe, then, that Jesus Christ is the eternal son of the eternal
   father; that from the first of firstness Jesus is the son, because God
   is the father--a statement imperfect and unfit because an attempt of
   human thought to represent that which it cannot grasp, yet which it so
   believes that it must try to utter it even in speech that cannot be
   right. I believe therefore that the Father is the greater, that if the
   Father had not been, the Son could not have been. I will not apply
   logic to the thesis, nor would I state it now but for the sake of what
   is to follow. The true heart will remember the inadequacy of our
   speech, and our thought also, to the things that lie near the unknown
   roots of our existence. In saying what I do, I only say what Paul
   implies when he speaks of the Lord giving up the kingdom to his father,
   that God may be all in all. I worship the Son as the human God, the
   divine, the only Man, deriving his being and power from the Father,
   equal with him as a son is the equal at once and the subject of his
   father--but making himself the equal of his father in what is most
   precious in Godhead, namely, Love--which is, indeed, the essence of
   that statement of the evangelist with which I have now to do--a higher
   thing than the making of the worlds and the things in them, which he
   did by the power of the Father, not by a self-existent power in
   himself, whence the apostle, to whom the Lord must have said things he
   did not say to the rest, or who was better able to receive what he said
   to all, says, All things were made' not by, but through him.'

   We must not wonder things away into nonentity, but try to present them
   to ourselves after what fashion we are able--our shadows of the
   heavenly. For our very beings and understandings and consciousnesses,
   though but shadows in regard to any perfection either of outline or
   operation, are yet shadows of his being, his understanding, his
   consciousness, and he has cast those shadows; they are no more causally
   our own than his power of creation is ours. In our shadow-speech then,
   and following with my shadow-understanding as best I can the words of
   the evangelist, I say, The Father, in bringing out of the unseen the
   things that are seen, made essential use of the Son, so that all that
   exists was created through him. What the difference between the part in
   creation of the Father and the part of the Son may be, who can
   understand?--but perhaps we may one day come to see into it a little;
   for I dare hope that, through our willed sonship, we shall come far
   nearer ourselves to creating. The word creation applied to the loftiest
   success of human genius, seems to me a mockery of humanity, itself in
   process of creation.

   Let us read the text again: All things were made through him, and
   without him was made not one thing. That which was made in him was
   life.' You begin to see it? The power by which he created the worlds
   was given him by his father; he had in himself a greater power than
   that by which he made the worlds. There was something made, not through
   but in him; something brought into being by himself. Here he creates in
   his grand way, in himself, as did the Father. That which was made in
   him was life.'

   What does this mean? What is the life the apostle intends? Many forms
   of life have come to being through the Son, but those were results, not
   forms of the life that was brought to existence in him. He could not
   have been employed by the Father in creating, save in virtue of the
   life that was in him.

   As to what the life of God is to himself, we can only know that we
   cannot know it--even that not being absolute ignorance, for no one can
   see that, from its very nature, he cannot understand a thing without
   therein approaching that thing in a most genuine manner. As to what the
   life of God is in relation to us, we know that it is the causing life
   of everything that we call life--of everything that is; and in knowing
   this, we know something of that life, by the very forms of its force.
   But the one interminable mystery, for I presume the two make but one
   mystery--a mystery that must be a mystery to us for ever, not because
   God will not explain it, but because God himself could not make us
   understand it--is first, how he can be self-existent, and next, how he
   can make other beings exist: self-existence and creation no man will
   ever understand. Again, regarding the matter from the side of the
   creature--the cause of his being is antecedent to that being; he can
   therefore have no knowledge of his own creation; neither could he
   understand that which he can do nothing like. If we could make
   ourselves, we should understand our creation, but to do that we must be
   God. And of all ideas this--that, with the self-dissatisfied, painfully
   circumscribed consciousness I possess, I could in any way have caused
   myself, is the most dismal and hopeless. Nevertheless, if I be a child
   of God, I must be like him, like him even in the matter of this
   creative energy. There must be something in me that corresponds in its
   childish way to the eternal might in him. But I am forestalling. The
   question now is: What was that life, the thing made in the Son--made by
   him inside himself, not outside him--made not through but in him--the
   life that was his own, as God's is his own?

   It was, I answer, that act in him that corresponded in him, as the son,
   to the self-existence of his father. Now what is the deepest in God?
   His power? No, for power could not make him what we mean when we say
   God. Evil could, of course, never create one atom; but let us
   understand very plainly, that a being whose essence was only power
   would be such a negation of the divine that no righteous worship could
   be offered him: his service must be fear, and fear only. Such a being,
   even were he righteous in judgment, yet could not be God. The God
   himself whom we love could not be righteous were he not something
   deeper and better still than we generally mean by the word--but, alas,
   how little can language say without seeming to say something wrong! In
   one word, God is Love. Love is the deepest depth, the essence of his
   nature, at the root of all his being. It is not merely that he could
   not be God, if he had made no creatures to whom to be God; but love is
   the heart and hand of his creation; it is his right to create, and his
   power to create as well. The love that foresees creation is itself the
   power to create. Neither could he be righteous--that is, fair to his
   creatures--but that his love created them. His perfection is his love.
   All his divine rights rest upon his love. Ah, he is not the great
   monarch! The simplest peasant loving his cow, is more divine than any
   monarch whose monarchy is his glory. If God would not punish sin, or if
   he did it for anything but love, he would not be the father of Jesus
   Christ, the God who works as Jesus wrought.

   What then, I say once more, is in Christ correspondent to the creative
   power of God? It must be something that comes also of love; and in the
   Son the love must be to the already existent. Because of that eternal
   love which has no beginning, the Father must have the Son. God could
   not love, could not be love, without making things to love: Jesus has
   God to love; the love of the Son is responsive to the love of the
   Father. The response to self-existent love is self-abnegating love. The
   refusal of himself is that in Jesus which corresponds to the creation
   of God. His love takes action, creates, in self-abjuration, in the
   death of self as motive; in the drowning of self in the life of God,
   where it lives only as love. What is life in a child? Is it not perfect
   response to his parents? thorough oneness with them? A child at strife
   with his parents, one in whom their will is not his, is no child; as a
   child he is dead, and his death is manifest in rigidity and contortion.
   His spiritual order is on the way to chaos. Disintegration has begun.
   Death is at work in him. See the same child yielding to the will that
   is righteously above his own; see the life begin to flow from the heart
   through the members; see the relaxing limbs; see the light rise like a
   fountain in his eyes, and flash from his face! Life has again its
   lordship!

   The life of Christ is this--negatively, that he does nothing, cares for
   nothing for his own sake; positively, that he cares with his whole soul
   for the will, the pleasure of his father. Because his father is his
   father, therefore he will be his child. The truth in Jesus is his
   relation to his father; the righteousness of Jesus is his fulfilment of
   that relation. Meeting this relation, loving his father with his whole
   being, he is not merely alive as born of God; but, giving himself with
   perfect will to God, choosing to die to himself and live to God, he
   therein creates in himself a new and higher life; and, standing upon
   himself, has gained the power to awake life, the divine shadow of his
   own, in the hearts of us his brothers and sisters, who have come from
   the same birth-home as himself, namely, the heart of his God and our
   God, his father and our father, but who, without our elder brother to
   do it first, would never have chosen that self-abjuration which is
   life, never have become alive like him. To will, not from self, but
   with the Eternal, is to live.

   This choice of his own being, in the full knowledge of what he did;
   this active willing to be the Son of the Father, perfect in
   obedience--is that in Jesus which responds and corresponds to the
   self-existence of God. Jesus rose at once to the height of his being,
   set himself down on the throne of his nature, in the act of subjecting
   himself to the will of the Father as his only good, the only reason of
   his existence. When he died on the cross, he did that, in the wild
   weather of his outlying provinces in the torture of the body of his
   revelation, which he had done at home in glory and gladness. From the
   infinite beginning--for here I can speak only by contradictions--he
   completed and held fast the eternal circle of his existence in saying,
   Thy will, not mine, be done!' He made himself what he is by deathing
   himself into the will of the eternal Father, through which will he was
   the eternal Son--thus plunging into the fountain of his own life, the
   everlasting Fatherhood, and taking the Godhead of the Son. This is the
   life that was made in Jesus: That which was made in him was life.' This
   life, self-willed in Jesus, is the one thing that makes such life--the
   eternal life, the true life, possible--nay, imperative, essential, to
   every man, woman, and child, whom the Father has sent into the outer,
   that he may go back into the inner world, his heart. As the
   self-existent life of the Father has given us being, so the willed
   devotion of Jesus is his power to give us eternal life like his own--to
   enable us to do the same. There is no life for any man, other than the
   same kind that Jesus has; his disciple must live by the same absolute
   devotion of his will to the Father's; then is his life one with the
   life of the Father.

   Because we are come out of the divine nature, which chooses to be
   divine, we must choose to be divine, to be of God, to be one with God,
   loving and living as he loves and lives, and so be partakers of the
   divine nature, or we perish. Man cannot originate this life; it must be
   shown him, and he must choose it. God is the father of Jesus and of
   us--of every possibility of our being; but while God is the father of
   his children, Jesus is the father of their sonship; for in him is made
   the life which is sonship to the Father--the recognition, namely, in
   fact and life, that the Father has his claim upon his sons and
   daughters. We are not and cannot become true sons without our will
   willing his will, our doing following his making. It was the will of
   Jesus to be the thing God willed and meant him, that made him the true
   son of God. He was not the son of God because he could not help it, but
   because he willed to be in himself the son that he was in the divine
   idea. So with us: we must be the sons we are. We are not made to be
   what we cannot help being; sons and daughters are not after such
   fashion! We are sons and daughters in God's claim; we must be sons and
   daughters in our will. And we can be sons and daughters, saved into the
   original necessity and bliss of our being, only by choosing God for the
   father he is, and doing his will--yielding ourselves true sons to the
   absolute Father. Therein lies human bliss--only and essential. The
   working out of this our salvation must be pain, and the handing of it
   down to them that are below must ever be in pain; but the eternal form
   of the will of God in and for us, is intensity of bliss.

   And the life was the light of men.'

   The life of which I have now spoken became light to men in the
   appearing of him in whom it came into being. The life became light that
   men might see it, and themselves live by choosing that life also, by
   choosing so to live, such to be.

   There is always something deeper than anything said--a something of
   which all human, all divine words, figures, pictures, motion-forms, are
   but the outer laminar spheres through which the central reality shines
   more or less plainly. Light itself is but the poor outside form of a
   deeper, better thing, namely, life. The life is Christ. The light too
   is Christ, but only the body of Christ. The life is Christ himself. The
   light is what we see and shall see in him; the life is what we may be
   in him. The life is a light by abundant clarity invisible;' it is the
   unspeakable unknown; it must become light such as men can see before
   men can know it. Therefore the obedient human God appeared as the
   obedient divine man, doing the works of his father--the things, that
   is, which his father did--doing them humbly before unfriendly brethren.
   The Son of the Father must take his own form in the substance of flesh,
   that he may be seen of men, and so become the light of men--not that
   men may have light, but that men may have life;--that, seeing what they
   could not originate, they may, through the life that is in them, begin
   to hunger after the life of which they are capable, and which is
   essential to their being;--that the life in them may long for him who
   is their life, and thirst for its own perfection, even as root and stem
   may thirst for the flower for whose sake, and through whose presence in
   them, they exist. That the child of God may become the son of God by
   beholding the Son, the life revealed in light; that the radiant heart
   of the Son of God may be the sunlight to his fellows; that the idea may
   be drawn out by the presence and drawing of the Ideal--that Ideal, the
   perfect Son of the Father, was sent to his brethren.

   Let us not forget that the devotion of the Son could never have been
   but for the devotion of the Father, who never seeks his own glory one
   atom more than does the Son; who is devoted to the Son, and to all his
   sons and daughters, with a devotion perfect and eternal, with
   fathomless unselfishness. The whole being and doing of Jesus on earth
   is the same as his being and doing from all eternity, that whereby he
   is the blessed son-God of the father-God; it is the shining out of that
   life that men might see it. It is a being like God, a doing of the will
   of God, a working of the works of God, therefore an unveiling of the
   Father in the Son, that men may know him. It is the prayer of the Son
   to the rest of the sons to come back to the Father, to be reconciled to
   the Father, to behave to the Father as he does. He seems to me to say:
   I know your father, for he is my father; I know him because I have been
   with him from eternity. You do not know him; I have come to you to tell
   you that as I am, such is he; that he is just like me, only greater and
   better. He only is the true, original good; I am true because I seek
   nothing but his will. He only is all in all; I am not all in all, but
   he is my father, and I am the son in whom his heart of love is
   satisfied. Come home with me, and sit with me on the throne of my
   obedience. Together we will do his will, and be glad with him, for his
   will is the only good. You may do with me as you please; I will not
   defend myself. Because I speak true, my witness is unswerving; I stand
   to it, come what may. If I held my face to my testimony only till
   danger came close, and then prayed the Father for twelve legions of
   angels to deliver me, that would be to say the Father would do anything
   for his children until it began to hurt him. I bear witness that my
   father is such as I. In the face of death I assert it, and dare death
   to disprove it. Kill me; do what you will and can against me; my father
   is true, and I am true in saying that he is true. Danger or hurt cannot
   turn me aside from this my witness. Death can only kill my body; he
   cannot make me his captive. Father, thy will be done! The pain will
   pass; it will be but for a time! Gladly will I suffer that men may know
   that I live, and that thou art my life. Be with me, father, that it may
   not be more than I can bear.'

   Friends, if you think anything less than this could redeem the world,
   or make blessed any child that God has created, you know neither the
   Son nor the Father.

   The bond of the universe, the chain that holds it together, the one
   active unity, the harmony of things, the negation of difference, the
   reconciliation of all forms, all shows, all wandering desires, all
   returning loves; the fact at the root of every vision, revealing that
   love is the only good in the world,' and selfishness the one thing
   hateful, in the city of the living God unutterable, is the devotion of
   the Son to the Father. It is the life of the universe. It is not the
   fact that God created all things, that makes the universe a whole; but
   that he through whom he created them loves him perfectly, is eternally
   content in his father, is satisfied to be because his father is with
   him. It is not the fact that God is all in all, that unites the
   universe; it is the love of the Son to the Father. For of no onehood
   comes unity; there can be no oneness where there is only one. For the
   very beginnings of unity there must be two. Without Christ, therefore,
   there could be no universe. The reconciliation wrought by Jesus is not
   the primary source of unity, of safety to the world; that
   reconciliation was the necessary working out of the eternal antecedent
   fact, the fact making itself potent upon the rest of the family--that
   God and Christ are one, are father and son, the Father loving the Son
   as only the Father can love, the Son loving the Father as only the Son
   can love. The prayer of the Lord for unity between men and the Father
   and himself, springs from the eternal need of love. The more I regard
   it, the more I am lost in the wonder and glory of the thing. But for
   the Father and the Son, no two would care a jot the one for the other.
   It might be the right way for creatures to love because of mere
   existence, but what two creatures would ever have originated the
   loving? I cannot for a moment believe it would have been I. Even had I
   come into being as now with an inclination to love, selfishness would
   soon have overborne it. But if the Father loves the Son, if the very
   music that makes the harmony of life lies, not in the theory of love in
   the heart of the Father, but in the fact of it, in the burning love in
   the hearts of Father and Son, then glory be to the Father and to the
   Son, and to the spirit of both, the fatherhood of the Father meeting
   and blending with the sonhood of the Son, and drawing us up into the
   glory of their joy, to share in the thoughts of love that pass between
   them, in their thoughts of delight and rest in each other, in their
   thoughts of joy in all the little ones. The life of Jesus is the light
   of men, revealing to them the Father.

   But light is not enough; light is for the sake of life. We too must
   have life in ourselves. We too must, like the Life himself, live. We
   can live in no way but that in which Jesus lived, in which life was
   made in him. That way is, to give up our life. This is the one supreme
   action of life possible to us for the making of life in ourselves.
   Christ did it of himself, and so became light to us, that we might be
   able to do it in ourselves, after him, and through his originating act.
   We must do it ourselves, I say. The help that he has given and gives,
   the light and the spirit-working of the Lord, the spirit, in our
   hearts, is all in order that we may, as we must, do it ourselves. Till
   then we are not alive; life is not made in us. The whole strife and
   labour and agony of the Son with every man, is to get him to die as he
   died. All preaching that aims not at this, is a building with wood and
   hay and stubble. If I say not with whole heart, My father, do with me
   as thou wilt, only help me against myself and for thee;' if I cannot
   say, I am thy child, the inheritor of thy spirit, thy being, a part of
   thyself, glorious in thee, but grown poor in me: let me be thy dog, thy
   horse, thy anything thou willest; let me be thine in any shape the love
   that is my Father may please to have me; let me be thine in any way,
   and my own or another's in no way but thine;'--if we cannot, fully as
   this, give ourselves to the Father, then we have not yet laid hold upon
   that for which Christ has laid hold upon us. The faith that a man may,
   nay, must put in God, reaches above earth and sky, stretches beyond the
   farthest outlying star of the creatable universe. The question is not
   at present, however, of removing mountains, a thing that will one day
   be simple to us, but of waking and rising from the dead now.

   When a man truly and perfectly says with Jesus, and as Jesus said it,
   Thy will be done,' he closes the everlasting life-circle; the life of
   the Father and the Son flows through him; he is a part of the divine
   organism. Then is the prayer of the Lord in him fulfilled: I in them
   and thou in me, that they made be made perfect in one.' The Christ in
   us, is the spirit of the perfect child toward the perfect father. The
   Christ in us is our own true nature made blossom in us by the Lord,
   whose life is the light of men that it may become the life of men; for
   our true nature is childhood to the Father.

   Friends, those of you who know, or suspect, that these things are true,
   let us arise and live--arise even in the darkest moments of spiritual
   stupidity, when hope itself sees nothing to hope for. Let us not
   trouble ourselves about the cause of our earthliness, except we know it
   to be some unrighteousness in us, but go at once to the Life. Never,
   never let us accept as consolation the poor suggestion, that the cause
   of our deadness is physical. Can it be comfort to know that this body
   of ours, because of the death in it, is too much for the spirit--which
   ought not merely to triumph over it, but to inspire it with subjection
   and obedience? Let us comfort ourselves in the thought of the Father
   and the Son. So long as there dwells harmony, so long as the Son loves
   the Father with all the love the Father can welcome, all is well with
   the little ones. God is all right--why should we mind standing in the
   dark for a minute outside his window? Of course we miss the inness, but
   there is a bliss of its own in waiting. What if the rain be falling,
   and the wind blowing; what if we stand alone, or, more painful still,
   have some dear one beside us, sharing our outness; what even if the
   window be not shining, because of the curtains of good inscrutable
   drawn across it; let us think to ourselves, or say to our friend, God
   is; Jesus is not dead; nothing can be going wrong, however it may look
   so to hearts unfinished in childness.' Let us say to the Lord, Jesus,
   art thou loving the Father in there? Then we out here will do his will,
   patiently waiting till he open the door. We shall not mind the wind or
   the rain much. Perhaps thou art saying to the Father, "Thy little ones
   need some wind and rain: their buds are hard; the flowers do not come
   out. I cannot get them made blessed without a little more
   winter-weather." Then perhaps the Father will say, "Comfort them, my
   son Jesus, with the memory of thy patience when thou wast missing me.
   Comfort them that thou wast sure of me when everything about thee
   seemed so unlike me, so unlike the place thou hadst left." In a word,
   let us be at peace, because peace is at the heart of things--peace and
   utter satisfaction between the Father and the Son--in which peace they
   call us to share; in which peace they promise that at length, when they
   have their good way with us, we shall share.

   Before us, then, lies a bliss unspeakable, a bliss beyond the thought
   or invention of man, to every child who will fall in with the perfect
   imagination of the Father. His imagination is one with his creative
   will. The thing that God imagines, that thing exists. When the created
   falls in with the will of him who loved him into being,' then all is
   well; thenceforward the mighty creation goes on in him upon higher and
   yet higher levels, in more and yet more divine airs. Thy will, O God,
   be done! Nought else is other than loss, than decay, than corruption.
   There is no life but that born of the life that the Word made in
   himself by doing thy will, which life is the light of men. Through that
   light is born the life of men--the same life in them that came first
   into being in Jesus. As he laid down his life, so must men lay down
   their lives, that as he liveth they may live also. That which was made
   in him was life, and the life is the light of men; and yet his own, to
   whom he was sent, did not believe him.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE KNOWING OF THE SON.

   Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. And ye
   have not his word abiding in you; for whom he hath sent, him ye believe
   not.--John v. 37, 38.

   We shall know one day just how near we come in the New Testament to the
   very words of the Lord. That we have them with a difference, I cannot
   doubt. For one thing, I do not believe he spoke in Greek. He was sent
   to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and would speak their natural
   language, not that which, at best, they knew in secondary fashion. That
   the thoughts of God would come out of the heart of Jesus in anything
   but the mother-tongue of the simple men to whom he spoke, I cannot
   think. He may perhaps have spoken to the Jews of Jerusalem in Greek,
   for they were less simple; but at present I do not see ground to
   believe he did.

   Again, are we bound to believe that John Boanerges, who indeed best,
   and in some things alone, understood him, was able, after such a lapse
   of years, to give us in his gospel, supposing the Lord to have spoken
   to his disciples in Greek, the very words in which he uttered the
   simplest profundities ever heard in the human world? I do not say he
   was not able; I say--Are we bound to believe he was able? When the
   disciples became, by the divine presence in their hearts, capable of
   understanding the Lord, they remembered things he had said which they
   had forgotten; possibly the very words in which he said them returned
   to their memories; but must we believe the evangelists always precisely
   recorded his words? The little differences between their records is
   answer enough. The gospel of John is the outcome of years and years of
   remembering, recalling, and pondering the words of the Master, one
   thing understood recalling another. We cannot tell of how much the
   memory, in best condition--that is, with God in the man--may not be
   capable; but I do not believe that John would have always given us the
   very words of the Lord, even if, as I do not think he did, he had
   spoken them in Greek. God has not cared that we should anywhere have
   assurance of his very words; and that not merely, perhaps, because of
   the tendency in his children to word-worship, false logic, and
   corruption of the truth, but because he would not have them oppressed
   by words, seeing that words, being human, therefore but partially
   capable, could not absolutely contain or express what the Lord meant,
   and that even he must depend for being understood upon the spirit of
   his disciple. Seeing it could not give life, the letter should not be
   throned with power to kill; it should be but the handmaid to open the
   door of the truth to the mind that was of the truth.

   Then you believe in an individual inspiration to anyone who chooses to
   lay claim to it!'

   Yes--to everyone who claims it from God; not to everyone who claims
   from men the recognition of his possessing it. He who has a thing, does
   not need to have it recognized. If I did not believe in a special
   inspiration to every man who asks for the holy spirit, the good thing
   of God, I should have to throw aside the whole tale as an imposture;
   for the Lord has, according to that tale, promised such inspiration to
   those who ask it. If an objector has not this spirit, is not inspired
   with the truth, he knows nothing of the words that are spirit and life;
   and his objection is less worth heeding than that of a savage to the
   assertion of a chemist. His assent equally is but the blowing of an
   idle horn.

   But how is one to tell whether it be in truth the spirit of God that is
   speaking in a man?'

   You are not called upon to tell. The question for you is whether you
   have the spirit of Christ yourself. The question is for you to put to
   yourself, the question is for you to answer to yourself: Am I alive
   with the life of Christ? Is his spirit dwelling in me? Everyone who
   desires to follow the Master has the spirit of the Master, and will
   receive more, that he may follow closer, nearer, in his very footsteps.
   He is not called upon to prove to this or that or any man that he has
   the light of Jesus; he has to let his light shine. It does not follow
   that his work is to teach others, or that he is able to speak large
   truths in true forms. When the strength or the joy or the pity of the
   truth urges him, let him speak it out and not be afraid--content to be
   condemned for it; comforted that if he mistake, the Lord himself will
   condemn him, and save him as by fire.' The condemnation of his fellow
   men will not hurt him, nor a whit the more that it be spoken in the
   name of Christ. If he speak true, the Lord will say I sent him.' For
   all truth is of him; no man can see a true thing to be true but by the
   Lord, the spirit.

   How am I to know that a thing is true?'

   By doing what you know to be true, and calling nothing true until you
   see it to be true; by shutting your mouth until the truth opens it. Are
   you meant to be silent? Then woe to you if you speak.

   But if I do not take the words attributed to him by the evangelists,
   for the certain, absolute, very words of the Master, how am I to know
   that they represent his truth?'

   By seeing in them what corresponds to the plainest truth he speaks, and
   commends itself to the power that is working in you to make of you a
   true man; by their appeal to your power of judging what is true; by
   their rousing of your conscience. If they do not seem to you true,
   either they are not the words of the Master, or you are not true enough
   to understand them. Be certain of this, that, if any words that are his
   do not show their truth to you, you have not received his message in
   them; they are not yet to you the word of God, for they are not in you
   spirit and life. They may be the nearest to the truth that words can
   come; they may have served to bring many into contact with the heart of
   God; but for you they remain as yet sealed. If yours be a true heart,
   it will revere them because of the probability that they are words with
   the meaning of the Master behind them; to you they are the rock in the
   desert before Moses spoke to it. If you wait, your ignorance will not
   hurt you; if you presume to reason from them, you are a blind man
   disputing of that you never saw. To reason from a thing not understood,
   is to walk straight into the mire. To dare to reason of truth from
   words that do not show to us that they are true, is the presumption of
   Pharisaical hypocrisy. Only they who are not true, are capable of doing
   it. Humble mistake will not hurt us: the truth is there, and the Lord
   will see that we come to know it. We may think we know it when we have
   scarce a glimpse of it; but the error of a true heart will not be
   allowed to ruin it. Certainly that heart would not have mistaken the
   truth except for the untruth yet remaining in it; but he who casts out
   devils will cast out that devil.

   In the saying before us, I see enough to enable me to believe that its
   words embody the mind of Christ. If I could not say this, I should say,
   The apostle has here put on record a saying of Christ's; I have not yet
   been able to recognise the mind of Christ in it; therefore I conclude
   that I cannot have understood it, for to understand what is true is to
   know it true.' I have yet seen no words credibly reported as the words
   of Jesus, concerning which I dared to say, His mind is not therein,
   therefore the words are not his.' The mind of man can receive any word
   only in proportion as it is the word of Christ, and in proportion as he
   is one with Christ. To him who does verily receive his word, it is a
   power, not of argument, but of life. The words of the Lord are not for
   the logic that deals with words as if they were things; but for the
   spiritual logic that reasons from divine thought to divine thought,
   dealing with spiritual facts.

   No thought, human or divine, can be conveyed from man to man save
   through the symbolism of the creation. The heavens and the earth are
   around us that it may be possible for us to speak of the unseen by the
   seen; for the outermost husk of creation has correspondence with the
   deepest things of the Creator. He is not a God that hideth himself, but
   a God who made that he might reveal; he is consistent and one
   throughout. There are things with which an enemy hath meddled; but
   there are more things with which no enemy could meddle, and by which we
   may speak of God. They may not have revealed him to us, but at least
   when he is revealed, they show themselves so much of his nature, that
   we at once use them as spiritual tokens in the commerce of the spirit,
   to help convey to other minds what we may have seen of the unseen.
   Belonging to this sort of mediation are the words of the Lord I would
   now look into.

   And the Father himself which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye
   have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. And ye
   have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye believe
   not.'

   If Jesus said these words, he meant more, not less, than lies on their
   surface. They cannot be mere assertion of what everybody knew; neither
   can their repetition of similar negations be tautological. They were
   not intended to inform the Jews of a fact they would not have dreamed
   of denying. Who among them would say he had ever heard God's voice, or
   seen his shape? John himself says No man hath seen God at any time.'
   What is the tone of the passage? It is reproach. Then he reproaches
   them that they had not seen God, when no man hath seen God at any time,
   and Paul says no man can see him! Is there here any paradox? There
   cannot be the sophism: No man hath seen God; ye are to blame that ye
   have not seen God; therefore all men are to blame that they have not
   seen God!' If we read, No man hath seen God, but some men ought to have
   seen him,' we do not reap such hope for the race as will give the
   aspect of a revelation to the assurance that not one of those capable
   of seeing him has ever seen him!

   The one utterance is of John; the other of his master: if there is any
   contradiction between them, of course the words of John must be thrown
   away. But there can hardly be contradiction, since he who says the one
   thing, is recorder of the other as said by his master, him to whom he
   belonged, whose disciple he was, whom he loved as never man loved man
   before.

   The word see is used in one sense in the one statement, and in another
   sense in the other. In the one it means see with the eyes; in the
   other, with the soul. The one statement is made of all men; the other
   is made to certain of the Jews of Jerusalem concerning themselves. It
   is true that no man hath seen God, and true that some men ought to have
   seen him. No man hath seen him with his bodily eyes; these Jews ought
   to have seen him with their spiritual eyes.

   No man has ever seen God in any outward, visible, close-fitting form of
   his own: he is revealed in no shape save that of his son. But
   multitudes of men have with their mind's, or rather their heart's eye,
   seen more or less of God; and perhaps every man might have and ought to
   have seen something of him. We cannot follow God into his infinitesimal
   intensities of spiritual operation, any more than into the atomic
   life-potencies that lie deep beyond the eye of the microscope: God may
   be working in the heart of a savage, in a way that no wisdom of his
   wisest, humblest child can see, or imagine that it sees. Many who have
   never beheld the face of God, may yet have caught a glimpse of the hem
   of his garment; many who have never seen his shape, may yet have seen
   the vastness of his shadow; thousands who have never felt the warmth of
   its folds, have yet been startled by

   No face: only the sight

   Of a sweepy garment vast and white.

   Some have dreamed his hand laid upon them, who never knew themselves
   gathered to his bosom. The reproach in the words of the Lord is the
   reproach of men who ought to have had an experience they had not had.
   Let us look a little nearer at his words.

   Ye have not heard his voice at any time,' might mean, Ye have never
   listened to his voice,' or Ye have never obeyed his voice;' but the
   following phrase, nor seen his shape,' keeps us rather to the primary
   sense of the word hear: The sound of his voice is unknown to you;' You
   have never heard his voice so as to know it for his.' You have not seen
   his shape;'--You do not know what he is like.' Plainly he implies, You
   ought to know his voice; you ought to know what he is like.' You have
   not his word abiding in you;'--The word that is in you from the
   beginning, the word of God in your conscience, you have not kept with
   you, it is not dwelling in you; by yourselves accepted as the witness
   of Moses, the scripture in which you think you have eternal life does
   not abide with you, is not at home in you. It comes to you and goes
   from you. You hear, heed not, and forget. You do not dwell with it, and
   brood upon it, and obey it. It finds no acquaintance in you. You are
   not of its kind. You are not of those to whom the word of God comes.
   Their ears are ready to hear; they hunger after the word of the
   Father.'

   On what does the Lord found this his accusation of them? What is the
   sign in them of their ignorance of God?--For whom he hath sent, him ye
   believe not.'

   How so?' the Jews might answer. Have we not asked from thee a sign from
   heaven, and hast thou not point-blank refused it?'

   The argument of the Lord was indeed of small weight with, and of little
   use to, those to whom it most applied, for the more it applied, the
   more incapable were they of seeing that it did apply; but it would be
   of great force upon some that stood listening, their minds more or less
   open to the truth, and their hearts drawn to the man before them. His
   argument was this: If ye had ever heard the Father's voice; if ye had
   ever known his call; if you had ever imagined him, or a God anything
   like him; if you had cared for his will so that his word was at home in
   your hearts, you would have known me when you saw me--known that I must
   come from him, that I must be his messenger, and would have listened to
   me. The least acquaintance with God, such as any true heart must have,
   would have made you recognize that I came from the God of whom you knew
   that something. You would have been capable of knowing me by the light
   of his word abiding in you; by the shape you had beheld however
   vaguely; by the likeness of my face and my voice to those of my father.
   You would have seen my father in me; you would have known me by the
   little you knew of him. The family-feeling would have been awake in
   you, the holy instinct of the same spirit, making you know your elder
   brother. That you do not know me now, as I stand here speaking to you,
   is that you do not know your own father, even my father; that
   throughout your lives you have refused to do his will, and so have not
   heard his voice; that you have shut your eyes from seeing him, and have
   thought of him only as a partisan of your ambitions. If you had loved
   my father, you would have known his son.' And I think he might have
   said, If even you had loved your neighbour, you would have known me,
   neighbour to the deepest and best in you.'

   If the Lord were to appear this day in England as once in Palestine, he
   would not come in the halo of the painters, or with that wintry shine
   of effeminate beauty, of sweet weakness, in which it is their helpless
   custom to represent him. Neither would he probably come as carpenter,
   or mason, or gardener. He would come in such form and condition as
   might bear to the present England, Scotland, and Ireland, a relation
   like that which the form and condition he then came in, bore to the
   motley Judea, Samaria, and Galilee. If he came thus, in form altogether
   unlooked for, who would they be that recognized and received him? The
   idea involves no absurdity. He is not far from us at any moment--if the
   old story be indeed more than the best and strongest of the fables that
   possess the world. He might at any moment appear: who, I ask, would be
   the first to receive him? Now, as then, it would of course be the
   childlike in heart, the truest, the least selfish. They would not be
   the highest in the estimation of any church, for the childlike are not
   yet the many. It might not even be those that knew most about the
   former visit of the Master, that had pondered every word of the Greek
   Testament. The first to cry, It is the Lord!' would be neither good
   churchman' nor good dissenter.' It would be no one with so little of
   the mind of Christ as to imagine him caring about stupid outside
   matters. It would not be the man that holds by the mooring-ring of the
   letter, fast in the quay of what he calls theology, and from his
   rotting deck abuses the presumption of those that go down to the sea in
   ships--lets the wind of the spirit blow where it listeth, but never
   blow him out among its wonders in the deep. It would not be he who,
   obeying a command, does not care to see reason in the command; not he
   who, from very barrenness of soul, cannot receive the meaning and will
   of the Master, and so fails to fulfil the letter of his word, making it
   of none effect. It would certainly, if any, be those who were likest
   the Master--those, namely, that did the will of their father and his
   father, that built their house on the rock by hearing and doing his
   sayings. But are there any enough like him to know him at once by the
   sound of his voice, by the look of his face. There are multitudes who
   would at once be taken by a false Christ fashioned after their fancy,
   and would at once reject the Lord as a poor impostor. One thing is
   certain: they who first recognized him would be those that most loved
   righteousness and hated iniquity.

   But I would not forget that there are many in whom foolish forms cover
   a live heart, warm toward everything human and divine; for the
   worst-fitting and ugliest robe may hide the loveliest form. Every
   covering is not a clothing. The grass clothes the fields; the glory
   surpassing Solomon's clothes the grass; but the traditions of the
   worthiest elders will not clothe any soul--how much less the traditions
   of the unworthy! Its true clothing must grow out of the live soul
   itself. Some naked souls need but the sight of truth to rush to it, as
   Dante says, like a wild beast to his den; others, heavily clad in the
   garments the scribes have left behind them, and fearful of rending that
   which is fit only to be trodden underfoot, right cautiously approach
   the truth, go round and round it like a shy horse that fears a hidden
   enemy. But let each be true after the fashion possible to him, and he
   shall have the Master's praise.

   If the Lord were to appear, the many who take the common presentation
   of thing or person for the thing or person, could never recognize the
   new vision as another form of the old: the Master has been so
   misrepresented by such as have claimed to present him, and especially
   in the one eternal fact of facts--the relation between him and his
   father--that it is impossible they should see any likeness. For my
   part, I would believe in no God rather than in such a God as is
   generally offered for believing in. How far those may be to blame who,
   righteously disgusted, cast the idea from them, nor make inquiry
   whether something in it may not be true, though most must be false,
   neither grant it any claim to investigation on the chance that some
   that call themselves his prophets may have taken spiritual bribes

   To mingle beauty with infirmities,

   And pure perfection with impure defeature--

   how far those may be to blame, it is not my work to inquire. Some would
   grasp with gladness the hope that such chance might be proved a fact;
   others would not care to discern upon the palimpsest, covered but not
   obliterated, a credible tale of a perfect man revealing a perfect God:
   they are not true enough to desire that to be fact which would
   immediately demand the modelling of their lives upon a perfect idea,
   and the founding of their every hope upon the same.

   But we all, beholding the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
   image.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE MIRRORS OF THE LORD.

   But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the
   Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by
   the spirit of the Lord.--II Corinthians iii. 18.

   We may see from this passage how the apostle Paul received the Lord,
   and how he understands his life to be the light of men, and so their
   life also.

   Of all writers I know, Paul seems to me the most plainly, the most
   determinedly practical in his writing. What has been called his
   mysticism is at one time the exercise of a power of seeing, as by
   spiritual refraction, truths that had not, perhaps have not yet, risen
   above the human horizon; at another, the result of a wide-eyed habit of
   noting the analogies and correspondences between the concentric regions
   of creation; it is the working of a poetic imagination divinely alive,
   whose part is to foresee and welcome approaching truth; to discover the
   same principle in things that look unlike; to embody things discovered,
   in forms and symbols heretofore unused, and so present to other minds
   the deeper truths to which those forms and symbols owe their being.

   I find in Paul's writing the same artistic fault, with the same
   resulting difficulty, that I find in Shakspere's--a fault that, in each
   case, springs from the admirable fact that the man is much more than
   the artist--the fault of trying to say too much at once, of pouring out
   stintless the plethora of a soul swelling with life and its thought,
   through the too narrow neck of human utterance. Thence it comes that we
   are at times bewildered between two or more meanings, equally good in
   themselves, but perplexing as to the right deduction, as to the line of
   the thinker's reasoning. The uncertainty, however, lies always in the
   intellectual region, never in the practical. What Paul cares about is
   plain enough to the true heart, however far from plain to the man whose
   desire to understand goes ahead of his obedience, who starts with the
   notion that Paul's design was to teach a system, to explain instead of
   help to see God, a God that can be revealed only to childlike insight,
   never to keenest intellect. The energy of the apostle, like that of his
   master, went forth to rouse men to seek the kingdom of God over them,
   his righteousness in them; to dismiss the lust of possession and
   passing pleasure; to look upon the glory of the God and Father, and
   turn to him from all that he hates; to recognize the brotherhood of
   men, and the hideousness of what is unfair, unloving, and
   self-exalting. His design was not to teach any plan of salvation other
   than obedience to the Lord of Life. He knew nothing of the so-called
   Christian systems that change the glory of the perfect God into the
   likeness of the low intellects and dull consciences of men--a worse
   corruption than the representing of him in human shape. What kind of
   soul is it that would not choose the Apollo of light, the high-walking
   Hyperion, to the notion of the dull, self-cherishing monarch, the
   law-dispensing magistrate, or the cruel martinet, generated in the
   pagan arrogance of Rome, and accepted by the world in the church as the
   portrait of its God! Jesus Christ is the only likeness of the living
   Father.

   Let us see then what Paul teaches us in this passage about the life
   which is the light of men. It is his form of bringing to bear upon men
   the truth announced by John.

   When Moses came out from speaking with God, his face was radiant; its
   shining was a wonder to the people, and a power upon them. But the
   radiance began at once to diminish and die away, as was natural, for it
   was not indigenous in Moses. Therefore Moses put a veil upon his face
   that they might not see it fade. As to whether this was right or wise,
   opinion may differ: it is not my business to discuss the question. When
   he went again into the tabernacle, he took off his veil, talked with
   God with open face, and again put on the veil when he came out. Paul
   says that the veil which obscured the face of Moses lies now upon the
   hearts of the Jews, so that they cannot understand him, but that when
   they turn to the Lord, go into the tabernacle with Moses, the veil
   shall be taken away, and they shall see God. Then will they understand
   that the glory is indeed faded upon the face of Moses, but by reason of
   the glory that excelleth, the glory of Jesus that overshines it. Here,
   after all, I can hardly help asking--Would not Moses have done better
   to let them see that the glory of their leader was altogether dependent
   on the glory within the veil, whither they were not worthy to enter?
   Did that veil hide Moses's face only? Did he not, however
   unintentionally, lay it on their hearts? Did it not cling there, and
   help to hide God from them, so that they could not perceive that the
   greater than Moses was come, and stormed at the idea that the glory of
   their prophet must yield? Might not the absence of that veil from his
   face have left them a little more able to realize that his glory was a
   glory that must pass, a glory whose glory was that it prepared the way
   for a glory that must extinguish it? Moses had put the veil for ever
   from his face, but they clutched it to their hearts, and it blinded
   them--admirable symbol of the wilful blindness of old Mosaist or modern
   Wesleyan, admitting no light that his Moses or his Wesley did not see,
   and thus losing what of the light he saw and reflected.

   Paul says that the sight of the Lord will take that veil from their
   hearts. His light will burn it away. His presence gives liberty. Where
   he is, there is no more heaviness, no more bondage, no more wilderness
   or Mount Sinai. The Son makes free with sonship.

   And now comes the passage whose import I desire to make more clear:

   But we all,' having this presence and this liberty, with open face
   beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
   same image,' that of the Lord, from glory to glory, even as of the
   Lord, the spirit.'

   We need no Moses, no earthly mediator, to come between us and the
   light, and bring out for us a little of the glory. We go into the
   presence of the Son revealing the Father--into the presence of the
   Light of men. Our mediator is the Lord himself, the spirit of light, a
   mediator not sent by us to God to bring back his will, but come from
   God to bring us himself. We enter, like Moses, into the presence of the
   visible, radiant God--only how much more visible, more radiant! As
   Moses stood with uncovered face receiving the glory of God full upon
   it, so with open, with uncovered face, full in the light of the glory
   of God, in the place of his presence, stand we--you and I, Corinthians.
   It is no reflected light we see, but the glory of God shining in,
   shining out of, shining in and from the face of Christ, the glory of
   the Father, one with the Son. Israel saw but the fading reflection of
   the glory of God on the face of Moses; we see the glory itself in the
   face of Jesus.'

   But in what follows, it seems to me that the revised version misses the
   meaning almost as much as the authorized, when, instead of beholding as
   in a glass,' it gives reflecting as a mirror.' The former is wrong; the
   latter is far from right. The idea, with the figure, is that of a poet,
   not a man of science. The poet deals with the outer show of things,
   which outer show is infinitely deeper in its relation to truth, as well
   as more practically useful, than the analysis of the man of science.
   Paul never thought of the mirror as reflecting, as throwing back the
   rays of light from its surface; he thought of it as receiving, taking
   into itself, the things presented to it--here, as filling its bosom
   with the glory it looks upon. When I see the face of my friend in a
   mirror, the mirror seems to hold it in itself, to surround the visage
   with its liquid embrace. The countenance is there--down there in the
   depth of the mirror. True, it shines radiant out of it, but it is not
   the shining out of it that Paul has in his thought; it is the fact--the
   visual fact, which, according to Wordsworth, the poet always seizes--of
   the mirror holding in it the face.

   That this is the way poet or prophet--Paul was both--would think of the
   thing, especially in the age of the apostle, I shall be able to make
   appear even more probable by directing your notice to the following
   passage from Dante--whose time, though so much farther from that of the
   apostle than our time from Dante's, was in many respects much liker
   Paul's than ours.

   The passage is this:--Dante's Inferno: Canto xxiii. 25-27:

   E quei: S' io fossi d' impiombato vetro,

   L' immagine di fuor tua non trarrei

   Piu tosto a me, che quella dentro impetro.'

   Here Virgil, with reference to the power he had of reading the thoughts
   of his companion, says to Dante:

   If I were of leaded glass,'--meaning, If I were glass covered at the
   back with lead, so that I was a mirror,'--I should not draw thy outward
   image to me more readily than I gain thy inner one;'--meaning, than now
   I know your thoughts.'

   It seems, then, to me, that the true simple word to represent the
   Greek, and the most literal as well by which to translate it, is the
   verb mirror--when the sentence, so far, would run thus: But we all,
   with unveiled face, mirroring the glory of the Lord,--.'

   I must now go on to unfold the idea at work in the heart of the
   apostle. For the mere correctness of a translation is nothing, except
   it bring us something deeper, or at least some fresher insight: with
   him who cares for the words apart from what the writer meant them to
   convey, I have nothing to do: he must cease to pass for a man' and
   begin to be a man indeed, on the way to be a live soul, before I can
   desire his intercourse. The prophet-apostle seems to me, then, to say,
   We all, with clear vision of the Lord, mirroring in our hearts his
   glory, even as a mirror would take into itself his face, are thereby
   changed into his likeness, his glory working our glory, by the present
   power, in our inmost being, of the Lord, the spirit.' Our mirroring of
   Christ, then, is one with the presence of his spirit in us. The idea,
   you see, is not the reflection, the radiating of the light of Christ on
   others, though that were a figure lawful enough; but the taking into,
   and having in us, him working to the changing of us.

   That the thing signified transcends the sign, outreaches the figure, is
   no discovery; the thing figured always belongs to a higher stratum, to
   which the simile serves but as a ladder; when the climber has reached
   it, he then unto the ladder turns his back.' It is but according to the
   law of symbol, that the thing symbolized by the mirror should have
   properties far beyond those of leaded glass or polished metal, seeing
   it is a live soul understanding that which it takes into its
   deeps--holding it, and conscious of what it holds. It mirrors by its
   will to hold in its mirror. Unlike its symbol, it can hold not merely
   the outward visual resemblance, but the inward likeness of the person
   revealed by it; it is open to the influences of that which it embraces,
   and is capable of active co-operation with them: the mirror and the
   thing mirrored are of one origin and nature, and in closest relation to
   each other. Paul's idea is, that when we take into our understanding,
   our heart, our conscience, our being, the glory of God, namely Jesus
   Christ as he shows himself to our eyes, our hearts, our consciences, he
   works upon us, and will keep working, till we are changed to the very
   likeness we have thus mirrored in us; for with his likeness he comes
   himself, and dwells in us. He will work until the same likeness is
   wrought out and perfected in us, the image, namely, of the humanity of
   God, in which image we were made at first, but which could never be
   developed in us except by the indwelling of the perfect likeness. By
   the power of Christ thus received and at home in us, we are
   changed--the glory in him becoming glory in us, his glory changing us
   to glory.

   But we must beware of receiving this or any symbol after the flesh,
   beware of interpreting it in any fashion that partakes of the character
   of the mere physical, psychical, or spirituo-mechanical. The symbol
   deals with things far beyond the deepest region whence symbols can be
   drawn. The indwelling of Jesus in the soul of man, who shall declare!
   But let us note this, that the dwelling of Jesus in us is the power of
   the spirit of God upon us; for the Lord is that spirit,' and that Lord
   dwelling in us, we are changed even as from the Lord the spirit.' When
   we think Christ, Christ comes; when we receive his image into our
   spiritual mirror, he enters with it. Our thought is not cut off from
   his. Our open receiving thought is his door to come in. When our hearts
   turn to him, that is opening the door to him, that is holding up our
   mirror to him; then he comes in, not by our thought only, not in our
   idea only, but he comes himself, and of his own will--comes in as we
   could not take him, but as he can come and we receive him--enabled to
   receive by his very coming the one welcome guest of the whole universe.
   Thus the Lord, the spirit, becomes the soul of our souls, becomes
   spiritually what he always was creatively; and as our spirit informs,
   gives shape to our bodies, in like manner his soul informs, gives shape
   to our souls. In this there is nothing unnatural, nothing at conflict
   with our being. It is but that the deeper soul that willed and wills
   our souls, rises up, the infinite Life, into the Self we call I and me,
   but which lives immediately from him, and is his very own property and
   nature--unspeakably more his than ours: this deeper creative soul,
   working on and with his creation upon higher levels, makes the I and me
   more and more his, and himself more and more ours; until at length the
   glory of our existence flashes upon us, we face full to the sun that
   enlightens what it sent forth, and know ourselves alive with an
   infinite life, even the life of the Father; know that our existence is
   not the moonlight of a mere consciousness of being, but the sun-glory
   of a life justified by having become one with its origin, thinking and
   feeling with the primal Sun of life, from whom it was dropped away that
   it might know and bethink itself, and return to circle for ever in
   exultant harmony around him. Then indeed we are; then indeed we have
   life; the life of Jesus has, through light, become life in us; the
   glory of God in the face of Jesus, mirrored in our hearts, has made us
   alive; we are one with God for ever and ever.

   What less than such a splendour of hope would be worthy the revelation
   of Jesus? Filled with the soul of their Father, men shall inherit the
   glory of their Father; filled with themselves, they cast him out, and
   rot. The company of the Lord, soul to soul, is that which saves with
   life, his life of God-devotion, the souls of his brethren. No other
   saving can save them. They must receive the Son, and through the Son
   the Father. What it cost the Son to get so near to us that we could say
   Come in, is the story of his life. He stands at the door and knocks,
   and when we open to him he comes in, and dwells with us, and we are
   transformed to the same image of truth and purity and heavenly
   childhood. Where power dwells, there is no force; where the spirit-Lord
   is, there is liberty. The Lord Jesus, by free, potent communion with
   their inmost being, will change his obedient brethren till in every
   thought and impulse they are good like him, unselfish, neighbourly,
   brotherly like him, loving the Father perfectly like him, ready to die
   for the truth like him, caring like him for nothing in the universe but
   the will of God, which is love, harmony, liberty, beauty, and joy.

   I do not know if we may call this having life in ourselves; but it is
   the waking up, the perfecting in us of the divine life inherited from
   our Father in heaven, who made us in his own image, whose nature
   remains in us, and makes it the deepest reproach to a man that he has
   neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. He who would
   thus live must, as a mirror draws into its bosom an outward glory,
   receive into his heart of heart' the inward glory of Jesus Christ, the
   Truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE TRUTH.

   I am the truth.--John xiv. 6.

   When the man of the five senses talks of truth, he regards it but as a
   predicate of something historical or scientific proved a fact; or, if
   he allows that, for aught he knows, there may be higher truth, yet, as
   he cannot obtain proof of it from without, he acts as if under no
   conceivable obligation to seek any other satisfaction concerning it.
   Whatever appeal be made to the highest region of his nature, such a one
   behaves as if it were the part of a wise man to pay it no heed, because
   it does not come within the scope of the lower powers of that nature.
   According to the word of the man, however, truth means more than fact,
   more than relation of facts or persons, more than loftiest abstraction
   of metaphysical entity--means being and life, will and action; for he
   says, I am the truth.'

   I desire to help those whom I may to understand more of what is meant
   by the truth, not for the sake of definition, or logical
   discrimination, but that, when they hear the word from the mouth of the
   Lord, the right idea may rise in their minds; that the word may neither
   be to them a void sound, nor call up either a vague or false notion of
   what he meant by it. If he says, I am the truth,' it must, to say the
   least, be well to know what he means by the word with whose idea he
   identifies himself. And at once we may premise that he can mean nothing
   merely intellectual, such as may be set forth and left there; he means
   something vital, so vital that the whole of its necessary relations are
   subject to it, so vital that it includes everything else which, in any
   lower plane, may go or have gone by the same name. Let us endeavour to
   arrive at his meaning by a gently ascending stair.

   A thing being so, the word that says it is so, is the truth. But the
   fact may be of no value in itself, and our knowledge of it of no value
   either. Of most facts it may be said that the truth concerning them is
   of no consequence. For instance, it cannot be in itself important
   whether on a certain morning I took one side of the street or the
   other. It may be of importance to some one to know which I took, but in
   itself it is of none. It would therefore be felt unfit if I said, It is
   a truth that I walked on the sunny side.' The correct word would be a
   fact, not a truth. If the question arose whether a statement concerning
   the thing were correct, we should still be in the region of fact or no
   fact; but when we come to ask whether the statement was true or false,
   then we are concerned with the matter as the assertion of a human
   being, and ascend to another plane of things. It may be of no
   consequence which side I was upon, or it may be of consequence to some
   one to know which, but it is of vital importance to the witness and to
   any who love him, whether or not he believes the statement he
   makes--whether the man himself is true or false. Concerning the thing
   it can be but a question of fact; it remains a question of fact even
   whether the man has or has not spoken the truth; but concerning the man
   it is a question of truth: he is either a pure soul, so far as this
   thing witnesses, or a false soul, capable and guilty of a lie. In this
   relation it is of no consequence whether the man spoke the fact or not;
   if he meant to speak the fact, he remains a true man.

   Here I would anticipate so far as to say that there are truths as well
   as facts, and lies against truths as well as against facts. When the
   Pharisees said Corban, they lied against the truth that a man must
   honour his father and mother.

   Let us go up now from the region of facts that seem casual, to those
   facts that are invariable, by us unchangeable, which therefore involve
   what we call law. It will be seen at once that the fact here is of more
   dignity, and the truth or falsehood of a statement in this region of
   more consequence in itself. It is a small matter whether the water in
   my jug was frozen on such a morning; but it is a fact of great
   importance that at thirty-two degrees of Fahrenheit water always
   freezes. We rise a step here in the nature of the facts concerned: are
   we come therefore into the region of truths? Is it a truth that water
   freezes at thirty-two degrees? I think not. There is no principle, open
   to us, involved in the changeless fact. The principle that lies at the
   root of it in the mind of God must be a truth, but to the human mind
   the fact is as yet only a fact. The word truth ought to be kept for
   higher things. There are those that think such facts the highest that
   can be known; they put therefore the highest word they know to the
   highest thing they know, and call the facts of nature truths; but to me
   it seems that, however high you come in your generalization, however
   wide you make your law--including, for instance, all solidity under the
   law of freezing--you have not risen higher than the statement that such
   and such is an invariable fact. Call it a law if you will--a law of
   nature if you choose--that it always is so, but not a truth. It cannot
   be to us a truth until we descry the reason of its existence, its
   relation to mind and intent, yea to self-existence. Tell us why it must
   be so, and you state a truth. When we come to see that a law is such,
   because it is the embodiment of a certain eternal thought, beheld by us
   in it, a fact of the being of God, the facts of which alone are truths,
   then indeed it will be to us, not a law merely, but an embodied truth.
   A law of God's nature is a way he would have us think of him; it is a
   necessary truth of all being. When a law of Nature makes us see this;
   when we say, I understand that law; I see why it ought to be; it is
   just like God; then it rises, not to the dignity of a truth in itself,
   but to the truth of its own nature--namely, a revelation of character,
   nature, and will in God. It is a picture of something in God, a word
   that tells a fact about God, and is therefore far nearer being called a
   truth than anything below it. As a simple illustration: What notion
   should we have of the unchanging and unchangeable, without the solidity
   of matter? If, such as we are, we had nothing solid about us, where
   would be our thinking about God and truth and law?

   But there is a region perhaps not so high as this from the scientific
   point of view, where yet the word truth may begin to be rightly
   applied. I believe that every fact in nature is a revelation of God, is
   there such as it is because God is such as he is; and I suspect that
   all its facts impress us so that we learn God unconsciously. True, we
   cannot think of any one fact thus, except as we find the soul of
   it--its fact of God; but from the moment when first we come into
   contact with the world, it is to us a revelation of God, his things
   seen, by which we come to know the things unseen. How should we imagine
   what we may of God, without the firmament over our heads, a visible
   sphere, yet a formless infinitude! What idea could we have of God
   without the sky? The truth of the sky is what it makes us feel of the
   God that sent it out to our eyes. If you say the sky could not but be
   so and such, I grant it--with God at the root of it. There is nothing
   for us to conceive in its stead--therefore indeed it must be so. In its
   discovered laws, light seems to me to be such because God is such. Its
   so-called laws are the waving of his garments, waving so because he is
   thinking and loving and walking inside them.

   We are here in a region far above that commonly claimed for science,
   open only to the heart of the child and the childlike man and woman--a
   region in which the poet is among his own things, and to which he has
   often to go to fetch them. For things as they are, not as science deals
   with them, are the revelation of God to his children. I would not be
   misunderstood: there is no fact of science not yet incorporated in a
   law, no law of science that has got beyond the hypothetic and
   tentative, that has not in it the will of God, and therefore may not
   reveal God; but neither fact nor law is there for the sake of fact or
   law; each is but a mean to an end; in the perfected end we find the
   intent, and there God--not in the laws themselves, save as his means.
   For that same reason, human science cannot discover God; for human
   science is but the backward undoing of the tapestry--web of God's
   science, works with its back to him, and is always leaving him--his
   intent, that is, his perfected work--behind it, always going farther
   and farther away from the point where his work culminates in
   revelation. Doubtless it thus makes some small intellectual approach to
   him, but at best it can come only to his back; science will never find
   the face of God; while those who would reach his heart, those who, like
   Dante, are returning thither where they are, will find also the
   spring-head of his science. Analysis is well, as death is well;
   analysis is death, not life. It discovers a little of the way God walks
   to his ends, but in so doing it forgets and leaves the end itself
   behind. I do not say the man of science does so, but the very process
   of his work is such a leaving of God's ends behind. It is a following
   back of his footsteps, too often without appreciation of the result for
   which the feet took those steps. To rise from the perfected work is the
   swifter and loftier ascent. If the man could find out why God worked
   so, then he would be discovering God; but even then he would not be
   discovering the best and the deepest of God; for his means cannot be so
   great as his ends. I must make myself clearer.

   Ask a man of mere science, what is the truth of a flower: he will pull
   it to pieces, show you its parts, explain how they operate, how they
   minister each to the life of the flower; he will tell you what changes
   are wrought in it by scientific cultivation; where it lives originally,
   where it can live; the effects upon it of another climate; what part
   the insects bear in its varieties--and doubtless many more facts about
   it. Ask the poet what is the truth of the flower, and he will answer:
   Why, the flower itself, the perfect flower, and what it cannot help
   saying to him who has ears to hear it.' The truth of the flower is, not
   the facts about it, be they correct as ideal science itself, but the
   shining, glowing, gladdening, patient thing throned on its stalk--the
   compeller of smile and tear from child and prophet. The man of science
   laughs at this, because he is only a man of science, and does not know
   what it means; but the poet and the child care as little for his
   laughter as the birds of God, as Dante calls the angels, for his
   treatise on aerostation. The children of God must always be mocked by
   the children of the world, whether in the church or out of it--children
   with sharp ears and eyes, but dull hearts. Those that hold love the
   only good in the world, understand and smile at the world's children,
   and can do very well without anything they have got to tell them. In
   the higher state to which their love is leading them, they will
   speedily outstrip the men of science, for they have that which is at
   the root of science, that for the revealing of which God's science
   exists. What shall it profit a man to know all things, and lose the
   bliss, the consciousness of well-being, which alone can give value to
   his knowledge?

   God's science in the flower exists for the existence of the flower in
   its relation to his children. If we understand, if we are at one with,
   if we love the flower, we have that for which the science is there,
   that which alone can equip us for true search into the means and ways
   by which the divine idea of the flower was wrought out to be presented
   to us. The idea of God is the flower; his idea is not the botany of the
   flower. Its botany is but a thing of ways and means--of canvas and
   colour and brush in relation to the picture in the painter's brain. The
   mere intellect can never find out that which owes its being to the
   heart supreme. The relation of the intellect to that which is born of
   the heart is an unreal except it be a humble one. The idea of God, I
   repeat, is the flower. He thought it; invented its means; sent it, a
   gift of himself, to the eyes and hearts of his children. When we see
   how they are loved by the ignorant and degraded, we may well believe
   the flowers have a place in the history of the world, as written for
   the archives of heaven, which we are yet a long way from understanding,
   and which science could not, to all eternity, understand, or enable to
   understand. Watch that child! He has found one of his silent and
   motionless brothers, with God's clothing upon it, God's thought in its
   face. In what a smile breaks out the divine understanding between them!
   Watch his mother when he takes it home to her--no nearer understanding
   it than he! It is no old association that brings those tears to her
   eyes, powerful in that way as are flowers, and things far inferior to
   flowers; it is God's thought, unrecognized as such, holding communion
   with her. She weeps with a delight inexplicable. It is only a daisy!
   only a primrose! only a pheasant-eye--narcissus! only a lily of the
   field! only a snowdrop! only a sweet-pea! only a brave yellow crocus!
   But here to her is no mere fact; here is no law of nature; here is a
   truth of nature, the truth of a flower--a perfect thought from the
   heart of God--a truth of God!--not an intellectual truth, but a divine
   fact, a dim revelation, a movement of the creative soul! Who but a
   father could think the flowers for his little ones? We are nigh the
   region now in which the Lord's word is at home--I am the truth.'

   I will take an illustrative instance altogether to my mind and special
   purpose. What, I ask, is the truth of water? Is it that it is formed of
   hydrogen and oxygen?--That the chemist has now another mode of stating
   the fact of water, will not affect my illustration. His new mode will
   probably be one day yet more antiquated than mine is now.--Is it for
   the sake of the fact that hydrogen and oxygen combined form water, that
   the precious thing exists? Is oxygen-and-hydrogen the divine idea of
   water? Or has God put the two together only that man might separate and
   find them out? He allows his child to pull his toys to pieces; but were
   they made that he might pull them to pieces? He were a child not to be
   envied for whom his inglorious father would make toys to such an end! A
   school--examiner might see therein the best use of a toy, but not a
   father! Find for us what in the constitution of the two gases makes
   them fit and capable to be thus honoured in forming the lovely thing,
   and you will give us a revelation about more than water, namely about
   the God who made oxygen and hydrogen. There is no water in oxygen, no
   water in hydrogen: it comes bubbling fresh from the imagination of the
   living God, rushing from under the great white throne of the glacier.
   The very thought of it makes one gasp with an elemental joy no
   metaphysician can analyse. The water itself, that dances, and sings,
   and slakes the wonderful thirst--symbol and picture of that draught for
   which the woman of Samaria made her prayer to Jesus--this lovely thing
   itself, whose very wetness is a delight to every inch of the human body
   in its embrace--this live thing which, if I might, I would have running
   through my room, yea, babbling along my table--this water is its own
   self its own truth, and is therein a truth of God. Let him who would
   know the love of the maker, become sorely athirst, and drink of the
   brook by the way--then lift up his heart--not at that moment to the
   maker of oxygen and hydrogen, but to the inventor and mediator of
   thirst and water, that man might foresee a little of what his soul may
   find in God. If he become not then as a hart panting for the
   water-brooks, let him go back to his science and its husks: they will
   at last make him thirsty as the victim in the dust-tower of the
   Persian. As well may a man think to describe the joy of drinking by
   giving thirst and water for its analysis, as imagine he has revealed
   anything about water by resolving it into its scientific elements. Let
   a man go to the hillside and let the brook sing to him till he loves
   it, and he will find himself far nearer the fountain of truth than the
   triumphal car of the chemist will ever lead the shouting crew of his
   half-comprehending followers. He will draw from the brook the water of
   joyous tears, and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea,
   and the fountains of waters.'

   The truth of a thing, then, is the blossom of it, the thing it is made
   for, the topmost stone set on with rejoicing; truth in a man's
   imagination is the power to recognize this truth of a thing; and
   wherever, in anything that God has made, in the glory of it, be it sky
   or flower or human face, we see the glory of God, there a true
   imagination is beholding a truth of God. And now we must advance to a
   yet higher plane.

   We have seen that the moment whatever goes by the name of truth comes
   into connection with man; the moment that, instead of merely mirroring
   itself in his intellect as a thing outside of him, it comes into
   contact with him as a being of action; the moment the knowledge of it
   affects or ought to affect his sense of duty, it becomes a thing of far
   nobler import; the question of truth enters upon a higher phase, looks
   out of a loftier window. A fact which in itself is of no value, becomes
   at once a matter of life and death--moral life and death, when a man
   has the choice, the imperative choice of being true or false concerning
   it. When the truth, the heart, the summit, the crown of a thing, is
   perceived by a man, he approaches the fountain of truth whence the
   thing came, and perceiving God by understanding what is, becomes more
   of a man, more of the being he was meant to be. In virtue of this truth
   perceived, he has relations with the universe undeveloped in him till
   then. But far higher will the doing of the least, the most
   insignificant duty raise him. He begins thereby to be a true man. A man
   may delight in the vision and glory of a truth, and not himself be
   true. The man whose vision is weak, but who, as far as he sees, and
   desirous to see farther, does the thing he sees, is a true man. If a
   man knows what is, and says it is not, his knowing does not make him
   less than a liar. The man who recognizes the truth of any human
   relation, and neglects the duty involved, is not a true man. The man
   who knows the laws of nature, and does not heed them, the more he
   teaches them to others, the less is he a true man. But he may obey them
   all and be the falsest of men, because of far higher and closer duties
   which he neglects. The man who takes good care of himself and none of
   his brother and sister, is false. A man may be a poet, aware of the
   highest truth of a thing, of that beauty which is the final cause of
   its existence; he may draw thence a notion of the creative loveliness
   that thought it out; he may be a man who would not tell a lie, or
   steal, or slander--and yet he may not be a true man, inasmuch as the
   essentials of manhood are not his aim: having nowise come to the flower
   of his own being, nowise, in his higher degree, attained the truth of a
   thing--namely, that for which he exists, the creational notion of
   him--neither is he striving after the same. There are relations closer
   than those of the facts around him, plainer than those that seem to
   bring the maker nigh to him, which he is failing to see, or seeing
   fails to acknowledge, or acknowledging fails to fulfil. Man is man only
   in the doing of the truth, perfect man only in the doing of the highest
   truth, which is the fulfilling of his relations to his origin. But he
   has relations with his fellow man, closer infinitely than with any of
   the things around him, and to many a man far plainer than his relations
   with God. Now the nearer is plainer that he may step on it, and rise to
   the higher, till then the less plain. These relations make a large part
   of his being, are essential to his very existence, and spring from the
   very facts of the origination of his being. They are the relation of
   thought to thought, of being to being, of duty to duty. The very nature
   of a man depends upon or is one with these relations. They are truths,
   and the man is a true man as he fulfils them. Fulfilling them
   perfectly, he is himself a truth, a living truth. As regarded merely by
   the intellect, these relations are facts of man's nature; but that they
   are of man's nature makes them truths, and the fulfilments of them are
   duties. He is so constituted as to understand them at first more than
   he can love them, with the resulting advantage of having thereby the
   opportunity of choosing them purely because they are true; so doing he
   chooses to love them, and is enabled to love them in the doing, which
   alone can truly reveal them to him, and make the loving of them
   possible. Then they cease to show themselves in the form of duties, and
   appear as they more truly are, absolute truths, essential realities,
   eternal delights. The man is a true man who chooses duty; he is a
   perfect man who at length never thinks of duty, who forgets the name of
   it. The duty of Jesus was the doing in lower forms than the perfect
   that which he loved perfectly, and did perfectly in the highest forms
   also. Thus he fulfilled all righteousness. One who went to the truth by
   mere impulse, would be a holy animal, not a true man. Relations,
   truths, duties, are shown to the man away beyond him, that he may
   choose them, and be a child of God, choosing righteousness like him.
   Hence the whole sad victorious human tale, and the glory to be
   revealed!

   The moral philosopher who regards duties only as facts of his system;
   nay, even the man who rewards them as truths, essential realities of
   his humanity, but goes no farther, is essentially a liar, a man of
   untruth. He is a man indeed, but not a true man. He is a man in
   possibility, but not a real man yet. The recognition of these things is
   the imperative obligation to fulfil them. Not fulfilling these
   relations, the man is undoing the right of his own existence,
   destroying his raison d'etre, making of himself a monster, a live
   reason why he should not live, for nothing on those terms could ever
   have begun to be. His presence is a claim upon his creator for
   destruction.

   The facts of human relation, then, are truths indeed, and of awfullest
   import. Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer; and ye know that no
   murderer hath eternal life abiding in him!' The man who lives a hunter
   after pleasure, not a labourer in the fields of duty, who thinks of
   himself as if he were alone on the earth, is in himself a lie. Instead
   of being the man he looks, the man he was made to be, he lives as the
   beasts seem to live--with this difference, I trust, that they are
   rising, while he, so far as lies in himself, is sinking. But he cannot
   be allowed to sink beyond God's reach; hence all the holy--that is,
   healing--miseries that come upon him, of which he complains as so hard
   and unfair: they are for the compelling of the truth he will not
   yield--a painful suasion to be himself, to be a truth.

   But suppose, for the sake of my progressive unfolding, that a man did
   everything required of him--fulfilled all the relations to his fellows
   of which I have been speaking, was toward them at least, a true man; he
   would yet feel, doubtless would feel it the more, that something was
   lacking to him--lacking to his necessary well-being. Like a live
   flower, he would feel that he had not yet blossomed, and could not tell
   what the blossom ought to be. In this direction the words of the Lord
   point, when he says to the youth, If thou wouldst be perfect.' The man
   whom I suppose, would feel that his existence was not yet justified to
   itself, that the truth of his being and nature was not yet revealed to
   his consciousness. He would remain unsatisfied; and the cause would be
   that there was in him a relation, and that the deepest, closest, and
   strongest, which had not yet come into live fact, which had not yet
   become a truth in him, toward which he was not true, whereby his being
   remained untrue, he was not himself, was not ripened into the divine
   idea, which alone can content itself. A child with a child's heart who
   does not even know that he has a father, yet misses him--with his whole
   nature, even if not with his consciousness. This relation has not yet
   so far begun to be fulfilled in him, as that the coming blossom should
   send before it patience and hope enough to enable him to live by faith
   without sight. When the flower begins to come, the human plant begins
   to rejoice in the glory of God not yet revealed, the inheritance of the
   saints in light; with uplifted stem and forward-leaning bud expects the
   hour when the lily of God's field shall know itself alive, with God
   himself for its heart and its atmosphere; the hour when God and the man
   shall be one, and all that God cares for shall be the man's. But again
   I forget my progression.

   The highest truth to the intellect, the abstract truth, is the relation
   in which man stands to the source of his being--his will to the will
   whence it became a will, his love to the love that kindled his power to
   love, his intellect to the intellect that lighted his. If a man deal
   with these things only as things to be dealt with, as objects of
   thought, as ideas to be analysed and arranged in their due order and
   right relation, he treats them as facts and not as truths, and is no
   better, probably much the worse, for his converse with them, for he
   knows in a measure, and is false to all that is most worthy of his
   faithfulness.

   But when the soul, or heart, or spirit, or what you please to call that
   which is the man himself and not his body, sooner or later becomes
   aware that he needs some one above him, whom to obey, in whom to rest,
   from whom to seek deliverance from what in himself is despicable,
   disappointing, unworthy even of his own interest; when he is aware of
   an opposition in him, which is not harmony; that, while he hates it,
   there is yet present with him, and seeming to be himself, what
   sometimes he calls the old Adam, sometimes the flesh, sometimes his
   lower nature, sometimes his evil self; and sometimes recognizes as
   simply that part of his being where God is not; then indeed is the man
   in the region of truth, and beginning to come true in himself. Nor will
   it be long ere he discover that there is no part in him with which he
   would be at strife, so God were there, so that it were true, what it
   ought to be--in right relation to the whole; for, by whatever name
   called, the old Adam, or antecedent horse, or dog, or tiger, it would
   then fulfil its part holily, intruding upon nothing, subject utterly to
   the rule of the higher; horse or dog or tiger, it would be good horse,
   good dog, good tiger.

   When the man bows down before a power that can account for him, a power
   to whom he is no mystery as he is to himself; a power that knows whence
   he came and whither he is going; who knows why he loves this and hates
   that, why and where he began to go wrong; who can set him right, longs
   indeed to set him right, making of him a creature to look up to himself
   without shadow of doubt, anxiety or fear, confident as a child whom his
   father is leading by the hand to the heights of happy-making truth,
   knowing that where he is wrong, the father is right and will set him
   right; when the man feels his whole being in the embrace of
   self-responsible paternity--then the man is bursting into his flower;
   then the truth of his being, the eternal fact at the root of his new
   name, his real nature, his idea--born in God at first, and responsive
   to the truth, the being of God, his origin--begins to show itself; then
   his nature is almost in harmony with itself. For, obeying the will that
   is the cause of his being, the cause of that which demands of itself to
   be true, and that will being righteousness and love and truth, he
   begins to stand on the apex of his being, to know himself divine. He
   begins to feel himself free. The truth--not as known to his intellect,
   but as revealed in his own sense of being true, known by his essential
   consciousness of his divine condition, without which his nature is
   neither his own nor God's--trueness has made him free. Not any abstract
   truth, not all abstract truth, not truth its very metaphysical self,
   held by purest insight into entity, can make any man free; but the
   truth done, the truth loved, the truth lived by the man; the truth of
   and not merely in the man himself; the honesty that makes the man
   himself a child of the honest God.

   When a man is, with his whole nature, loving and willing the truth, he
   is then a live truth. But this he has not originated in himself. He has
   seen it and striven for it, but not originated it. The one originating,
   living, visible truth, embracing all truths in all relations, is Jesus
   Christ. He is true; he is the live Truth. His truth, chosen and willed
   by him, the ripeness of his being, the flower of his sonship which is
   his nature, the crown of his one topmost perfect relation acknowledged
   and gloried in, is his absolute obedience to his father. The obedient
   Jesus is Jesus the Truth. He is true and the root of all truth and
   development of truth in men. Their very being, however far from the
   true human, is the undeveloped Christ in them, and his likeness to
   Christ is the truth of a man, even as the perfect meaning of a flower
   is the truth of a flower. Every man, according to the divine idea of
   him, must come to the truth of that idea; and under every form of
   Christ is the Christ. The truth of every man, I say, is the perfected
   Christ in him. As Christ is the blossom of humanity, so the blossom of
   every man is the Christ perfected in him. The vital force of humanity
   working in him is Christ; he is his root--the generator and perfecter
   of his individuality. The stronger the pure will of the man to be true;
   the freer and more active his choice; the more definite his
   individuality, ever the more is the man and all that is his, Christ's.
   Without him he could not have been; being, he could not have become
   capable of truth; capable of truth, he could never have loved it;
   loving and desiring it, he could not have attained to it. Nothing but
   the heart-presence, the humanest sympathy, and whatever deeper thing
   else may be betwixt the creating Truth and the responding soul, could
   make a man go on hoping, until at last he forget himself, and keep open
   house for God to come and go. He gives us the will wherewith to will,
   and the power to use it, and the help needed to supplement the power,
   whatever in any case the need may be; but we ourselves must will the
   truth, and for that the Lord is waiting, for the victory of God his
   father in the heart of his child. In this alone can he see of the
   travail of his soul, in this alone be satisfied. The work is his, but
   we must take our willing share. When the blossom breaks forth in us,
   the more it is ours the more it is his, for the highest creation of the
   Father, and that pre-eminently through the Son, is the being that can,
   like the Father and the Son, of his own self will what is right. The
   groaning and travailing, the blossom and the joy, are the Father's and
   the Son's and ours. The will, the power of willing, may be created, but
   the willing is begotten. Because God wills first, man wills also.

   When my being is consciously and willedly in the hands of him who
   called it to live and think and suffer and be glad--given back to him
   by a perfect obedience--I thenceforward breathe the breath, share the
   life of God himself. Then I am free, in that I am true--which means one
   with the Father. And freedom knows itself to be freedom. When a man is
   true, if he were in hell he could not be miserable. He is right with
   himself because right with him whence he came. To be right with God is
   to be right with the universe; one with the power, the love, the will
   of the mighty Father, the cherisher of joy, the lord of laughter, whose
   are all glories, all hopes, who loves everything, and hates nothing but
   selfishness, which he will not have in his kingdom.

   Christ then is the Lord of life; his life is the light of men; the
   light mirrored in them changes them into the image of him, the Truth;
   and thus the truth, who is the Son, makes them free.
     __________________________________________________________________

  FREEDOM.

   The Truth shall make you free. . . . Whosoever committeth sin, is the
   servant of sin. And the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but
   the Son abideth ever. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye
   shall be free indeed.--John viii. 32, 34-36.

   As this passage stands, I have not been able to make sense of it. No
   man could be in the house of the Father in virtue of being the servant
   of sin; yet this man is in the house as a servant, and the house in
   which he serves is not the house of sin, but the house of the Father.
   The utterance is confused at best, and the reasoning faulty. He must be
   in the house of the Father on some other ground than sin. This, had no
   help come, would have been sufficient cause for leaving the passage
   alone, as one where, perhaps, the words of the Lord were
   misrepresented--where, at least, perceiving more than one fundamental
   truth involved in the passage, I failed to follow the argument. I do
   not see that I could ever have suggested where the corruption, if any,
   lay. Most difficulties of similar nature have originated, like this, I
   can hardly doubt, with some scribe who, desiring to explain what he did
   not understand, wrote his worthless gloss on the margin: the next
   copier took the words for an omission that ought to be replaced in the
   body of the text, and inserting them, falsified the utterance, and
   greatly obscured its intention. What do we not owe to the critics who
   have searched the scriptures, and found what really was written! In the
   present case, Dr. Westcott's notation gives us to understand that there
   is another with a reasonable probability of being the true reading.'
   The difference is indeed small to the eye, but is great enough to give
   us fine gold instead of questionable ore. In an alternative of the
   kind, I must hope in what seems logical against what seems illogical;
   in what seems radiant against what seems trite.

   What I take for the true reading then, I English thus: Every one
   committing sin is a slave. But the slave does not remain in the house
   for ever; the son remaineth for ever. If then the son shall make you
   free, you shall in reality be free.' The authorized version gives,
   Whosoever committeth sin, is the servant of sin; the revised version
   gives, Every one that committeth sin is the bondservant of sin;' both
   accepting the reading that has the words, of sin.' The statement is
   certainly in itself true, but appears to me useless for the argument
   that follows. And I think it may have been what I take to be the true
   reading, that suggested to the apostle Paul what he says in the
   beginning of the fourth chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians--words
   of spirit and life from which has been mistakenly drawn the doctrine of
   adoption, merest poison to the child-heart. The words of the Lord here
   are not that he who sins is the slave of sin, true utterly as that is;
   but that he is a slave, and the argument shows that he means a slave to
   God. The two are perfectly consistent. No amount of slavery to sin can
   keep a man from being as much the slave of God as God chooses in his
   mercy to make him. It is his sin makes him a slave instead of a child.
   His slavery to sin is his ruin; his slavery to God is his only hope.
   God indeed does not love slavery; he hates it; he will have children,
   not slaves; but he may keep a slave in his house a long time in the
   hope of waking up the poor slavish nature to aspire to the sonship
   which belongs to him, which is his birthright. But the slave is not to
   be in the house for ever. The father is not bound to keep his son a
   slave because the foolish child prefers it.

   Whoever will not do what God desires of him, is a slave whom God can
   compel to do it, however he may bear with him. He who, knowing this, or
   fearing punishment, obeys God, is still a slave, but a slave who comes
   within hearing of the voice of his master. There are, however, far
   higher than he, who yet are but slaves. Those to whom God is not all in
   all, are slaves. They may not commit great sins; they may be trying to
   do right; but so long as they serve God, as they call it, from duty,
   and do not know him as their father, the joy of their being, they are
   slaves--good slaves, but slaves. If they did not try to do their duty,
   they would be bad slaves. They are by no means so slavish as those that
   serve from fear, but they are slaves; and because they are but slaves,
   they can fulfil no righteousness, can do no duty perfectly, but must
   ever be trying after it wearily and in pain, knowing well that if they
   stop trying, they are lost. They are slaves indeed, for they would be
   glad to be adopted by one who is their own father! Where then are the
   sons? I know none, I answer, who are yet utterly and entirely sons or
   daughters. There may be such--God knows; I have not known them; or,
   knowing them, have not been myself such as to be able to recognize
   them. But I do know some who are enough sons and daughters to be at war
   with the slave in them, who are not content to be slaves to their
   father. Nothing I have seen or known of sonship, comes near the glory
   of the thing; but there are thousands of sons and daughters, though
   their number be yet only a remnant, who are siding with the father of
   their spirits against themselves, against all that divides them from
   him from whom they have come, but out of whom they have never come,
   seeing that in him they live and move and have their being. Such are
   not slaves; they are true though not perfect children; they are
   fighting along with God against the evil separation; they are breaking
   at the middle wall of partition. Only the rings of their fetters are
   left, and they are struggling to take them off. They are children--with
   more or less of the dying slave in them; they know it is there, and
   what it is, and hate the slavery in them, and try to slay it. The real
   slave is he who does not seek to be a child; who does not desire to end
   his slavery; who looks upon the claim of the child as presumption; who
   cleaves to the traditional authorized service of forms and ceremonies,
   and does not know the will of him who made the seven stars and Orion,
   much less cares to obey it; who never lifts up his heart to cry Father,
   what wouldst thou have me to do?' Such are continually betraying their
   slavery by their complaints. Do we not well to be angry?' they cry with
   Jonah; and, truly, being slaves, I do not know how they are to help it.
   When they are sons and daughters, they will no longer complain of the
   hardships, and miseries, and troubles of life; no longer grumble at
   their aches and pains, at the pinching of their poverty, at the hunger
   that assails them; no longer be indignant at their rejection by what is
   called Society. Those who believe in their own perfect father, can ill
   blame him for anything they do not like. Ah, friend, it may be you and
   I are slaves, but there are such sons and daughters as I speak of.

   The slaves of sin rarely grumble at that slavery; it is their slavery
   to God they grumble at; of that alone they complain--of the painful
   messengers he sends to deliver them from their slavery both to sin and
   to himself. They must be sons or slaves. They cannot rid themselves of
   their owner. Whether they deny God, or mock him by acknowledging and
   not heeding him, or treat him as an arbitrary, formal monarch; whether,
   taking no trouble to find out what pleases him, they do dull things for
   his service he cares nothing about, or try to propitiate him by
   assuming with strenuous effort some yoke the Son never wore, and never
   called on them to wear, they are slaves, and not the less slaves that
   they are slaves to God; they are so thoroughly slaves, that they do not
   care to get out of their slavery by becoming sons and daughters, by
   finding the good of life where alone it can or could lie. Could a
   creator make a creature whose well-being should not depend on himself?
   And if he could, would the creature be the greater for that? Which, the
   creature he made more, or the creature he made less dependent on
   himself, would be the greater? The slave in heart would immediately,
   with Milton's Satan, reply, that the farthest from him who made him
   must be the freest, thus acknowledging his very existence a slavery,
   and but two kinds in being--a creator, and as many slaves as he pleases
   to make, whose refusal to obey is their unknown protest against their
   own essence. Being itself must, for what they call liberty, be
   repudiated! Creation itself, to go by their lines of life, is an
   injustice! God had no right to create beings less than himself; and as
   he could not create equal, he ought not to have created! But they do
   not complain of having been created; they complain of being required to
   do justice. They will not obey, but, his own handiwork, ravish from his
   work every advantage they can! They desire to be free with another kind
   of freedom than that with which God is free; unknowing, they seek a
   more complete slavery. There is, in truth, no mid way between absolute
   harmony with the Father and the condition of slaves--submissive, or
   rebellious. If the latter, their very rebellion is by the strength of
   the Father in them. Of divine essence, they thrust their existence in
   the face of their essence, their own nature.

   Yet is their very rebellion in some sense but the rising in them of his
   spirit against their false notion of him--against the lies they hold
   concerning him. They do not see that, if his work, namely, they
   themselves, are the chief joy to themselves, much more might the life
   that works them be a glory and joy to them the work--inasmuch as it is
   nearer to them than they to themselves, causing them to be, and
   extends, without breach of relation, so infinitely above and beyond
   them. For nothing can come so close as that which creates; the nearest,
   strongest, dearest relation possible is between creator and created.
   Where this is denied, the schism is the widest; where it is
   acknowledged and fulfilled, the closeness is unspeakable. But ever
   remains what cannot be said, and I sink defeated. The very protest of
   the rebel against slavery, comes at once of the truth of God in him,
   which he cannot all cast from him, and of a slavery too low to love
   truth--a meanness that will take all and acknowledge nothing, as if his
   very being was a disgrace to him. The liberty of the God that would
   have his creature free, is in contest with the slavery of the creature
   who would cut his own stem from his root that he might call it his own
   and love it; who rejoices in his own consciousness, instead of the life
   of that consciousness; who poises himself on the tottering wall of his
   own being, instead of the rock on which that being is built. Such a one
   regards his own dominion over himself-the rule of the greater by the
   less, inasmuch as the conscious self is less than the self-as a freedom
   infinitely greater than the range of the universe of God's being. If he
   says, At least I have it my own way!' I answer, You do not know what is
   your way and what is not. You know nothing of whence your impulses,
   your desires, your tendencies, your likings come. They may spring now
   from some chance, as of nerves diseased; now from some roar of a
   wandering bodiless devil; now from some infant hate in your heart; now
   from the greed or lawlessness of some ancestor you would be ashamed of
   if you knew him; or it may be now from some far--piercing chord of a
   heavenly orchestra: the moment it comes up into your consciousness, you
   call it your own way, and glory in it! Two devils amusing themselves
   with a duet of inspiration, one at each ear, might soon make that
   lordly me you are so in love with, rejoice in the freedom of willing
   the opposite each alternate moment; and at length drive you mad at
   finding that you could not, will as you would, make choice of a way and
   its opposite simultaneously. The whole question rests and turns on the
   relation of creative and created, of which relation few seem to have
   the consciousness yet developed. To live without the eternal creative
   life is an impossibility; freedom from God can only mean an incapacity
   for seeing the facts of existence, an incapability of understanding the
   glory of the creature who makes common cause with his creator in his
   creation of him, who wills that the lovely will calling him into life
   and giving him choice, should finish making him, should draw him into
   the circle of the creative heart, to joy that he lives by no poor power
   of his own will, but is one with the causing life of his life, in
   closest breathing and willing, vital and claimant oneness with the life
   of all life. Such a creature knows the life of the infinite Father as
   the very flame of his life, and joys that nothing is done or will be
   done in the universe in which the Father will not make him all of a
   sharer that it is possible for perfect generosity to make him. If you
   say this is irreverent, I doubt if you have seen the God manifest in
   Jesus. But all will be well, for the little god of your poor content
   will starve your soul to misery, and the terror of the eternal death
   creeping upon you, will compel you to seek a perfect father. Oh, ye
   hide--bound Christians, the Lord is not straitened, but ye are
   straitened in your narrow unwilling souls! Some of you need to be
   shamed before yourselves; some of you need the fire.

   But one who reads may call out, in the agony and thirst of a child
   waking from a dream of endless seeking and no finding, I am bound like
   Lazarus in his grave-clothes! what am I to do?' Here is the answer,
   drawn from this parable of our Lord; for the saying is much like a
   parable, teaching more than it utters, appealing to the conscience and
   heart, not to the understanding: You are a slave; the slave has no hold
   on the house; only the sons and daughters have an abiding rest in the
   home of their father. God cannot have slaves about him always. You must
   give up your slavery, and be set free from it. That is what I am here
   for. If I make you free, you shall be free indeed; for I can make you
   free only by making you what you were meant to be, sons like myself.
   That is how alone the Son can work. But it is you who must become sons;
   you must will it, and I am here to help you.' It is as if he said, You
   shall have the freedom of my father's universe; for, free from
   yourselves, you will be free of his heart. Yourselves are your slavery.
   That is the darkness which you have loved rather than the light. You
   have given honour to yourselves, and not to the Father; you have sought
   honour from men, and not from the Father! Therefore, even in the house
   of your father, you have been but sojourning slaves. We in his family
   are all one; we have no party-spirit; we have no self-seeking: fall in
   with us, and you shall be free as we are free.'

   If then the poor starved child cry--How, Lord?' the answer will depend
   on what he means by that how. If he means, What plan wilt thou adopt?
   What is thy scheme for cutting my bonds and setting me free?' the
   answer may be a deepening of the darkness, a tightening of the bonds.
   But if he means, Lord, what wouldst thou have me to do?' the answer
   will not tarry. Give yourself to me to do what I tell you, to
   understand what I say, to be my good, obedient little brother, and I
   will wake in you the heart that my father put in you, the same kind of
   heart that I have, and it will grow to love the Father, altogether and
   absolutely, as mine does, till you are ready to be torn to pieces for
   him. Then you will know that you are at the heart of the universe, at
   the heart of every secret--at the heart of the Father. Not till then
   will you be free, then free indeed!'

   Christ died to save us, not from suffering, but from ourselves; not
   from injustice, far less from justice, but from being unjust. He died
   that we might live--but live as he lives, by dying as he died who died
   to himself that he might live unto God. If we do not die to ourselves,
   we cannot live to God, and he that does not live to God, is dead. Ye
   shall know the truth,' the Lord says, and the truth shall make you
   free. I am the truth, and you shall be free as I am free. To be free,
   you must be sons like me. To be free you must be that which you have to
   be, that which you are created. To be free you must give the answer of
   sons to the Father who calls you. To be free you must fear nothing but
   evil, care for nothing but the will of the Father, hold to him in
   absolute confidence and infinite expectation. He alone is to be
   trusted.' He has shown us the Father not only by doing what the Father
   does, not only by loving his Father's children even as the Father loves
   them, but by his perfect satisfaction with him, his joy in him, his
   utter obedience to him. He has shown us the Father by the absolute
   devotion of a perfect son. He is the Son of God because the Father and
   he are one, have one thought, one mind, one heart. Upon this truth--I
   do not mean the dogma, but the truth itself of Jesus to his
   father--hangs the universe; and upon the recognition of this
   truth--that is, upon their becoming thus true--hangs the freedom of the
   children, the redemption of their whole world. I and the Father are
   one,' is the center-truth of the Universe; and the circumfering truth
   is, that they also may be one in us.'

   The only free man, then, is he who is a child of the Father. He is a
   servant of all, but can be made the slave of none: he is a son of the
   lord of the universe. He is in himself, in virtue of his truth, free.
   He is in himself a king. For the Son rests his claim to royalty on
   this, that he was born and came into the world to bear witness to the
   truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

  KINGSHIP.

   Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king! To
   this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
   should bear witness unto the truth: every one that is of the truth
   heareth my voice.--John xviii. 37.

   Pilate asks Jesus if he is a king. The question is called forth by what
   the Lord had just said concerning his kingdom, closing with the
   statement that it was not of this world. He now answers Pilate that he
   is a king indeed, but shows him that his kingdom is of a very different
   kind from what is called kingdom in this world. The rank and rule of
   this world are uninteresting to him. He might have had them. Calling
   his disciples to follow him, and his twelve legions of angels to help
   them, he might soon have driven the Romans into the abyss, piling them
   on the heap of nations they had tumbled there before. What easier for
   him than thus to have cleared the way, and over the tributary world
   reigned the just monarch that was the dream of the Jews, never seen in
   Israel or elsewhere, but haunting the hopes and longings of the poor
   and their helpers! He might from Jerusalem have ruled the world, not
   merely dispensing what men call justice, but compelling atonement. He
   did not care for government. No such kingdom would serve the ends of
   his father in heaven, or comfort his own soul. What was perfect empire
   to the Son of God, while he might teach one human being to love his
   neighbour, and be good like his father! To be love-helper to one heart,
   for its joy, and the glory of his father, was the beginning of true
   kingship! The Lord would rather wash the feet of his weary brothers,
   than be the one only perfect monarch that ever ruled in the world. It
   was empire he rejected when he ordered Satan behind him like a dog to
   his heel. Government, I repeat, was to him flat, stale, unprofitable.

   What then is the kingdom over which the Lord cares to reign, for he
   says he came into the world to be a king? I answer, A kingdom of kings,
   and no other. Where every man is a king, there and there only does the
   Lord care to reign, in the name of his father. As no king in Europe
   would care to reign over a cannibal, a savage, or an animal race, so
   the Lord cares for no kingdom over anything this world calls a nation.
   A king must rule over his own kind. Jesus is a king in virtue of no
   conquest, inheritance, or election, but in right of essential being;
   and he cares for no subjects but such as are his subjects in the same
   right. His subjects must be of his own kind, in their very nature and
   essence kings. To understand his answer to Pilate, see wherein consists
   his kingship; what it is that makes him a king; what manifestation of
   his essential being gives him a claim to be king. The Lord's is a
   kingdom in which no man seeks to be above another: ambition is of the
   dirt of this world's kingdoms. He says, I am a king, for I was born for
   the purpose, I came into the world with the object of bearing witness
   to the truth. Everyone that is of my kind, that is of the truth, hears
   my voice. He is a king like me, and makes one of my subjects.' Pilate
   thereupon--as would most Christians nowadays, instead of setting about
   being true--requests a definition of truth, a presentation to his
   intellect in set terms of what the word truth' means; but instantly,
   whether confident of the uselessness of the inquiry, or intending to
   resume it when he has set the Lord at liberty, goes out to the people
   to tell them he finds no fault in him. Whatever interpretation we put
   on his action here, he must be far less worthy of blame than those
   Christians' who, instead of setting themselves to be pure even as he is
   pure,' to be their brother and sister's keeper, and to serve God by
   being honourable in shop and counting-house and labour-market, proceed
   to serve' him, some by going to church or chapel, some by condemning
   the opinions of their neighbours, some by teaching others what they do
   not themselves heed. Neither Pilate nor they ask the one true question,
   How am I to be a true man? How am I to become a man worth being a man?'
   The Lord is a king because his life, the life of his thoughts, of his
   imagination, of his will, of every smallest action, is true--true first
   to God in that he is altogether his, true to himself in that he forgets
   himself altogether, and true to his fellows in that he will endure
   anything they do to him, nor cease declaring himself the son and
   messenger and likeness of God. They will kill him, but it matters not:
   the truth is as he says!

   Jesus is a king because his business is to bear witness to the truth.
   What truth? All truth; all verity of relation throughout the
   universe--first of all, that his father is good, perfectly good; and
   that the crown and joy of life is to desire and do the will of the
   eternal source of will, and of all life. He deals thus the death-blow
   to the power of hell. For the one principle of hell is--I am my own. I
   am my own king and my own subject. I am the centre from which go out my
   thoughts; I am the object and end of my thoughts; back upon me as the
   alpha and omega of life, my thoughts return. My own glory is, and ought
   to be, my chief care; my ambition, to gather the regards of men to the
   one centre, myself. My pleasure is my pleasure. My kingdom is--as many
   as I can bring to acknowledge my greatness over them. My judgment is
   the faultless rule of things. My right is--what I desire. The more I am
   all in all to myself, the greater I am. The less I acknowledge debt or
   obligation to another; the more I close my eyes to the fact that I did
   not make myself; the more self-sufficing I feel or imagine myself-the
   greater I am. I will be free with the freedom that consists in doing
   whatever I am inclined to do, from whatever quarter may come the
   inclination. To do my own will so long as I feel anything to be my
   will, is to be free, is to live. To all these principles of hell, or of
   this world--they are the same thing, and it matters nothing whether
   they are asserted or defended so long as they are acted upon--the Lord,
   the king, gives the direct lie. It is as if he said:--I ought to know
   what I say, for I have been from all eternity the son of him from whom
   you issue, and whom you call your father, but whom you will not have
   your father: I know all he thinks and is; and I say this, that my
   perfect freedom, my pure individuality, rests on the fact that I have
   not another will than his. My will is all for his will, for his will is
   right. He is righteousness itself. His very being is love and equity
   and self-devotion, and he will have his children such as
   himself-creatures of love, of fairness, of self-devotion to him and
   their fellows. I was born to bear witness to the truth--in my own
   person to be the truth visible--the very likeness and manifestation of
   the God who is true. My very being is his witness. Every fact of me
   witnesses him. He is the truth, and I am the truth. Kill me, but while
   I live I say, Such as I am he is. If I said I did not know him, I
   should be a liar. I fear nothing you can do to me. Shall the king who
   comes to say what is true, turn his back for fear of men? My Father is
   like me; I know it, and I say it. You do not like to hear it because
   you are not like him. I am low in your eyes which measure things by
   their show; therefore you say I blaspheme. I should blaspheme if I said
   he was such as anything you are capable of imagining him, for you love
   show, and power, and the praise of men. I do not, and God is like me. I
   came into the world to show him. I am a king because he sent me to bear
   witness to his truth, and I bear it. Kill me, and I will rise again.
   You can kill me, but you cannot hold me dead. Death is my servant; you
   are the slaves of Death because you will not be true, and let the truth
   make you free. Bound, and in your hands, I am free as God, for God is
   my father. I know I shall suffer, suffer unto death, but if you knew my
   father, you would not wonder that I am ready; you would be ready too.
   He is my strength. My father is greater than I.'

   Remember, friends, I said, It is as if he said.' I am daring to present
   a shadow of the Lord's witnessing, a shadow surely cast by his deeds
   and his very words! If I mistake, he will forgive me. I do not fear
   him; I fear only lest, able to see and write these things, I should
   fail of witnessing, and myself be, after all, a castaway--no king, but
   a talker; no disciple of Jesus, ready to go with him to the death, but
   an arguer about the truth; a hater of the lies men speak for God, and
   myself a truth-speaking liar, not a doer of the word.

   We see, then, that the Lord bore his witness to the Truth, to the one
   God, by standing just what he was, before the eyes and the lies of men.
   The true king is the man who stands up a true man and speaks the truth,
   and will die but not lie. The robes of such a king may be rags or
   purple; it matters neither way. The rags are the more likely, but
   neither better nor worse than the robes. Then was the Lord dressed most
   royally when his robes were a jest, a mockery, a laughter. Of the men
   who before Christ bare witness to the truth, some were sawn asunder,
   some subdued kingdoms; it mattered nothing which: they witnessed.

   The truth is God; the witness to the truth is Jesus. The kingdom of the
   truth is the hearts of men. The bliss of men is the true God. The
   thought of God is the truth of everything. All well-being lies in true
   relation to God. The man who responds to this with his whole being, is
   of the truth. The man who knows these things, and but knows them; the
   man who sees them to be true, and does not order life and action,
   judgment and love by them, is of the worst of lying; with hand, and
   foot, and face he casts scorn upon that which his tongue confesses.

   Little thought the sons of Zebedee and their ambitious mother what the
   earthly throne of Christ's glory was which they and she begged they
   might share. For the king crowned by his witnessing, witnessed then to
   the height of his uttermost argument, when he hung upon the cross--like
   a sin, as Paul in his boldness expresses it. When his witness is
   treated as a lie, then most he witnesses, for he gives it still. High
   and lifted up on the throne of his witness, on the cross of his
   torture, he holds to it: I and the Father are one.' Every mockery borne
   in witnessing, is a witnessing afresh. Infinitely more than had he sat
   on the throne of the whole earth, did Jesus witness to the truth when
   Pilate brought him out for the last time, and perhaps made him sit on
   the judgment-seat in his mockery of kingly garments and royal insignia,
   saying, Behold your king!' Just because of those robes and that crown,
   that sceptre and that throne of ridicule, he was the only real king
   that ever sat on any throne.

   Is every Christian expected to bear witness? A man content to bear no
   witness to the truth is not in the kingdom of heaven. One who believes
   must bear witness. One who sees the truth, must live witnessing to it.
   Is our life, then, a witnessing to the truth? Do we carry ourselves in
   bank, on farm, in house or shop, in study or chamber or workshop, as
   the Lord would, or as the Lord would not? Are we careful to be true? Do
   we endeavour to live to the height of our ideas? Or are we mean,
   self-serving, world-flattering, fawning slaves? When contempt is cast
   on the truth, do we smile? Wronged in our presence, do we make no sign
   that we hold by it? I do not say we are called upon to dispute, and
   defend with logic and argument, but we are called upon to show that we
   are on the other side. But when I say truth, I do not mean opinion: to
   treat opinion as if that were truth, is grievously to wrong the truth.
   The soul that loves the truth and tries to be true, will know when to
   speak and when to be silent; but the true man will never look as if he
   did not care. We are not bound to say all we think, but we are bound
   not even to look what we do not think. The girl who said before a
   company of mocking companions, I believe in Jesus,' bore true witness
   to her Master, the Truth. David bore witness to God, the Truth, when he
   said, Unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy, for thou renderest to every
   man according to his work.'
     __________________________________________________________________

  JUSTICE.

   Also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy; for thou renderest to every
   man according to his work.--Psalm lxii. 12.

   Some of the translators make it kindness and goodness; but I presume
   there is no real difference among them as to the character of the word
   which here, in the English Bible, is translated mercy.

   The religious mind, however, educated upon the theories yet prevailing
   in the so-called religious world, must here recognize a departure from
   the presentation to which they have been accustomed: to make the psalm
   speak according to prevalent theoretic modes, the verse would have to
   be changed thus:--To thee, O Lord, belongeth justice, for thou
   renderest to every man according to his work.'

   Let the reason of my choosing this passage, so remarkable in itself,
   for a motto to the sermon which follows, remain for the present
   doubtful. I need hardly say that I mean to found no logical argument
   upon it.

   Let us endeavour to see plainly what we mean when we use the word
   justice, and whether we mean what we ought to mean when we use
   it--especially with reference to God. Let us come nearer to knowing
   what we ought to understand by justice, that is, the justice of God;
   for his justice is the live, active justice, giving existence to the
   idea of justice in our minds and hearts. Because he is just, we are
   capable of knowing justice; it is because he is just, that we have the
   idea of justice so deeply imbedded in us.

   What do we oftenest mean by justice? Is it not the carrying out of the
   law, the infliction of penalty assigned to offence? By a just judge we
   mean a man who administers the law without prejudice, without favour or
   dislike; and where guilt is manifest, punishes as much as, and no more
   than, the law has in the case laid down. It may not be that justice has
   therefore been done. The law itself may be unjust, and the judge may
   mistake; or, which is more likely, the working of the law may be foiled
   by the parasites of law for their own gain. But even if the law be
   good, and thoroughly administered, it does not necessarily follow that
   justice is done.

   Suppose my watch has been taken from my pocket; I lay hold of the
   thief; he is dragged before the magistrate, proved guilty, and
   sentenced to a just imprisonment: must I walk home satisfied with the
   result? Have I had justice done me? The thief may have had justice done
   him--but where is my watch? That is gone, and I remain a man wronged.
   Who has done me the wrong? The thief. Who can set right the wrong? The
   thief, and only the thief; nobody but the man that did the wrong. God
   may be able to move the man to right the wrong, but God himself cannot
   right it without the man. Suppose my watch found and restored, is the
   account settled between me and the thief? I may forgive him, but is the
   wrong removed? By no means. But suppose the thief to bethink himself,
   to repent. He has, we shall say, put it out of his power to return the
   watch, but he comes to me and says he is sorry he stole it and begs me
   to accept for the present what little he is able to bring, as a
   beginning of atonement: how should I then regard the matter? Should I
   not feel that he had gone far to make atonement--done more to make up
   for the injury he had inflicted upon me, than the mere restoration of
   the watch, even by himself, could reach to? Would there not lie, in the
   thief's confession and submission and initial restoration, an appeal to
   the divinest in me--to the eternal brotherhood? Would it not indeed
   amount to a sufficing atonement as between man and man? If he offered
   to bear what I chose to lay upon him, should I feel it necessary, for
   the sake of justice, to inflict some certain suffering as demanded by
   righteousness? I should still have a claim upon him for my watch, but
   should I not be apt to forget it? He who commits the offence can make
   up for it--and he alone.

   One thing must surely be plain--that the punishment of the wrong-doer
   makes no atonement for the wrong done. How could it make up to me for
   the stealing of my watch that the man was punished? The wrong would be
   there all the same. I am not saying the man ought not to be
   punished--far from it; I am only saying that the punishment nowise
   makes up to the man wronged. Suppose the man, with the watch in his
   pocket, were to inflict the severest flagellation on himself: would
   that lessen my sense of injury? Would it set anything right? Would it
   anyway atone? Would it give him a right to the watch? Punishment may do
   good to the man who does the wrong, but that is a thing as different as
   important.

   Another thing plain is, that, even without the material rectification
   of the wrong where that is impossible, repentance removes the offence
   which no suffering could. I at least should feel that I had no more
   quarrel with the man. I should even feel that the gift he had made me,
   giving into my heart a repentant brother, was infinitely beyond the
   restitution of what he had taken from me. True, he owed me both himself
   and the watch, but such a greater does more than include such a less.
   If it be objected, You may forgive, but the man has sinned against
   God!'--Then it is not a part of the divine to be merciful, I return,
   and a man may be more merciful than his maker! A man may do that which
   would be too merciful in God! Then mercy is not a divine attribute, for
   it may exceed and be too much; it must not be infinite, therefore
   cannot be God's own.

   Mercy may be against justice.' Never--if you mean by justice what I
   mean by justice. If anything be against justice, it cannot be called
   mercy, for it is cruelty. To thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy, for thou
   renderest to every man according to his work.' There is no opposition,
   no strife whatever, between mercy and justice. Those who say justice
   means the punishing of sin, and mercy the not punishing of sin, and
   attribute both to God, would make a schism in the very idea of God. And
   this brings me to the question, What is meant by divine justice?

   Human justice may be a poor distortion of justice, a mere shadow of it;
   but the justice of God must be perfect. We cannot frustrate it in its
   working; are we just to it in our idea of it? If you ask any ordinary
   Sunday congregation in England, what is meant by the justice of God,
   would not nineteen out of twenty answer, that it means his punishing of
   sin? Think for a moment what degree of justice it would indicate in a
   man--that he punished every wrong. A Roman emperor, a Turkish cadi,
   might do that, and be the most unjust both of men and judges. Ahab
   might be just on the throne of punishment, and in his garden the
   murderer of Naboth. In God shall we imagine a distinction of office and
   character? God is one; and the depth of foolishness is reached by that
   theology which talks of God as if he held different offices, and
   differed in each. It sets a contradiction in the very nature of God
   himself. It represents him, for instance, as having to do that as a
   magistrate which as a father he would not do! The love of the father
   makes him desire to be unjust as a magistrate! Oh the folly of any mind
   that would explain God before obeying him! that would map out the
   character of God, instead of crying, Lord, what wouldst thou have me to
   do? God is no magistrate; but, if he were, it would be a position to
   which his fatherhood alone gave him the right; his rights as a father
   cover every right he can be analytically supposed to possess. The
   justice of God is this, that--to use a boyish phrase, the best the
   language will now afford me because of misuse--he gives every man,
   woman, child, and beast, everything that has being, fair play; he
   renders to every man according to his work; and therein lies his
   perfect mercy; for nothing else could be merciful to the man, and
   nothing but mercy could be fair to him. God does nothing of which any
   just man, the thing set fairly and fully before him so that he
   understood, would not say, That is fair.' Who would, I repeat, say a
   man was a just man because he insisted on prosecuting every offender? A
   scoundrel might do that. Yet the justice of God, forsooth, is his
   punishment of sin! A just man is one who cares, and tries, and always
   tries, to give fair play to everyone in every thing. When we speak of
   the justice of God, let us see that we do mean justice! Punishment of
   the guilty may be involved in justice, but it does not constitute the
   justice of God one atom more than it would constitute the justice of a
   man.

   But no one ever doubts that God gives fair play!'

   That may be--but does not go for much, if you say that God does this or
   that which is not fair.'

   If he does it, you may be sure it is fair.'

   Doubtless, or he could not be God--except to devils. But you say he
   does so and so, and is just; I say, he does not do so and so, and is
   just. You say he does, for the Bible says so. I say, if the Bible said
   so, the Bible would lie; but the Bible does not say so. The lord of
   life complains of men for not judging right. To say on the authority of
   the Bible that God does a thing no honourable man would do, is to lie
   against God; to say that it is therefore right, is to lie against the
   very spirit of God. To uphold a lie for God's sake is to be against
   God, not for him. God cannot be lied for. He is the truth. The truth
   alone is on his side. While his child could not see the rectitude of a
   thing, he would infinitely rather, even if the thing were right, have
   him say, God could not do that thing, than have him believe that he did
   it. If the man were sure God did it, the thing he ought to say would
   be, Then there must be something about it I do not know, which if I did
   know, I should see the thing quite differently.' But where an evil
   thing is invented to explain and account for a good thing, and a lover
   of God is called upon to believe the invention or be cast out, he needs
   not mind being cast out, for it is into the company of Jesus. Where
   there is no ground to believe that God does a thing except that men who
   would explain God have believed and taught it, he is not a true man who
   accepts men against his own conscience of God. I acknowledge no
   authority calling upon me to believe a thing of God, which I could not
   be a man and believe right in my fellow-man. I will accept no
   explanation of any way of God which explanation involves what I should
   scorn as false and unfair in a man. If you say, That may be right of
   God to do which it would not be right of man to do, I answer, Yes,
   because the relation of the maker to his creatures is very different
   from the relation of one of those creatures to another, and he has
   therefore duties toward his creatures requiring of him what no man
   would have the right to do to his fellow-man; but he can have no duty
   that is not both just and merciful. More is required of the maker, by
   his own act of creation, than can be required of men. More and higher
   justice and righteousness is required of him by himself, the
   Truth;--greater nobleness, more penetrating sympathy; and nothing but
   what, if an honest man understood it, he would say was right. If it be
   a thing man cannot understand, then man can say nothing as to whether
   it is right or wrong. He cannot even know that God does it, when the it
   is unintelligible to him. What he calls it may be but the smallest
   facet of a composite action. His part is silence. If it be said by any
   that God does a thing, and the thing seems to me unjust, then either I
   do not know what the thing is, or God does not do it. The saying cannot
   mean what it seems to mean, or the saying is not true. If, for
   instance, it be said that God visits the sins of the fathers on the
   children, a man who takes visits upon to mean punishes, and the
   children to mean the innocent children, ought to say, Either I do not
   understand the statement, or the thing is not true, whoever says it.'
   God may do what seems to a man not right, but it must so seem to him
   because God works on higher, on divine, on perfect principles, too
   right for a selfish, unfair, or unloving man to understand. But least
   of all must we accept some low notion of justice in a man, and argue
   that God is just in doing after that notion.

   The common idea, then, is, that the justice of God consists in
   punishing sin: it is in the hope of giving a larger idea of the justice
   of God in punishing sin that I ask, Why is God bound to punish sin?'

   How could he be a just God and not punish sin?'

   Mercy is a good and right thing,' I answer, and but for sin there could
   be no mercy. We are enjoined to forgive, to be merciful, to be as our
   father in heaven. Two rights cannot possibly be opposed to each other.
   If God punish sin, it must be merciful to punish sin; and if God
   forgive sin, it must be just to forgive sin. We are required to
   forgive, with the argument that our father forgives. It must, I say, be
   right to forgive. Every attribute of God must be infinite as himself.
   He cannot be sometimes merciful, and not always merciful. He cannot be
   just, and not always just. Mercy belongs to him, and needs no
   contrivance of theologic chicanery to justify it.'

   Then you mean that it is wrong to punish sin, therefore God does not
   punish sin?'

   By no means; God does punish sin, but there is no opposition between
   punishment and forgiveness. The one may be essential to the possibility
   of the other. Why, I repeat, does God punish sin? That is my point.'

   Because in itself sin deserves punishment.'

   Then how can he tell us to forgive it?'

   He punishes, and having punished he forgives?'

   That will hardly do. If sin demands punishment, and the righteous
   punishment is given, then the man is free. Why should he be forgiven?'

   He needs forgiveness because no amount of punishment will meet his
   deserts.'

   I avoid for the present, as anyone may perceive, the probable expansion
   of this reply.

   Then why not forgive him at once if the punishment is not essential--if
   part can be pretermitted? And again, can that be required which,
   according to your showing, is not adequate? You will perhaps answer,
   God may please to take what little he can have;' and this brings me to
   the fault in the whole idea.

   Punishment is nowise an offset to sin. Foolish people sometimes, in a
   tone of self-gratulatory pity, will say, If I have sinned I have
   suffered.' Yes, verily, but what of that? What merit is there in it?
   Even had you laid the suffering upon yourself, what did that do to make
   up for the wrong? That you may have bettered by your suffering is well
   for you, but what atonement is there in the suffering? The notion is a
   false one altogether. Punishment, deserved suffering, is no equipoise
   to sin. It is no use laying it in the other scale. It will not move it
   a hair's breadth. Suffering weighs nothing at all against sin. It is
   not of the same kind, not under the same laws, any more than mind and
   matter. We say a man deserves punishment; but when we forgive and do
   not punish him, we do not always feel that we have done wrong; neither
   when we do punish him do we feel that any amends has been made for his
   wrongdoing. If it were an offset to wrong, then God would be bound to
   punish for the sake of the punishment; but he cannot be, for he
   forgives. Then it is not for the sake of the punishment, as a thing
   that in itself ought to be done, but for the sake of something else, as
   a means to an end, that God punishes. It is not directly for justice,
   else how could he show mercy, for that would involve injustice?

   Primarily, God is not bound to punish sin; he is bound to destroy sin.
   If he were not the Maker, he might not be bound to destroy sin--I do
   not know; but seeing he has created creatures who have sinned, and
   therefore sin has, by the creating act of God, come into the world, God
   is, in his own righteousness, bound to destroy sin.

   But that is to have no mercy.'

   You mistake. God does destroy sin; he is always destroying sin. In him
   I trust that he is destroying sin in me. He is always saving the sinner
   from his sins, and that is destroying sin. But vengeance on the sinner,
   the law of a tooth for a tooth, is not in the heart of God, neither in
   his hand. If the sinner and the sin in him, are the concrete object of
   the divine wrath, then indeed there can be no mercy. Then indeed there
   will be an end put to sin by the destruction of the sin and the sinner
   together. But thus would no atonement be wrought--nothing be done to
   make up for the wrong God has allowed to come into being by creating
   man. There must be an atonement, a making-up, a bringing together--an
   atonement which, I say, cannot be made except by the man who has
   sinned.

   Punishment, I repeat, is not the thing required of God, but the
   absolute destruction of sin. What better is the world, what better is
   the sinner, what better is God, what better is the truth, that the
   sinner should suffer--continue suffering to all eternity? Would there
   be less sin in the universe? Would there be any making-up for sin?
   Would it show God justified in doing what he knew would bring sin into
   the world, justified in making creatures who he knew would sin? What
   setting-right would come of the sinner's suffering? If justice demand
   it, if suffering be the equivalent for sin, then the sinner must
   suffer, then God is bound to exact his suffering, and not pardon; and
   so the making of man was a tyrannical deed, a creative cruelty. But
   grant that the sinner has deserved to suffer, no amount of suffering is
   any atonement for his sin. To suffer to all eternity could not make up
   for one unjust word. Does that mean, then, that for an unjust word I
   deserve to suffer to all eternity? The unjust word is an eternally evil
   thing; nothing but God in my heart can cleanse me from the evil that
   uttered it; but does it follow that I saw the evil of what I did so
   perfectly, that eternal punishment for it would be just? Sorrow and
   confession and self-abasing love will make up for the evil word;
   suffering will not. For evil in the abstract, nothing can be done. It
   is eternally evil. But I may be saved from it by learning to loathe it,
   to hate it, to shrink from it with an eternal avoidance. The only
   vengeance worth having on sin is to make the sinner himself its
   executioner. Sin and punishment are in no antagonism to each other in
   man, any more than pardon and punishment are in God; they can perfectly
   co-exist. The one naturally follows the other, punishment being born of
   sin, because evil exists only by the life of good, and has no life of
   its own, being in itself death. Sin and suffering are not natural
   opposites; the opposite of evil is good, not suffering; the opposite of
   sin is not suffering, but righteousness. The path across the gulf that
   divides right from wrong is not the fire, but repentance. If my friend
   has wronged me, will it console me to see him punished? Will that be a
   rendering to me of my due? Will his agony be a balm to my deep wound?
   Should I be fit for any friendship if that were possible even in regard
   to my enemy? But would not the shadow of repentant grief, the light of
   reviving love on his countenance, heal it at once however deep? Take
   any of those wicked people in Dante's hell, and ask wherein is justice
   served by their punishment. Mind, I am not saying it is not right to
   punish them; I am saying that justice is not, never can be, satisfied
   by suffering--nay, cannot have any satisfaction in or from suffering.
   Human resentment, human revenge, human hate may. Such justice as
   Dante's keeps wickedness alive in its most terrible forms. The life of
   God goes forth to inform, or at least give a home to victorious evil.
   Is he not defeated every time that one of those lost souls defies him?
   All hell cannot make Vanni Fucci say I was wrong.' God is triumphantly
   defeated, I say, throughout the hell of his vengeance. Although against
   evil, it is but the vain and wasted cruelty of a tyrant. There is no
   destruction of evil thereby, but an enhancing of its horrible power in
   the midst of the most agonizing and disgusting tortures a divine
   imagination can invent. If sin must be kept alive, then hell must be
   kept alive; but while I regard the smallest sin as infinitely
   loathsome, I do not believe that any being, never good enough to see
   the essential ugliness of sin, could sin so as to deserve such
   punishment. I am not now, however, dealing with the question of the
   duration of punishment, but with the idea of punishment itself; and
   would only say in passing, that the notion that a creature born
   imperfect, nay, born with impulses to evil not of his own generating,
   and which he could not help having, a creature to whom the true face of
   God was never presented, and by whom it never could have been seen,
   should be thus condemned, is as loathsome a lie against God as could
   find place in heart too undeveloped to understand what justice is, and
   too low to look up into the face of Jesus. It never in truth found
   place in any heart, though in many a pettifogging brain. There is but
   one thing lower than deliberately to believe such a lie, and that is to
   worship the God of whom it is believed. The one deepest, highest,
   truest, fittest, most wholesome suffering must be generated in the
   wicked by a vision, a true sight, more or less adequate, of the
   hideousness of their lives, of the horror of the wrongs they have done.
   Physical suffering may be a factor in rousing this mental pain; but I
   would I had never been born!' must be the cry of Judas, not because of
   the hell-fire around him, but because he loathes the man that betrayed
   his friend, the world's friend. When a man loathes himself, he has
   begun to be saved. Punishment tends to this result. Not for its own
   sake, not as a make-up for sin, not for divine revenge--horrible word,
   not for any satisfaction to justice, can punishment exist. Punishment
   is for the sake of amendment and atonement. God is bound by his love to
   punish sin in order to deliver his creature; he is bound by his justice
   to destroy sin in his creation. Love is justice--is the fulfilling of
   the law, for God as well as for his children. This is the reason of
   punishment; this is why justice requires that the wicked shall not go
   unpunished--that they, through the eye-opening power of pain, may come
   to see and do justice, may be brought to desire and make all possible
   amends, and so become just. Such punishment concerns justice in the
   deepest degree. For Justice, that is God, is bound in himself to see
   justice done by his children--not in the mere outward act, but in their
   very being. He is bound in himself to make up for wrong done by his
   children, and he can do nothing to make up for wrong done but by
   bringing about the repentance of the wrong-doer. When the man says, I
   did wrong; I hate myself and my deed; I cannot endure to think that I
   did it!' then, I say, is atonement begun. Without that, all that the
   Lord did would be lost. He would have made no atonement. Repentance,
   restitution, confession, prayer for forgiveness, righteous dealing
   thereafter, is the sole possible, the only true make-up for sin. For
   nothing less than this did Christ die. When a man acknowledges the
   right he denied before; when he says to the wrong, I abjure, I loathe
   you; I see now what you are; I could not see it before because I would
   not; God forgive me; make me clean, or let me die!' then justice, that
   is God, has conquered--and not till then.

   What atonement is there?'

   Every atonement that God cares for; and the work of Jesus Christ on
   earth was the creative atonement, because it works atonement in every
   heart. He brings and is bringing God and man, and man and man, into
   perfect unity: I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
   in one.'

   That is a dangerous doctrine!'

   More dangerous than you think to many things--to every evil, to every
   lie, and among the rest to every false trust in what Christ did,
   instead of in Christ himself. Paul glories in the cross of Christ, but
   he does not trust in the cross: he trusts in the living Christ and his
   living father.

   Justice then requires that sin should be put an end to; and not that
   only, but that it should be atoned for; and where punishment can do
   anything to this end, where it can help the sinner to know what he has
   been guilty of, where it can soften his heart to see his pride and
   wrong and cruelty, justice requires that punishment shall not be
   spared. And the more we believe in God, the surer we shall be that he
   will spare nothing that suffering can do to deliver his child from
   death. If suffering cannot serve this end, we need look for no more
   hell, but for the destruction of sin by the destruction of the sinner.
   That, however, would, it appears to me, be for God to suffer defeat,
   blameless indeed, but defeat.

   If God be defeated, he must destroy--that is, he must withdraw life.
   How can he go on sending forth his life into irreclaimable souls, to
   keep sin alive in them throughout the ages of eternity? But then, I
   say, no atonement would be made for the wrongs they have done; God
   remains defeated, for he has created that which sinned, and which would
   not repent and make up for its sin. But those who believe that God will
   thus be defeated by many souls, must surely be of those who do not
   believe he cares enough to do his very best for them. He is their
   Father; he had power to make them out of himself, separate from
   himself, and capable of being one with him: surely he will somehow save
   and keep them! Not the power of sin itself can close all the channels
   between creating and created.

   The notion of suffering as an offset for sin, the foolish idea that a
   man by suffering borne may get out from under the hostile claim to
   which his wrong-doing has subjected him, comes first of all, I think,
   from the satisfaction we feel when wrong comes to grief. Why do we feel
   this satisfaction? Because we hate wrong, but, not being righteous
   ourselves, more or less hate the wronger as well as his wrong, hence
   are not only righteously pleased to behold the law's disapproval
   proclaimed in his punishment, but unrighteously pleased with his
   suffering, because of the impact upon us of his wrong. In this way the
   inborn justice of our nature passes over to evil. It is no pleasure to
   God, as it so often is to us, to see the wicked suffer. To regard any
   suffering with satisfaction, save it be sympathetically with its
   curative quality, comes of evil, is inhuman because undivine, is a
   thing God is incapable of. His nature is always to forgive, and just
   because he forgives, he punishes. Because God is so altogether alien to
   wrong, because it is to him a heart-pain and trouble that one of his
   little ones should do the evil thing, there is, I believe, no extreme
   of suffering to which, for the sake of destroying the evil thing in
   them, he would not subject them. A man might flatter, or bribe, or coax
   a tyrant; but there is no refuge from the love of God; that love will,
   for very love, insist upon the uttermost farthing.

   That is not the sort of love I care about!'

   No; how should you? I well believe it! You cannot care for it until you
   begin to know it. But the eternal love will not be moved to yield you
   to the selfishness that is killing you. What lover would yield his lady
   to her passion for morphia? You may sneer at such love, but the Son of
   God who took the weight of that love, and bore it through the world, is
   content with it, and so is everyone who knows it. The love of the
   Father is a radiant perfection. Love and not self-love is lord of the
   universe. Justice demands your punishment, because justice demands, and
   will have, the destruction of sin. Justice demands your punishment
   because it demands that your father should do his best for you. God,
   being the God of justice, that is of fair-play, and having made us what
   we are, apt to fall and capable of being raised again, is in himself
   bound to punish in order to deliver us--else is his relation to us poor
   beside that of an earthly father. To thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy, for
   thou renderest to every man according to his work.' A man's work is his
   character; and God in his mercy is not indifferent, but treats him
   according to his work.

   The notion that the salvation of Jesus is a salvation from the
   consequences of our sins, is a false, mean, low notion. The salvation
   of Christ is salvation from the smallest tendency or leaning to sin. It
   is a deliverance into the pure air of God's ways of thinking and
   feeling. It is a salvation that makes the heart pure, with the will and
   choice of the heart to be pure. To such a heart, sin is disgusting. It
   sees a thing as it is,--that is, as God sees it, for God sees
   everything as it is. The soul thus saved would rather sink into the
   flames of hell than steal into heaven and skulk there under the shadow
   of an imputed righteousness. No soul is saved that would not prefer
   hell to sin. Jesus did not die to save us from punishment; he was
   called Jesus because he should save his people from their sins.

   If punishment be no atonement, how does the fact bear on the popular
   theology accepted by every one of the opposers of what they call
   Christianity, as representing its doctrines? Most of us have been more
   or less trained in it, and not a few of us have thereby, thank God,
   learned what it is--an evil thing, to be cast out of intellect and
   heart. Many imagine it dead and gone, but in reality it lies at the
   root (the intellectual root only, thank God) of much the greater part
   of the teaching of Christianity in the country; and is believed in--so
   far as the false can be believed in--by many who think they have left
   it behind, when they have merely omitted the truest, most offensive
   modes of expressing its doctrines. It is humiliating to find how many
   comparatively honest people think they get rid of a falsehood by
   softening the statement of it, by giving it the shape and placing it in
   the light in which it will least assert itself, and so have a good
   chance of passing both with such as hold it thoroughly, and such as
   might revolt against it more plainly uttered.

   Once for all I will ease my soul regarding the horrid phantasm. I have
   passed through no change of opinion concerning it since first I began
   to write or speak; but I have written little and spoken less about it,
   because I would preach no mere negation. My work was not to destroy the
   false, except as it came in the way of building the true. Therefore I
   sought to speak but what I believed, saying little concerning what I
   did not believe; trusting, as now I trust, in the true to cast out the
   false, and shunning dispute. Neither will I now enter any theological
   lists to be the champion for or against mere doctrine. I have no desire
   to change the opinion of man or woman. Let everyone for me hold what he
   pleases. But I would do my utmost to disable such as think correct
   opinion essential to salvation from laying any other burden on the
   shoulders of true men and women than the yoke of their Master; and such
   burden, if already oppressing any, I would gladly lift. Let the Lord
   himself teach them, I say. A man who has not the mind of Christ--and no
   man has the mind of Christ except him who makes it his business to obey
   him--cannot have correct opinions concerning him; neither, if he could,
   would they be of any value to him: he would be nothing the better, he
   would be the worse for having them. Our business is not to think
   correctly, but to live truly; then first will there be a possibility of
   our thinking correctly. One chief cause of the amount of unbelief in
   the world is, that those who have seen something of the glory of
   Christ, set themselves to theorize concerning him rather than to obey
   him. In teaching men, they have not taught them Christ, but taught them
   about Christ. More eager after credible theory than after doing the
   truth, they have speculated in a condition of heart in which it was
   impossible they should understand; they have presumed to explain a
   Christ whom years and years of obedience could alone have made them
   able to comprehend. Their teaching of him, therefore, has been
   repugnant to the common sense of many who had not half their
   privileges, but in whom, as in Nathanael, there was no guile. Such,
   naturally, press their theories, in general derived from them of old
   time, upon others, insisting on their thinking about Christ as they
   think, instead of urging them to go to Christ to be taught by him
   whatever he chooses to teach them. They do their unintentional worst to
   stop all growth, all life. From such and their false teaching I would
   gladly help to deliver the true-hearted. Let the dead bury their dead,
   but I would do what I may to keep them from burying the living.

   If there be no satisfaction to justice in the mere punishment of the
   wrong-doer, what shall we say of the notion of satisfying justice by
   causing one to suffer who is not the wrong-doer? And what, moreover,
   shall we say to the notion that, just because he is not the person who
   deserves to be punished, but is absolutely innocent, his suffering
   gives perfect satisfaction to the perfect justice? That the injustice
   be done with the consent of the person maltreated makes no difference:
   it makes it even worse, seeing, as they say, that justice requires the
   punishment of the sinner, and here is one far more than innocent. They
   have shifted their ground; it is no more punishment, but mere suffering
   the law requires! The thing gets worse and worse. I declare my utter
   and absolute repudiation of the idea in any form whatever. Rather than
   believe in a justice--that is, a God--to whose righteousness, abstract
   or concrete, it could be any satisfaction for the wrong-doing of a man
   that a man who did no wrong should suffer, I would be driven from among
   men, and dwell with the wild beasts that have not reason enough to be
   unreasonable. What! God, the father of Jesus Christ, like that! His
   justice contented with direst injustice! The anger of him who will
   nowise clear the guilty, appeased by the suffering of the innocent!
   Very God forbid! Observe: the evil fancy actually substitutes for
   punishment not mere suffering, but that suffering which is farthest
   from punishment; and this when, as I have shown, punishment, the
   severest, can be no satisfaction to justice! How did it come ever to be
   imagined? It sprang from the trustless dread that cannot believe in the
   forgiveness of the Father; cannot believe that even God will do
   anything for nothing; cannot trust him without a legal arrangement to
   bind him. How many, failing to trust God, fall back on a text, as they
   call it! It sprang from the pride that will understand what it cannot,
   before it will obey what it sees. He that will understand first will
   believe a lie--a lie from which obedience alone will at length deliver
   him. If anyone say, But I believe what you despise,' I answer, To
   believe it is your punishment for being able to believe it; you may
   call it your reward, if you will. You ought not to be able to believe
   it. It is the merest, poorest, most shameless fiction, invented without
   the perception that it was an invention--fit to satisfy the intellect,
   doubtless, of the inventor, else he could not have invented it. It has
   seemed to satisfy also many a humble soul, content to take what was
   given, and not think; content that another should think for him, and
   tell him what was the mind of his Father in heaven. Again I say, let
   the person who can be so satisfied be so satisfied; I have not to
   trouble myself with him. That he can be content with it, argues him
   unready to receive better. So long as he can believe false things
   concerning God, he is such as is capable of believing them--with how
   much or how little of blame, God knows. Opinion, right or wrong, will
   do nothing to save him. I would that he thought no more about this or
   any other opinion, but set himself to do the work of the Master. With
   his opinions, true or false, I have nothing to do. It is because such
   as he force evil things upon their fellows--utter or imply them from
   the seat of authority or influence--to their agony, their paralysation,
   their unbelief, their indignation, their stumbling, that I have any
   right to speak. I would save my fellows from having what notion of God
   is possible to them blotted out by a lie.

   If it be asked how, if it be false, the doctrine of substitution can
   have been permitted to remain so long an article of faith to so many, I
   answer, On the same principle on which God took up and made use of the
   sacrifices men had, in their lack of faith, invented as a way of
   pleasing him. Some children will tell lies to please the parents that
   hate lying. They will even confess to having done a wrong they have not
   done, thinking their parents would like them to say they had done it,
   because they teach them to confess. God accepted men's sacrifices until
   he could get them to see--and with how many has he yet not succeeded,
   in the church and out of it!--that he does not care for such things.

   But,' again it may well be asked, whence then has sprung the undeniable
   potency of that teaching?' I answer, From its having in it a notion of
   God and his Christ, poor indeed and faint, but, by the very poverty and
   untruth in its presentation, fitted to the weakness and unbelief of
   men, seeing it was by men invented to meet and ease the demand made
   upon their own weakness and unbelief. Thus the leaven spreads. The
   truth is there. It is Christ the glory of God. But the ideas that poor
   slavish souls breed concerning this glory the moment the darkness
   begins to disperse, is quite another thing. Truth is indeed too good
   for men to believe; they must dilute it before they can take it; they
   must dilute it before they dare give it. They must make it less true
   before they can believe it enough to get any good of it. Unable to
   believe in the love of the Lord Jesus Christ, they invented a mediator
   in his mother, and so were able to approach a little where else they
   had stood away; unable to believe in the forgivingness of their father
   in heaven, they invented a way to be forgiven that should not demand of
   him so much; which might make it right for him to forgive; which should
   save them from having to believe downright in the tenderness of his
   father-heart, for that they found impossible. They thought him bound to
   punish for the sake of punishing, as an offset to their sin; they could
   not believe in clear forgiveness; that did not seem divine; it needed
   itself to be justified; so they invented for its justification a
   horrible injustice, involving all that was bad in sacrifice, even human
   sacrifice. They invented a satisfaction for sin which was an insult to
   God. He sought no satisfaction, but an obedient return to the Father.
   What satisfaction was needed he made himself in what he did to cause
   them to turn from evil and go back to him. The thing was too simple for
   complicated unbelief and the arguing spirit. Gladly would I help their
   followers to loathe such thoughts of God; but for that, they themselves
   must grow better men and women. While they are capable of being
   satisfied with them, there would be no advantage in their becoming
   intellectually convinced that such thoughts were wrong. I would not
   speak a word to persuade them of it. Success would be worthless. They
   would but remain what they were--children capable of thinking meanly of
   their father. When the heart recoils, discovering how horrible it would
   be to have such an unreality for God, it will begin to search about and
   see whether it must indeed accept such statements concerning God; it
   will search after a real God by whom to hold fast, a real God to
   deliver them from the terrible idol. It is for those thus moved that I
   write, not at all for the sake of disputing with those who love the lie
   they may not be to blame for holding; who, like the Jews of old, would
   cast out of their synagogue the man who doubts the genuineness of their
   moral caricature of God, who doubts their travesty of the grandest
   truth in the universe, the atonement of Jesus Christ. Of such a man
   they will unhesitatingly report that he does not believe in the
   atonement. But a lie for God is against God, and carries the sentence
   of death in itself.

   Instead of giving their energy to do the will of God, men of power have
   given it to the construction of a system by which to explain why Christ
   must die, what were the necessities and designs of God in permitting
   his death; and men of power of our own day, while casting from them not
   a little of the good in the teaching of the Roman Church, have clung to
   the morally and spiritually vulgar idea of justice and satisfaction
   held by pagan Rome, buttressed by the Jewish notion of sacrifice, and
   in its very home, alas, with the mother of all the western churches!
   Better the reformers had kept their belief in a purgatory, and parted
   with what is called vicarious sacrifice!

   Their system is briefly this: God is bound to punish sin, and to punish
   it to the uttermost. His justice requires that sin be punished. But he
   loves man, and does not want to punish him if he can help it. Jesus
   Christ says, I will take his punishment upon me.' God accepts his
   offer, and lets man go unpunished--upon a condition. His justice is
   more than satisfied by the punishment of an infinite being instead of a
   world of worthless creatures. The suffering of Jesus is of greater
   value than that of all the generations, through endless ages, because
   he is infinite, pure, perfect in love and truth, being God's own
   everlasting son. God's condition with man is, that he believe in
   Christ's atonement thus explained. A man must say, I have sinned, and
   deserve to be tortured to all eternity. But Christ has paid my debts,
   by being punished instead of me. Therefore he is my Saviour. I am now
   bound by gratitude to him to turn away from evil.' Some would doubtless
   insist on his saying a good deal more, but this is enough for my
   purpose.

   As to the justice of God requiring the punishment of the sinner, I have
   said enough. That the mere suffering of the sinner can be no
   satisfaction to justice, I have also tried to show. If the suffering of
   the sinner be indeed required by the justice of God, let it be
   administered. But what shall we say adequate to confront the base
   representation that it is not punishment, not the suffering of the
   sinner that is required, but suffering! nay, as if this were not depth
   enough of baseness to crown all heathenish representation of the ways
   of God, that the suffering of the innocent is unspeakably preferable in
   his eyes to that of the wicked, as a make-up for wrong done! nay,
   again, in the lowest deep a lower deep,' that the suffering of the
   holy, the suffering of the loving, the suffering of the eternally and
   perfectly good, is supremely satisfactory to the pure justice of the
   Father of spirits! Not all the suffering that could be heaped upon the
   wicked could buy them a moment's respite, so little is their suffering
   a counterpoise to their wrong; in the working of this law of
   equivalents, this lex talionis, the suffering of millions of years
   could not equal the sin of a moment, could not pay off one farthing of
   the deep debt. But so much more valuable, precious, and dear, is the
   suffering of the innocent, so much more of a satisfaction--observe--to
   the justice of God, that in return for that suffering another wrong is
   done: the sinners who deserve and ought to be punished are set free.

   I know the root of all that can be said on the subject; the notion is
   imbedded in the gray matter of my Scotch brains; and if I reject it, I
   know what I reject. For the love of God my heart rose early against the
   low invention. Strange that in a Christian land it should need to be
   said, that to punish the innocent and let the guilty go free is unjust!
   It wrongs the innocent, the guilty, and God himself. It would be the
   worst of all wrongs to the guilty to treat them as innocent. The whole
   device is a piece of spiritual charlatanry--fit only for a fraudulent
   jail--delivery. If the wicked ought to be punished, it were the worst
   possible perversion of justice to take a righteous being however
   strong, and punish him instead of the sinner however weak. To the
   poorest idea of justice in punishment, it is essential that the sinner,
   and no other than the sinner, should receive the punishment. The strong
   being that was willing to bear such punishment might well be regarded
   as worshipful, but what of the God whose so-called justice he thus
   defeats? If you say it is justice, not God that demands the suffering,
   I say justice cannot demand that which is unjust, and the whole thing
   is unjust. God is absolutely just, and there is no deliverance from his
   justice, which is one with his mercy. The device is an absurdity--a
   grotesquely deformed absurdity. To represent the living God as a party
   to such a style of action, is to veil with a mask of cruelty and
   hypocrisy the face whose glory can be seen only in the face of Jesus;
   to put a tirade of vulgar Roman legality into the mouth of the Lord God
   merciful and gracious, who will by no means clear the guilty. Rather
   than believe such ugly folly of him whose very name is enough to make
   those that know him heave the breath of the hart panting for the
   waterbrooks; rather than think of him what in a man would make me avoid
   him at the risk of my life, I would say, There is no God; let us
   neither eat nor drink, that we may die! For lo, this is not our God!
   This is not he for whom we have waited!' But I have seen his face and
   heard his voice in the face and the voice of Jesus Christ; and I say
   this is our God, the very one whose being the Creator makes it an
   infinite gladness to be the created. I will not have the God of the
   scribes and the pharisees whether Jewish or Christian, protestant,
   Roman, or Greek, but thy father, O Christ! He is my God. If you say,
   That is our God, not yours!' I answer, Your portrait of your God is an
   evil caricature of the face of Christ.'

   To believe in a vicarious sacrifice, is to think to take refuge with
   the Son from the righteousness of the Father; to take refuge with his
   work instead of with the Son himself; to take refuge with a theory of
   that work instead of the work itself; to shelter behind a false quirk
   of law instead of nestling in the eternal heart of the unchangeable and
   righteous Father, who is merciful in that he renders to every man
   according to his work, and compels their obedience, nor admits judicial
   quibble or subterfuge. God will never let a man off with any fault. He
   must have him clean. He will excuse him to the very uttermost of truth,
   but not a hair's-breadth beyond it; he is his true father, and will
   have his child true as his son Jesus Christ is true. He will impute to
   him nothing that he has not, will lose sight of no smallest good that
   he has; will quench no smoking flax, break no bruised reed, but send
   forth judgment unto victory. He is God beyond all that heart hungriest
   for love and righteousness could to eternity desire.

   If you say the best of men have held the opinions I stigmatize, I
   answer, Some of the best of men have indeed held these theories, and of
   men who have held them I have loved and honoured some heartily and
   humbly--but because of what they were, not because of what they
   thought; and they were what they were in virtue of their obedient
   faith, not of their opinion. They were not better men because of
   holding these theories. In virtue of knowing God by obeying his son,
   they rose above the theories they had never looked in the face, and so
   had never recognized as evil. Many have arrived, in the natural
   progress of their sacred growth, at the point where they must abandon
   them. The man of whom I knew the most good gave them up gladly. Good to
   worshipfulness may be the man that holds them, and I hate them the more
   therefore; they are lies that, working under cover of the truth mingled
   with them, burrow as near the heart of the good man as they can go.
   Whoever, from whatever reason of blindness, may be the holder of a lie,
   the thing is a lie, and no falsehood must mingle with the justice we
   mete out to it. There is nothing for any lie but the pit of hell. Yet
   until the man sees the thing to be a lie, how shall he but hold it! Are
   there not mingled with it shadows of the best truth in the universe? So
   long as a man is able to love a lie, he is incapable of seeing it is a
   lie. He who is true, out and out, will know at once an untruth; and to
   that vision we must all come. I do not write for the sake of those who
   either make or heartily accept any lie. When they see the glory of God,
   they will see the eternal difference between the false and the true,
   and not till then. I write for those whom such teaching as theirs has
   folded in a cloud through which they cannot see the stars of heaven, so
   that some of them even doubt if there be any stars of heaven. For the
   holy ones who believed and taught these things in days gone by, all is
   well. Many of the holiest of them cast the lies from them long ere the
   present teachers of them were born. Many who would never have invented
   them for themselves, yet receiving them with the seals affixed of so
   many good men, took them in their humility as recognized truths,
   instead of inventions of men; and, oppressed by authority, the
   authority of men far inferior to themselves, did not dare dispute them,
   but proceeded to order their lives by what truths they found in their
   company, and so had their reward, the reward of obedience, in being by
   that obedience brought to know God, which knowledge broke for them the
   net of a presumptuous self-styled orthodoxy. Every man who tries to
   obey the Master is my brother, whether he counts me such or not, and I
   revere him; but dare I give quarter to what I see to be a lie, because
   my brother believes it? The lie is not of God, whoever may hold it.

   Well, then,' will many say, if you thus unceremoniously cast to the
   winds the doctrine of vicarious sacrifice, what theory do you propose
   to substitute in its stead?'

   In the name of the truth,' I answer, None. I will send out no theory of
   mine to rouse afresh little whirlwinds of dialogistic dust mixed with
   dirt and straws and holy words, hiding the Master in talk about him. If
   I have any such, I will not cast it on the road as I walk, but present
   it on a fair patine to him to whom I may think it well to show it. Only
   eyes opened by the sun of righteousness, and made single by obedience,
   can judge even the poor moony pearl of formulated thought. Say if you
   will that I fear to show my opinion. Is the man a coward who will not
   fling his child to the wolves? What faith in this kind I have, I will
   have to myself before God, till I see better reason for uttering it
   than I do now.

   Will you then take from me my faith, and help me to no other?'

   Your faith! God forbid. Your theory is not your faith, nor anything
   like it. Your faith is your obedience; your theory I know not what.
   Yes, I will gladly leave you without any of what you call faith. Trust
   in God. Obey the word--every word of the Master. That is faith; and so
   believing, your opinion will grow out of your true life, and be worthy
   of it. Peter says the Lord gives the spirit to them that obey him: the
   spirit of the Master, and that alone, can guide you to any theory that
   it will be of use to you to hold. A theory arrived at any other way is
   not worth the time spent on it. Jesus is the creating and saving lord
   of our intellects as well as of our more precious hearts; nothing that
   he does not think, is worth thinking; no man can think as he thinks,
   except he be pure like him; no man can be pure like him, except he go
   with him, and learn from him. To put off obeying him till we find a
   credible theory concerning him, is to set aside the potion we know it
   our duty to drink, for the study of the various schools of therapy. You
   know what Christ requires of you is right--much of it at least you
   believe to be right, and your duty to do, whether he said it or not: do
   it. If you do not do what you know of the truth, I do not wonder that
   you seek it intellectually, for that kind of search may well be, as
   Milton represents it, a solace even to the fallen angels. But do not
   call anything that may be so gained, The Truth. How can you, not caring
   to be true, judge concerning him whose life was to do for very love the
   things you confess your duty, yet do them not? Obey the truth, I say,
   and let theory wait. Theory may spring from life, but never life from
   theory.

   I will not then tell you what I think, but I will tell any man who
   cares to hear it what I believe. I will do it now. Of course what I say
   must partake thus much of the character of theory that I cannot prove
   it; I can only endeavour to order my life by it.

   I believe in Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, my elder brother, my
   lord and master; I believe that he has a right to my absolute obedience
   whereinsoever I know or shall come to know his will; that to obey him
   is to ascend the pinnacle of my being; that not to obey him would be to
   deny him. I believe that he died that I might die like him--die to any
   ruling power in me but the will of God--live ready to be nailed to the
   cross as he was, if God will it. I believe that he is my Saviour from
   myself, and from all that has come of loving myself, from all that God
   does not love, and would not have me love--all that is not worth
   loving; that he died that the justice, the mercy of God, might have its
   way with me, making me just as God is just, merciful as he is merciful,
   perfect as my father in heaven is perfect. I believe and pray that he
   will give me what punishment I need to set me right, or keep me from
   going wrong. I believe that he died to deliver me from all meanness,
   all pretence, all falseness, all unfairness, all poverty of spirit, all
   cowardice, all fear, all anxiety, all forms of self-love, all trust or
   hope in possession; to make me merry as a child, the child of our
   father in heaven, loving nothing but what is lovely, desiring nothing I
   should be ashamed to let the universe of God see me desire. I believe
   that God is just like Jesus, only greater yet, for Jesus said so. I
   believe that God is absolutely, grandly beautiful, even as the highest
   soul of man counts beauty, but infinitely beyond that soul's highest
   idea--with the beauty that creates beauty, not merely shows it, or
   itself exists beautiful. I believe that God has always done, is always
   doing his best for every man; that no man is miserable because God is
   forgetting him; that he is not a God to crouch before, but our father,
   to whom the child-heart cries exultant, Do with me as thou wilt.'

   I believe that there is nothing good for me or for any man but God, and
   more and more of God, and that alone through knowing Christ can we come
   nigh to him.

   I believe that no man is ever condemned for any sin except one--that he
   will not leave his sins and come out of them, and be the child of him
   who is his father.

   I believe that justice and mercy are simply one and the same thing;
   without justice to the full there can be no mercy, and without mercy to
   the full there can be no justice; that such is the mercy of God that he
   will hold his children in the consuming fire of his distance until they
   pay the uttermost farthing, until they drop the purse of selfishness
   with all the dross that is in it, and rush home to the Father and the
   Son, and the many brethren--rush inside the centre of the life--giving
   fire whose outer circles burn. I believe that no hell will be lacking
   which would help the just mercy of God to redeem his children.

   I believe that to him who obeys, and thus opens the doors of his heart
   to receive the eternal gift, God gives the spirit of his son, the
   spirit of himself, to be in him, and lead him to the understanding of
   all truth; that the true disciple shall thus always know what he ought
   to do, though not necessarily what another ought to do; that the spirit
   of the father and the son enlightens by teaching righteousness. I
   believe that no teacher should strive to make men think as he thinks,
   but to lead them to the living Truth, to the Master himself, of whom
   alone they can learn anything, who will make them in themselves know
   what is true by the very seeing of it. I believe that the inspiration
   of the Almighty alone gives understanding. I believe that to be the
   disciple of Christ is the end of being; that to persuade men to be his
   disciples is the end of teaching.

   The sum of all this is that you do not believe in the atonement?'

   I believe in Jesus Christ. Nowhere am I requested to believe in any
   thing, or in any statement, but everywhere to believe in God and in
   Jesus Christ. In what you call the atonement, in what you mean by the
   word, what I have already written must make it plain enough I do not
   believe. God forbid I should, for it would be to believe a lie, and a
   lie which is to blame for much non-acceptance of the gospel in this and
   other lands. But, as the word was used by the best English writers at
   the time when the translation of the Bible was made--with all my heart,
   and soul, and strength, and mind, I believe in the atonement, call it
   the a-tone-ment, or the at-one-ment, as you please. I believe that
   Jesus Christ is our atonement; that through him we are reconciled to,
   made one with God. There is not one word in the New Testament about
   reconciling God to us; it is we that have to be reconciled to God. I am
   not writing, neither desire to write, a treatise on the atonement, my
   business being to persuade men to be atoned to God; but I will go so
   far to meet my questioner as to say--without the slightest expectation
   of satisfying him, or the least care whether I do so or not, for his
   opinion is of no value to me, though his truth is of endless value to
   me and to the universe--that, even in the sense of the atonement being
   a making-up for the evil done by men toward God, I believe in the
   atonement. Did not the Lord cast himself into the eternal gulf of evil
   yawning between the children and the Father? Did he not bring the
   Father to us, let us look on our eternal Sire in the face of his true
   son, that we might have that in our hearts which alone could make us
   love him--a true sight of him? Did he not insist on the one truth of
   the universe, the one saving truth, that God was just what he was? Did
   he not hold to that assertion to the last, in the face of contradiction
   and death? Did he not thus lay down his life persuading us to lay down
   ours at the feet of the Father? Has not his very life by which he died
   passed into those who have received him, and re-created theirs, so that
   now they live with the life which alone is life? Did he not foil and
   slay evil by letting all the waves and billows of its horrid sea break
   upon him, go over him, and die without rebound--spend their rage, fall
   defeated, and cease? Verily, he made atonement! We sacrifice to
   God!--it is God who has sacrificed his own son to us; there was no way
   else of getting the gift of himself into our hearts. Jesus sacrificed
   himself to his father and the children to bring them together--all the
   love on the side of the Father and the Son, all the selfishness on the
   side of the children. If the joy that alone makes life worth living,
   the joy that God is such as Christ, be a true thing in my heart, how
   can I but believe in the atonement of Jesus Christ? I believe it
   heartily, as God means it.

   Then again, as the power that brings about a making-up for any wrong
   done by man to man, I believe in the atonement. Who that believes in
   Jesus does not long to atone to his brother for the injury he has done
   him? What repentant child, feeling he has wronged his father, does not
   desire to make atonement? Who is the mover, the causer, the persuader,
   the creator of the repentance, of the passion that restores
   fourfold?--Jesus, our propitiation, our atonement. He is the head and
   leader, the prince of the atonement. He could not do it without us, but
   he leads us up to the Father's knee: he makes us make atonement.
   Learning Christ, we are not only sorry for what we have done wrong, we
   not only turn from it and hate it, but we become able to serve both God
   and man with an infinitely high and true service, a soul-service. We
   are able to offer our whole being to God to whom by deepest right it
   belongs. Have I injured anyone? With him to aid my justice, new risen
   with him from the dead, shall I not make good amends? Have I failed in
   love to my neighbour? Shall I not now love him with an infinitely
   better love than was possible to me before? That I will and can make
   atonement, thanks be to him who is my atonement, making me at one with
   God and my fellows! He is my life, my joy, my lord, my owner, the
   perfecter of my being by the perfection of his own. I dare not say with
   Paul that I am the slave of Christ; but my highest aspiration and
   desire is to be the slave of Christ.

   But you do not believe that the sufferings of Christ, as sufferings,
   justified the supreme ruler in doing anything which he would not have
   been at liberty to do but for those sufferings?'

   I do not. I believe the notion as unworthy of man's belief, as it is
   dishonouring to God. It has its origin doubtless in a salutary sense of
   sin; but sense of sin is not inspiration, though it may lie not far
   from the temple-door. It is indeed an opener of the eyes, but upon
   home-defilement, not upon heavenly truth; it is not the revealer of
   secrets. Also there is another factor in the theory, and that is
   unbelief--incapacity to accept the freedom of God's forgiveness;
   incapacity to believe that it is God's chosen nature to forgive, that
   he is bound in his own divinely willed nature to forgive. No atonement
   is necessary to him but that men should leave their sins and come back
   to his heart. But men cannot believe in the forgiveness of God.
   Therefore they need, therefore he has given them a mediator. And yet
   they will not know him. They think of the father of souls as if he had
   abdicated his fatherhood for their sins, and assumed the judge. If he
   put off his fatherhood, which he cannot do, for it is an eternal fact,
   he puts off with it all relation to us. He cannot repudiate the
   essential and keep the resultant. Men cannot, or will not, or dare not
   see that nothing but his being our father gives him any right over
   us--that nothing but that could give him a perfect right. They regard
   the father of their spirits as their governor! They yield the idea of
   the Ancient of Days, the glad creator,' and put in its stead a
   miserable, puritanical martinet of a God, caring not for righteousness,
   but for his rights; not for the eternal purities, but the goody
   proprieties. The prophets of such a God take all the glow, all the
   hope, all the colour, all the worth, out of life on earth, and offer
   you instead what they call eternal bliss--a pale, tearless hell. Of all
   things, turn from a mean, poverty stricken faith. But, if you are
   straitened in your own mammon-worshipping soul, how shall you believe
   in a God any greater than can stand up in that prison-chamber?

   I desire to wake no dispute, will myself dispute with no man, but for
   the sake of those whom certain believers trouble, I have spoken my
   mind. I love the one God seen in the face of Jesus Christ. From all
   copies of Jonathan Edwards's portrait of God, however faded by time,
   however softened by the use of less glaring pigments, I turn with
   loathing. Not such a God is he concerning whom was the message John
   heard from Jesus, that he is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
     __________________________________________________________________

  LIGHT.

   This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto
   you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.--1 John i. 5.

   And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
   men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
   evil.--John iii. 19.

   We call the story of Jesus, told so differently, yet to my mind so
   consistently, by four narrators, the gospel. What makes this tale the
   good news? Is everything in the story of Christ's life on earth good
   news? Is it good news that the one only good man was served by his
   fellow-men as Jesus was served--cast out of the world in torture and
   shame? Is it good news that he came to his own, and his own received
   him not? What makes it fit, I repeat, to call the tale good news? If we
   asked this or that theologian, we should, in so far as he was a true
   man, and answered from his own heart and not from the tradition of the
   elders, understand what he saw in it that made it good news to him,
   though it might involve what would be anything but good news to some of
   us. The deliverance it might seem to this or that man to bring, might
   be founded on such notions of God as to not a few of us contain as
   little of good as of news. To share in the deliverance which some men
   find in what they call the gospel--for all do not apply the word to the
   tale itself, but to certain deductions made from the epistles and their
   own consciousness of evil--we should have to believe such things of God
   as would be the opposite of an evangel to us--yea, a message from hell
   itself; we should have to imagine that whose possibility would be worse
   than any ill from which their good news' might offer us deliverance: we
   must first believe in an unjust God, from whom we have to seek refuge.
   True, they call him just, but say he does that which seems to the best
   in me the essence of injustice. They will tell me I judge after the
   flesh: I answer, Is it then to the flesh the Lord appeals when he says,
   Yea, and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?' Is he not
   the light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world? They tell
   me I was born in sin, and I know it to be true; they tell me also that
   I am judged with the same severity as if I had been born in
   righteousness, and that I know to be false. They make it a consequence
   of the purity and justice of God that he will judge us, born in evil,
   for which birth we were not accountable, by our sinfulness, instead of
   by our guilt. They tell me, or at least give me to understand, that
   every wrong thing I have done makes me subject to be treated as if I
   had done that thing with the free will of one who had in him no taint
   of evil--when, perhaps, I did not at the time recognize the thing as
   evil, or recognized it only in the vaguest fashion. Is there any gospel
   in telling me that God is unjust, but that there is a way of
   deliverance from him? Show me my God unjust, and you wake in me a
   damnation from which no power can deliver me--least of all God himself.
   It may be good news to such as are content to have a God capable of
   unrighteousness, if only he be on their side!

   Who would not rejoice to hear from Matthew, or Mark, or Luke, what, in
   a few words, he meant by the word gospel--or rather, what in the story
   of Jesus made him call it good news! Each would probably give a
   different answer to the question, all the answers consistent, and each
   a germ from which the others might be reasoned; but in the case of
   John, we have his answer to the question: he gives us in one sentence
   of two members, not indeed the gospel according to John, but the gospel
   according to Jesus Christ himself. He had often told the story of
   Jesus, the good news of what he was, and did, and said: what in it all
   did John look upon as the essence of the goodness of its news? In his
   gospel he gives us all about him, the message concerning him; now he
   tells us what in it makes it to himself and to us good news--tells us
   the very goodness of the good news. It is not now his own message about
   Jesus, but the soul of that message--that which makes it gospel--the
   news Jesus brought concerning the Father, and gave to the disciples as
   his message for them to deliver to men. Throughout the story, Jesus, in
   all he does, and is, and says, is telling the news concerning his
   father, which he was sent to give to John and his companions, that they
   might hand it on to their brothers; but here, in so many words, John
   tells us what he himself has heard from The Word--what in sum he has
   gathered from Jesus as the message he has to declare. He has received
   it in no systematic form; it is what a life, the life, what a man, the
   man, has taught him. The Word is the Lord; the Lord is the gospel. The
   good news is no fagot of sticks of a man's gathering on the Sabbath.

   Every man must read the Word for himself. One may read it in one shape,
   another in another: all will be right if it be indeed the Word they
   read, and they read it by the lamp of obedience. He who is willing to
   do the will of the Father shall know the truth of the teaching of
   Jesus. The spirit is given to them that obey him.'

   But let us hear how John reads the Word--near what is John's version of
   the gospel.

   This then is the message,' he says, which we have heard of him, and
   declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.'
   Ah, my heart, this is indeed the good news for thee! This is a gospel!
   If God be light, what more, what else can I seek than God, than God
   himself! Away with your doctrines! Away with your salvation from the
   justice' of a God whom it is a horror to imagine! Away with your iron
   cages of false metaphysics! I am saved--for God is light! My God, I
   come to thee. That thou shouldst be thyself is enough for time and
   eternity, for my soul and all its endless need. Whatever seems to me
   darkness, that I will not believe of my God. If I should mistake, and
   call that darkness which is light, will he not reveal the matter to me,
   setting it in the light that lighteth every man, showing me that I saw
   but the husk of the thing, not the kernel? Will he not break open the
   shell for me, and let the truth of it, his thought, stream out upon me?
   He will not let it hurt me to mistake the light for darkness, while I
   take not the darkness for light. The one comes from blindness of the
   intellect, the other from blindness of heart and will. I love the
   light, and will not believe at the word of any man, or upon the
   conviction of any man, that that which seems to me darkness is in God.
   Where would the good news be if John said, God is light, but you cannot
   see his light; you cannot tell, you have no notion, what light is; what
   God means by light, is not what you mean by light; what God calls light
   may be horrible darkness to you, for you are of another nature from
   him!' Where, I say, would be the good news of that? It is true, the
   light of God may be so bright that we see nothing; but that is not
   darkness, it is infinite hope of light. It is true also that to the
   wicked the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light;' but is that
   because the conscience of the wicked man judges of good and evil
   oppositely to the conscience of the good man? When he says, Evil, be
   thou my good,' he means by evil what God means by evil, and by good he
   means pleasure. He cannot make the meanings change places. To say that
   what our deepest conscience calls darkness may be light to God, is
   blasphemy; to say light in God and light in man are of differing kinds,
   is to speak against the spirit of light. God is light far beyond what
   we can see, but what we mean by light, God means by light; and what is
   light to God is light to us, or would be light to us if we saw it, and
   will be light to us when we do see it. God means us to be jubilant in
   the fact that he is light--that he is what his children, made in his
   image, mean when they say light; that what in him is dark to them, is
   dark by excellent glory, by too much cause of jubilation; that, however
   dark it may be to their eyes, it is light even as they mean it, light
   for their eyes and souls and hearts to take in the moment they are
   enough of eyes, enough of souls, enough of hearts, to receive it in its
   very being. Living Light, thou wilt not have me believe anything dark
   of thee! thou wilt have me so sure of thee as to dare to say that is
   not of God which I see dark, see unlike the Master! If I am not honest
   enough, if the eye in me be not single enough to see thy light, thou
   wilt punish me, I thank thee, and purge my eyes from their darkness,
   that they may let the light in, and so I become an inheritor, with thy
   other children, of that light which is thy Godhead, and makes thy
   creatures need to worship thee. In thy light we shall see light.'

   All man will not, in our present imperfection, see the same light; but
   light is light notwithstanding, and what each does see, is his safety
   if he obeys it. In proportion as we have the image of Christ mirrored
   in us, we shall know what is and is not light. But never will anything
   prove to be light that is not of the same kind with that which we mean
   by light, with that in a thing which makes us call it light. The
   darkness yet left in us makes us sometimes doubt of a thing whether it
   be light or darkness; but when the eye is single, the whole body will
   be full of light.

   To fear the light is to be untrue, or at least it comes of untruth. No
   being, for himself or for another, needs fear the light of God. Nothing
   can be in light inimical to our nature, which is of God, or to anything
   in us that is worthy. All fear of the light, all dread lest there
   should be something dangerous in it, comes of the darkness still in
   those of us who do not love the truth with all our hearts; it will
   vanish as we are more and more interpenetrated with the light. In a
   word, there is no way of thought or action which we count admirable in
   man, in which God is not altogether adorable. There is no loveliness,
   nothing that makes man dear to his brother man, that is not in God,
   only it is infinitely better in God. He is God our saviour. Jesus is
   our saviour because God is our saviour. He is the God of comfort and
   consolation. He will soothe and satisfy his children better than any
   mother her infant. The only thing he will not give them is--leave to
   stay in the dark. If a child cry, I want the darkness,' and complain
   that he will not give it, yet he will not give it. He gives what his
   child needs--often by refusing what he asks. If his child say, I will
   not be good; I prefer to die; let me die!' his dealing with that child
   will be as if he said--No; I have the right to content you, not giving
   you your own will but mine, which is your one good. You shall not die;
   you shall live to thank me that I would not hear your prayer. You know
   what you ask, but not what you refuse.' There are good things God must
   delay giving until his child has a pocket to hold them--till he gets
   his child to make that pocket. He must first make him fit to receive
   and to have. There is no part of our nature that shall not be
   satisfied--and that not by lessening it, but by enlarging it to embrace
   an ever-enlarging enough.

   Come to God, then, my brother, my sister, with all thy desires and
   instincts, all thy lofty ideals, all thy longing for purity and
   unselfishness, all thy yearning to love and be true, all thy aspiration
   after self-forgetfulness and child-life in the breath of the Father;
   come to him with all thy weaknesses, all thy shames, all thy
   futilities; with all thy helplessness over thy own thoughts; with all
   thy failure, yea, with the sick sense of having missed the tide of true
   affairs; come to him with all thy doubts, fears, dishonesties,
   meannesses, paltrinesses, misjudgments, wearinesses, disappointments,
   and stalenesses: be sure he will take thee and all thy miserable brood,
   whether of draggle-winged angels, or covert-seeking snakes, into his
   care, the angels for life, the snakes for death, and thee for liberty
   in his limitless heart! For he is light, and in him is no darkness at
   all. If he were a king, a governor; if the name that described him were
   The Almighty, thou mightst well doubt whether there could be light
   enough in him for thee and thy darkness; but he is thy father, and more
   thy father than the word can mean in any lips but his who said, my
   father and your father, my God and your God;' and such a father is
   light, an infinite, perfect light. If he were any less or any other
   than he is, and thou couldst yet go on growing, thou must at length
   come to the point where thou wouldst be dissatisfied with him; but he
   is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If anything seem to be in
   him that you cannot be content with, be sure that the ripening of thy
   love to thy fellows and to him, the source of thy being, will make thee
   at length know that anything else than just what he is would have been
   to thee an endless loss. Be not afraid to build upon the rock Christ,
   as if thy holy imagination might build too high and heavy for that
   rock, and it must give way and crumble beneath the weight of thy divine
   idea. Let no one persuade thee that there is in him a little darkness,
   because of something he has said which his creature interprets into
   darkness. The interpretation is the work of the enemy--a handful of
   tares of darkness sown in the light. Neither let thy cowardly
   conscience receive any word as light because another calls it light,
   while it looks to thee dark. Say either the thing is not what it seems,
   or God never said or did it. But, of all evils, to misinterpret what
   God does, and then say the thing as interpreted must be right because
   God does it, is of the devil. Do not try to believe anything that
   affects thee as darkness. Even if thou mistake and refuse something
   true thereby, thou wilt do less wrong to Christ by such a refusal than
   thou wouldst by accepting as his what thou canst see only as darkness.
   It is impossible thou art seeing a true, a real thing--seeing it as it
   is, I mean--if it looks to thee darkness. But let thy words be few,
   lest thou say with thy tongue what thou wilt afterward repent with thy
   heart. Above all things believe in the light, that it is what thou
   callest light, though the darkness in thee may give thee cause at a
   time to doubt whether thou art verily seeing the light.

   But there is another side to the matter: God is light indeed, but there
   is darkness; darkness is death, and men are in it.'

   Yes; darkness is death, but not death to him that comes out of it.

   It may sound paradoxical, but no man is condemned for anything he has
   done; he is condemned for continuing to do wrong. He is condemned for
   not coming out of the darkness, for not coming to the light, the living
   God, who sent the light, his son, into the world to guide him home. Let
   us hear what John says about the darkness.

   For here also we have, I think, the word of the apostle himself: at the
   13^th verse he begins, I think, to speak in his own person. In the
   19^th verse he says, And this is the condemnation,'--not that men are
   sinners--not that they have done that which, even at the moment, they
   were ashamed of--not that they have committed murder, not that they
   have betrayed man or woman, not that they have ground the faces of the
   poor, making money by the groans of their fellows--not for any hideous
   thing are they condemned, but that they will not leave such doings
   behind, and do them no more: This is the condemnation, that light is
   come into the world, and men' would not come out of the darkness to the
   light, but loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
   evil.' Choosing evil, clinging to evil, loving the darkness because it
   suits with their deeds, therefore turning their backs on the inbreaking
   light, how can they but be condemned--if God be true, if he be light,
   and darkness be alien to him! Whatever of honesty is in man, whatever
   of judgment is left in the world, must allow that their condemnation is
   in the very nature of things, that it must rest on them and abide.

   But if one happens to utter some individual truth which another man has
   made into one of the cogs of his system, he is in danger of being
   supposed to accept all the toothed wheels and their relations in that
   system. I therefore go on to say that it does not follow, because light
   has come into the world, that it has fallen upon this or that man. He
   has his portion of the light that lighteth every man, but the
   revelation of God in Christ may not yet have reached him. A man might
   see and pass the Lord in a crowd, nor be to blame like the Jews of
   Jerusalem for not knowing him. A man like Nathanael might have started
   and stopped at the merest glimpse of him, but all growing men are not
   yet like him without guile. Everyone who has not yet come to the light
   is not necessarily keeping his face turned away from it. We dare not
   say that this or that man would not have come to the light had he seen
   it; we do not know that he will not come to the light the moment he
   does see it. God gives every man time. There is a light that lightens
   sage and savage, but the glory of God in the face of Jesus may not have
   shined on this sage or that savage. The condemnation is of those who,
   having seen Jesus, refuse to come to him, or pretend to come to him but
   do not the things he says. They have all sorts of excuses at hand; but
   as soon as a man begins to make excuse, the time has come when he might
   be doing that from which he excuses himself. How many are there not
   who, believing there is something somewhere with the claim of light
   upon them, go on and on to get more out of the darkness! This
   consciousness, all neglected by them, gives broad ground for the
   expostulation of the Lord--Ye will not come unto me that ye might have
   life!'

   All manner of sin and blasphemy,' the Lord said, shall be forgiven unto
   men; but the blasphemy against the spirit shall not be forgiven.' God
   speaks, as it were, in this manner: I forgive you everything. Not a
   word more shall be said about your sins--only come out of them; come
   out of the darkness of your exile; come into the light of your home, of
   your birthright, and do evil no more. Lie no more; cheat no more;
   oppress no more; slander no more; envy no more; be neither greedy nor
   vain; love your neighbour as I love you; be my good child; trust in
   your father. I am light; come to me, and you shall see things as I see
   them, and hate the evil thing. I will make you love the thing which now
   you call good and love not. I forgive all the past.'

   I thank thee, Lord, for forgiving me, but I prefer staying in the
   darkness: forgive me that too.'

   No; that cannot be. The one thing that cannot be forgiven is the sin of
   choosing to be evil, of refusing deliverance. It is impossible to
   forgive that sin. It would be to take part in it. To side with wrong
   against right, with murder against life, cannot be forgiven. The thing
   that is past I pass, but he who goes on doing the same, annihilates
   this my forgiveness, makes it of no effect. Let a man have committed
   any sin whatever, I forgive him; but to choose to go on sinning--how
   can I forgive that? It would be to nourish and cherish evil! It would
   be to let my creation go to ruin. Shall I keep you alive to do things
   hateful in the sight of all true men? If a man refuse to come out of
   his sin, he must suffer the vengeance of a love that would be no love
   if it left him there. Shall I allow my creature to be the thing my soul
   hates?'

   There is no excuse for this refusal. If we were punished for every
   fault, there would be no end, no respite; we should have no quiet
   wherein to repent; but God passes by all he can. He passes by and
   forgets a thousand sins, yea, tens of thousands, forgiving them
   all--only we must begin to be good, begin to do evil no more. He who
   refuses must be punished and punished--punished through all the
   ages--punished until he gives way, yields, and comes to the light, that
   his deeds may be seen by himself to be what they are, and be by himself
   reproved, and the Father at last have his child again. For the man who
   in this world resists to the full, there may be, perhaps, a whole age
   or era in the history of the universe during which his sin shall not be
   forgiven; but never can it be forgiven until he repents. How can they
   who will not repent be forgiven, save in the sense that God does and
   will do all he can to make them repent? Who knows but such sin may need
   for its cure the continuous punishment of an on?

   There are three conceivable kinds of punishment--first, that of mere
   retribution, which I take to be entirely and only human--therefore,
   indeed, more properly inhuman, for that which is not divine is not
   essential to humanity, and is of evil, and an intrusion upon the human;
   second, that which works repentance; and third, that which refines and
   purifies, working for holiness. But the punishment that falls on whom
   the Lord loveth because they have repented, is a very different thing
   from the punishment that falls on those whom he loveth in deed but
   cannot forgive because they hold fast by their sins.

   There are also various ways in which the word forgive can be used. A
   man might say to his son--My boy, I forgive you. You did not know what
   you were doing. I will say no more about it.' Or he might say--My boy,
   I forgive you; but I must punish you, for you have done the same thing
   several times, and I must make you remember.' Or, again, he might
   say--I am seriously angry with you. I cannot forgive you. I must punish
   you severely. The thing was too shameful! I cannot pass it by.' Or,
   once more, he might say--Except you alter your ways entirely, I shall
   have nothing more to do with you. You need not come to me. I will not
   take the responsibility of anything you do. So far from answering for
   you, I shall feel bound in honesty to warn my friends not to put
   confidence in you. Never, never, till I see a greater difference in you
   than I dare hope to see in this world, will I forgive you. I can no
   more regard you as one of the family. I would die to save you, but I
   cannot forgive you. There is nothing in you now on which to rest
   forgiveness. To say, I forgive you, would be to say, Do anything you
   like; I do not care what you do.' So God may forgive and punish; and he
   may punish and not forgive, that he may rescue. To forgive the sin
   against the holy spirit would be to damn the universe to the pit of
   lies, to render it impossible for the man so forgiven ever to be saved.
   He cannot forgive the man who will not come to the light because his
   deeds are evil. Against that man his fatherly heart is moved with
   indignation.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE DISPLEASURE OF JESUS.

   When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which
   came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled.--John xi.
   33.

   Grimm, in his lexicon to the New Testament, after giving as the
   equivalent of the word embrimaomai in pagan use, I am moved with
   anger,' I roar or growl,' I snort at,' I am vehemently angry or
   indignant with some one,' tells us that in Mark i. 43, and Matthew ix.
   30, it has a meaning different from that of the pagans, namely, I
   command with severe admonishment.' That he has any authority for saying
   so, I do not imagine, and believe the statement a blunder. The
   Translators and Revisers, however, have in those passages used the word
   similarly, and in one place, the passage before us, where a true
   version is of yet more consequence, have taken another liberty and
   rendered the word groaned.' The Revisers, at the same time, place in
   the margin what I cannot but believe its true meaning--was moved with
   indignation.'

   Let us look at all the passages in which the word is used of the Lord,
   and so, if we may, learn something concerning him. The only place in
   the gospel where it is used of any but the Lord is Mark xiv. 5. Here
   both versions say of the disciples that they murmured at' the waste of
   the ointment by one of the women who anointed the Lord. With regard to
   this rendering I need only remark that surely murmured at' can hardly
   be strong enough, especially seeing they had indignation among
   themselves' at the action.

   It is indeed right and necessary to insist that many a word must differ
   in moral weight and colour as used of or by persons of different
   character. The anger of a good man is a very different thing from the
   anger of a bad man; the displeasure of Jesus must be a very different
   thing from the displeasure of a tyrant. But they are both anger, both
   displeasure, nevertheless. We have no right to change a root-meaning,
   and say in one case that a word means he was indignant, in another that
   it means he straitly or strictly charged, and in a third that it means
   he groaned. Surely not thus shall we arrive at the truth! If any
   statement is made, any word employed, that we feel unworthy of the
   Lord, let us refuse it; let us say, I do not believe that;' or, There
   must be something there that I cannot see into: I must wait; it cannot
   be what it looks to me, and be true of the Lord!' But to accept the
   word as used of the Lord, and say it means something quite different
   from what it means when used by the same writer of some one else,
   appears to me untruthful.

   We shall take first the passage, Mark i. 43--in the authorized version,
   And he straitly charged him;' in the revised, And he strictly charged
   him,' with sternly' in the margin. Literally, as it seems to me, it
   reads, and ought to be read, And being angry' or displeased' or vexed'
   with him, he immediately dismissed him.' There is even some
   dissatisfaction implied, I think, in the word I have translated
   dismissed.' The word in John ix. 34, they cast him out,' is the same,
   only a little intensified.

   This adds something to the story, and raises the question, Why should
   Jesus have been angry? If we can find no reason for his anger, we must
   leave the thing as altogether obscure; for I do not know where to find
   another meaning for the word, except in the despair of a would--be
   interpreter.

   Jesus had cured the leper--not with his word only, which would have
   been enough for the mere cure, but was not enough without the touch of
   his hand--the Sinaitic version says his hands'--to satisfy the heart of
   Jesus--a touch defiling him, in the notion of the Jews, but how
   cleansing to the sense of the leper! The man, however, seems to have
   been unworthy of this delicacy of divine tenderness. The Lord, who
   could read his heart, saw that he made him no true response--that there
   was not awaked in him the faith he desired to rouse: he had not drawn
   the soul of the man to his. The leper was jubilant in the removal of
   his pain and isolating uncleanness, in his deliverance from suffering
   and scorn; he was probably elated with the pride of having had a
   miracle wrought for him. In a word, he was so full of himself that he
   did not think truly of his deliverer.

   The Lord, I say, saw this, or something of this kind, and was not
   satisfied. He had wanted to give the man something so much better than
   a pure skin, and had only roused in him an unseemly delight in his own
   cleanness--unseemly, for it was such that he paid no heed to the Lord,
   but immediately disobeyed his positive command. The moral position the
   man took was that which displeased the Lord, made him angry. He saw in
   him positive and rampant self-will and disobedience, an impertinent
   assurance and self-satisfaction. Filled, not with pure delight, or the
   child-like merriment that might well burst forth, mingled with tears,
   at such deliverance; filled, not with gratitude, but gratification, the
   keener that he had been so long an object of loathing to his people;
   filled with arrogance because of the favour shown to him, of all men,
   by the great prophet, and swelling with boast of the same, he left the
   presence of the healer to thwart his will, and, commanded to tell no
   man, at once began'--the frothy, volatile, talking soul--to publish it
   much, and to blaze abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more
   openly enter into a city, but was without in desert places.'

   Let us next look at the account of the healing of the two blind men,
   given in the ninth chapter of Matthew's gospel. In both the versions
   the same phrases are used in translation of the word in question, as in
   the story of the leper in Mark's gospel--straitly,' strictly,' sternly
   charged them.' I read the passage thus: And Jesus was displeased'--or,
   perhaps, much displeased'--with them, saying, See that no man know it.'

   But they went forth, and spread abroad his fame in all that land.'
   Surely here we have light on the cause of Jesus' displeasure with the
   blind men! it was the same with them as with the leper: they showed
   themselves bent on their own way, and did not care for his. Doubtless
   they were, in part, all of them moved by the desire to spread abroad
   his fame; that may even have seemed to them the best acknowledgment
   they could render their deliverer. They never suspected that a great
   man might desire to avoid fame, laying no value upon it, knowing it for
   a foolish thing. They did not understand that a man desirous of helping
   his fellows might yet avoid a crowd as obstructive to his object. What
   is a prophet without honour?' such virtually ask, nor understand the
   answer, A man the more likely to prove a prophet.' These men would
   repay their healer with trumpeting, not obedience. By them he should
   have his right--but as they not he judged fit! In his modesty he
   objected, but they would take care he should not go without his reward!
   Through them he should reap the praises of men! Not tell!' they
   exclaim. Indeed, we will tell!' They were too grateful not to rumour
   him, not grateful enough to obey him.

   We cannot surely be amazed at their self-sufficiency. How many are
   there not who seem capable of anything for the sake of the church or
   Christianity, except the one thing its Lord cares about--that they
   should do what he tells them! He would deliver them from themselves
   into the liberty of the sons of God, make them his brothers; they leave
   him to vaunt their church. His commandments are not grievous; they
   invent commandments for him, and lay them, burdens grievous to be
   borne, upon the necks of their brethren. God would have us sharers in
   his bliss--in the very truth of existence; they worship from afar, and
   will not draw nigh. It was not, I think, the obstruction to his work,
   not the personal inconvenience it would cause him, that made the Lord
   angry, but that they would not be his friends, would not do what he
   told them, would not be the children of his father, and help him to
   save their brethren. When Peter in his way next--much the same way as
   theirs--opposed the will of the Father, saying, That be far from thee,
   Lord!' he called him Satan, and ordered him behind him.

   Does it affect anyone to the lowering of his idea of the Master that he
   should ever be angry? If so, I would ask him whether his whole
   conscious experience of anger be such, that he knows but one kind of
   anger. There is a good anger and a bad anger. There is a wrath of God,
   and there is a wrath of man that worketh not the righteousness of God.
   Anger may be as varied as the colour of the rainbow. God's anger can be
   nothing but Godlike, therefore divinely beautiful, at one with his
   love, helpful, healing, restoring; yet is it verily and truly what we
   call anger. How different is the anger of one who loves, from that of
   one who hates! yet is anger anger. There is the degraded human anger,
   and the grand, noble, eternal anger. Our anger is in general degrading,
   because it is in general impure.

   It is to me an especially glad thought that the Lord came so near us as
   to be angry with us. The more we think of Jesus being angry with us,
   the more we feel that we must get nearer and nearer to him--get within
   the circle of his wrath, out of the sin that makes him angry, and near
   to him where sin cannot come. There is no quenching of his love in the
   anger of Jesus. The anger of Jesus is his recognition that we are to
   blame; if we were not to blame, Jesus could never be angry with us; we
   should not be of his kind, therefore not subject to his blame. To
   recognize that we are to blame, is to say that we ought to be better,
   that we are able to do right if we will. We are able to turn our faces
   to the light, and come out of the darkness; the Lord will see to our
   growth.

   It is a serious thought that the disobedience of the men he had set
   free from blindness and leprosy should be able to hamper him in his
   work for his father. But his best friends, his lovers did the same.
   That he should be crucified was a horror to them; they would have made
   him a king, and ruined his father's work. He preferred the cruelty of
   his enemies to the kindness of his friends. The former with evil intent
   wrought his father's will; the latter with good intent would have
   frustrated it. His disciples troubled him with their unbelieving
   expostulations. Let us know that the poverty of our idea of Jesus--how
   much more our disobedience to him!--thwarts his progress to victory,
   delays the coming of the kingdom of heaven. Many a man valiant for
   Christ, but not understanding him, and laying on himself and his
   fellows burdens against nature, has therein done will-worship and
   would-be service for which Christ will give him little thanks, which
   indeed may now be moving his holy anger. Where we do that we ought not,
   and could have helped it, be moved to anger against us, O Christ! do
   not treat us as if we were not worth being displeased with; let not our
   faults pass as if they were of no weight. Be angry with us, holy
   brother, wherein we are to blame; where we do not understand, have
   patience with us, and open our eyes, and give us strength to obey,
   until at length we are the children of the Father even as thou. For
   though thou art lord and master and saviour of them that are growing,
   thou art perfect lord only of the true and the safe and the free, who
   live in thy light and are divinely glad: we keep thee back from thy
   perfect lordship. Make us able to be angry and not sin; to be angry nor
   seek revenge the smallest; to be angry and full of forgiveness. We will
   not be content till our very anger is love.

   The Lord did not call the leprosy to return and seize again upon the
   man who disobeyed him. He may have deserved it, but the Lord did not do
   it. He did not wrap the self-confident seeing men in the cloud of their
   old darkness because they wrapped themselves in the cloud of
   disobedience. He let them go. Of course they failed of their well-being
   by it; for to say a man might disobey and be none the worse, would be
   to say that no may be yes, and light sometimes darkness; it would be to
   say that the will of God is not man's bliss. But the Lord did not
   directly punish them, any more than he does tens of thousands of wrongs
   in the world. Many wrongs punish themselves against the bosses of armed
   law; many wrong-doers cut themselves, like the priests of Baal, with
   the knives of their own injustice; and it is his will it should be so;
   but, whether he punish directly or indirectly, he is always working to
   deliver. I think sometimes his anger is followed, yea, accompanied by
   an astounding gift, fresh from his heart of grace. He knows what to do,
   for he is love. He is love when he gives, and love when he withholds;
   love when he heals, and love when he slays. Lord, if thus thou lookest
   upon men in thine anger, what must a full gaze be from thine eyes of
   love!

   Let us now look at the last case in which this word embrimaomai is used
   in the story of our Lord--that form of it, at least, which we have down
   here, for sure they have a fuller gospel in the Father's house, and
   without spot of blunder in it: let us so use that we have that we be
   allowed at length to look within the leaves of the other!

   In the authorized version of the gospel of John, the eleventh chapter,
   the thirty-third verse, we have the words: When Jesus therefore saw her
   weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned in
   the spirit and was troubled;'--according to the margin of the revised
   version, he was moved with indignation in the spirit, and troubled
   himself.' Also in the thirty-eighth verse we read, according to the
   margin of the revised version, Jesus therefore again being moved with
   indignation in himself cometh to the tomb.'

   Indignation--anger at the very tomb! in the presence of hearts torn by
   the loss of a brother four days dead, whom also he loved! Yes, verily,
   friends! such indignation, such anger as, at such a time, in such a
   place, it was eternally right the heart of Jesus should be moved
   withal. I can hardly doubt that he is in like manner moved by what he
   sees now at the death-beds and graves of not a few who are not his
   enemies, and yet in the presence of death seem no better than pagans.
   What have such gained by being the Christians they say they are? They
   fix their eyes on a grisly phantasm they call Death, and never lift
   them to the radiant Christ standing by bed or grave! For them Christ
   has not conquered Death:

   Thou art our king, O Death! to thee we groan!

   They would shudder at the thought of saying so in words; they say it in
   the bitterness of their tears, in their eyes of despair, in their black
   garments, in their instant retreat from the light of day to burrow in
   the bosom of darkness? What, would you have us not weep?' Weep freely,
   friends; but let your tears be those of expectant Christians, not
   hopeless pagans. Let us look at the story.

   The Lord had all this time been trying to teach his friends about his
   father--what a blessed and perfect father he was, who had sent him that
   men might look on his very likeness, and know him greater than any
   likeness could show him; and all they had gained by it seemed not to
   amount to an atom of consolation when the touch of death came. He had
   said hundreds of things to Martha and Mary that are not down in the few
   pages of our earthly gospel; but the fact that God loves them, and that
   God has Lazarus, seems nothing to them because they have not Lazarus!
   The Lord himself, for all he has been to them, cannot console them,
   even with his bodily presence, for the bodily absence of their brother.
   I do not mean that God would have even his closest presence make us
   forget or cease to desire that of our friend. God forbid! The love of
   God is the perfecting of every love. He is not the God of oblivion, but
   of eternal remembrance. There is no past with him. So far is he from
   such jealousy as we have all heard imputed to him, his determination is
   that his sons and daughters shall love each other perfectly. He gave us
   to each other to belong to each other for ever. He does not give to
   take away; with him is no variableness or shadow of turning. But if my
   son or daughter be gone from me for a season, should not the coming of
   their mother comfort me? Is it nothing that he who is the life should
   be present, assuring the well-being of the life that has vanished, and
   the well-being of the love that misses it? Why should the Lord have
   come to the world at all, if these his friends were to take no more
   good of him than this? Having the elder brother, could they not do for
   a little while without the younger? Must they be absolutely miserable
   without him? All their cry was, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
   brother had not died!' You may say they did not know Christ well enough
   yet. That is plain--but Christ had expected more of them, and was
   disappointed. You may say, How could that be, seeing he knew what was
   in man?' I doubt if you think rightly how much the Lord gave up in
   coming to us. Perhaps you have a poor idea of how much the Son was able
   to part with, or rather could let the Father take from him, without his
   sonship, the eternal to the eternal, being touched by it, save to show
   it deeper and deeper, closer and closer. That he did not in this world
   know everything, is plain from his own words, and from signs as well: I
   should scorn to imagine that ignorance touching his Godhead, that his
   Godhead could be hurt by what enhances his devotion. It enhances in my
   eyes the idea of his Godhead. Here, I repeat, I cannot but think that
   he was disappointed with his friends Martha and Mary. Had he done no
   more for them than this? Was his father and their father no comfort to
   them? Was this the way his best friends treated his father, who was
   doing everything for them possible for a father to do for his children!
   He cared so dearly for their hearts that he could not endure to see
   them weeping so that they shut out his father. His love was vexed with
   them that they would sit in ashes when they ought to be out in his
   father's sun and wind. And all for a lie!--since the feeling in their
   hearts that made them so weep, was a false one. Remember, it was not
   their love, but a false notion of loss. Were they no nearer the light
   of life than that? To think they should believe in death and the grave,
   not in him, the Life! Why should death trouble them? Why grudge the
   friendly elements their grasp on the body, restoring it whence it came,
   because Lazarus was gone home to God, and needed it no more? I suspect
   that, looking into their hearts, he saw them feeling and acting just as
   if Lazarus had ceased to exist.

   Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died. But I know,
   that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee.'

   Thy brother shall rise again.'

   I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day.'

   I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he
   were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever liveth, and believeth in
   me, shall never die.'

   I will not now endeavour to disclose anything of the depth of this word
   of the Lord. It will suffice for my present object to say that the
   sisters must surely have known that he raised up the daughter of Jairus
   and the son of the widow of Nain; and if the words he had just spoken,
   Thy brother shall rise again,' seemed to Martha too good to be true in
   the sense that he was going to raise him now, both she and Mary
   believing he could raise him if he would, might at least have known
   that if he did not, it must be for reasons as lovely as any for which
   he might have done it. If he could, and did not, must it not be as well
   as, yes, better than if he did?

   Martha had gone away, for the moment at least, a little comforted; and
   now came Mary, who knew the Lord better than her sister--alas, with the
   same bitter tears flowing from her eyes, and the same hopeless words,
   almost of reproach, falling from her lips! Then it was--at the sight of
   her and the Jews with her weeping, that the spirit of the Lord was
   moved with indignation. They wept as those who believe in death, not in
   life. Mary wept as if she had never seen with her eyes, never handled
   with her hands the Word of life! He was troubled with their unbelief,
   and troubled with their trouble. What was to be done with his brothers
   and sisters who would be miserable, who would not believe in his
   father! What a life of pain was theirs! How was he to comfort them?
   They would not be comforted! What a world was it that would go on
   thus--that would not free itself from the clutch of death, even after
   death was dead, but would weep and weep for thousands of years to come,
   clasped to the bosom of dead Death! Was existence, the glorious
   out-gift of his father, to be the most terrible of miseries, because
   some must go home before others? It was all so sad!--and all because
   they would not know his father! Then came the reaction from his
   indignation, and the labouring heart of the Lord found relief in tears.

   The Lord was standing, as it were, on the watershed of life. On one
   side of him lay what Martha and Mary called the world of life, on the
   other what he and his father and Lazarus called more abundant life. The
   Lord saw into both worlds--saw Martha and Mary on the one side weeping,
   on the other Lazarus waiting for them in peace. He would do his best
   for them--for the sisters--not for Lazarus! It was hard on Lazarus to
   be called back into the winding-sheet of the body, a sacrifice to their
   faithlessness, but it should be done! Lazarus should suffer for his
   sisters! Through him they should be compelled to believe in the Father,
   and so be delivered from bondage! Death should have no more dominion
   over them!

   He was vexed with them, I have said, for not believing in God, his and
   their father; and at the same time was troubled with their trouble. The
   cloud of his loving anger and disappointed sympathy broke in tears; and
   the tears eased his heart of the weight of its divine grief. He turned,
   not to them, not to punish them for their unbelief, not even to chide
   them for their sorrow; he turned to his father to thank him.

   He thanks him for hearing a prayer he had made--whether a moment
   before, or ere he left the other side of the Jordan, I cannot tell.
   What was the prayer for having heard which he now thanks his father?
   Surely he had spoken about bringing Lazarus back, and his father had
   shown himself of one mind with him. And I knew that thou hearest me
   always, but because of the multitude which standeth around I said it,
   that they may believe that thou didst send me.' I said it:' said what?
   He had said something for the sake of the multitude; what was it? The
   thanksgiving he had just uttered. He was not in the way of thanking his
   father in formal words; and now would not naturally have spoken his
   thanks aloud; for he was always speaking to the Father, and the Father
   was always hearing him; but he had a reason for doing so, and was now
   going to give his reason. He had done the unusual thing for the sake of
   being heard do it, and for holy honesty-sake he tells the fact,
   speaking to his father so as the people about him may hear, and there
   be no shadow of undisclosed doubleness in the action--nothing covert,
   however perfect in honesty. His design in thus thanking aloud must be
   made patent! I thank thee, father, for hearing me; and I say it, not as
   if I had had any doubt of thy hearing me, but that the people may
   understand that I am not doing this thing of myself, but as thy
   messenger. It is thou, father, art going to do it; I am doing it as thy
   right hand.--Lazarus, come forth.'

   I have said the trouble of the Lord was that his friends would not
   trust his father. He did not want any reception of himself that was not
   a reception of his father. It was his father, not he, that did the
   works! From this disappointment came, it seems to me, that sorrowful
   sigh, Nevertheless, when the son of man cometh, shall he find faith on
   the earth?'

   The thought of the Lord in uttering this prayer is not his own
   justification, but his father's reception by his children. If ever the
   Lord claims to be received as a true man, it is for the sake of his
   father and his brethren, that in the receiving of him, he may be
   received who sent him. Had he now desired the justification of his own
   claim, the thing he was about to do would have been powerful to that
   end; but he must have them understand clearly that the Father was one
   with him in it--that they were doing it together--that it was the will
   of the Father--that he had sent him.

   Lazarus must come and help him with these sisters whom he could not get
   to believe! Lazarus had tasted of death, and knew what it was: he must
   come and give his testimony! They have lost sight of you, Lazarus, and
   fancy you gone to the nowhere of their unbelief. Come forth; come out
   of the unseen. We will set them at rest.' It was hard, I repeat, upon
   Lazarus; he was better where he was; but he must come and bear the Lord
   company a little longer, and then be left behind with his sisters, that
   they and millions more like them might know that God is the God of the
   living, and not of the dead.

   The Jews said, Behold how he loved him!' but can any Christian believe
   it was from love to Lazarus that Jesus wept? It was from love to God,
   and to Martha and Mary. He had not lost Lazarus; but Martha and Mary
   were astray from their father in heaven. Come, my brother; witness!' he
   cried; and Lazarus came forth, bound hand and foot. Loose him and let
   him go,' he said--a live truth walking about the world: he had never
   been dead, and was come forth; he had not been lost, and was restored!
   It was a strange door he came through, back to his own--a door seldom
   used, known only to one--but there he was! Oh, the hearts of Martha and
   Mary! Surely the Lord had some recompense for his trouble, beholding
   their joy!

   Any Christian woman who has read thus far, I now beg to reflect on what
   I am going to put before her.

   Lazarus had to die again, and thanked God, we may be sure, for the glad
   fact. Did his sisters, supposing them again left behind him in the
   world, make the same lamentations over him as the former time he went?
   If they did, if they fell again into that passion of grief, lamenting
   and moaning and refusing to be comforted, what would you say of them? I
   imagine something to this effect: It was most unworthy of them to be no
   better for such a favour shown them. It was to behave like the
   naughtiest of faithless children. Did they not know that he was not
   lost?--that he was with the Master, who had himself seemed lost for a
   few days, but came again? He was no more lost now than the time he went
   before! Could they not trust that he who brought him back once would
   take care they should have him for ever at last!' Would you not speak
   after some such fashion? Would you not remember that he who is the
   shepherd of the sheep will see that the sheep that love one another
   shall have their own again, in whatever different pastures they may
   feed for a time? Would it not be hard to persuade you that they ever
   did so behave? They must have felt that he was but gone for a minute .
   . . from this room into the next;' and that, however they might miss
   him, it would be a shame not to be patient when they knew there was
   nothing to fear. It was all right with him, and would soon be all right
   with them also!

   Yes,' I imagine you saying, that is just how they would feel!'

   Then,' I return, why are you so miserable? Or why is it but the cold
   frost of use and forgetting that makes you less miserable than you were
   a year ago?'

   Ah,' you answer, but I had no such miracle wrought for me! Ah, if I had
   such a miracle wrought for me, you should see then!'

   You mean that if your husband, your son, your father, your brother,
   your lover, had been taken from you once and given to you again, you
   would not, when the time came that he must go once more, dream of
   calling him a second time from the good heaven? You would not be cruel
   enough for that! You would not bemoan or lament! You would not make the
   heart of the Lord sad with your hopeless tears! Ah, how little you know
   yourself! Do you not see that, so far as truth and reason are
   concerned, you are now in precisely the position supposed--the position
   of those sisters after Lazarus was taken from them the second time? You
   know now all they knew then. They had no more of a revelation by the
   recall of Lazarus than you have. For you profess to believe the story,
   though you make that doubtful enough by your disregard of the very soul
   of it. Is it possible that, so far as you are concerned, Lazarus might
   as well not have risen? What difference is there between your position
   now and theirs? Lazarus was with God, and they knew he had gone, come
   back, and gone again. You know that he went, came, and went again. Your
   friend is gone as Lazarus went twice, and you behave as if you knew
   nothing of Lazarus. You make a lamentable ado, vexing Jesus that you
   will not be reasonable and trust his father! When Martha and Mary
   behaved as you are doing, they had not had Lazarus raised; you have had
   Lazarus raised, yet you go on as they did then!

   You give too good reason to think that, if the same thing were done for
   you, you would say he was only in a cataleptic fit, and in truth was
   never raised from the dead. Or is there another way of understanding
   your behaviour: you do not believe that God is unchangeable, but think
   he acts one way one time and another way another time just from
   caprice? He might give back a brother to sisters who were favourites
   with him, but no such gift is to be counted upon? Why then, I ask, do
   you worship such a God?'

   But you know he does not do it! That was a mere exceptional case.'

   If it was, it is worthless indeed--as worthless as your behaviour would
   make it. But you are dull of heart, as were Martha and Mary. Do you not
   see that he is as continually restoring as taking away--that every
   bereavement is a restoration--that when you are weeping with void arms,
   others, who love as well as you, are clasping in ecstasy of reunion?'

   Alas, we know nothing about that!'

   If you have learned no more I must leave you, having no ground in you
   upon which my words may fall. You deceived me; you called yourself a
   Christian. You cannot have been doing the will of the Father, or you
   would not be as you are.'

   Ah, you little know my loss!'

   Indeed it is great! it seems to include God! If you knew what he knows
   about death you would clap your listless hands. But why should I seek
   in vain to comfort you? You must be made miserable, that you may wake
   from your sleep to know that you need God. If you do not find him,
   endless life with the living whom you bemoan would become and remain to
   you unendurable. The knowledge of your own heart will teach you
   this--not the knowledge you have, but the knowledge that is on its way
   to you through suffering. Then you will feel that existence itself is
   the prime of evils, without the righteousness which is of God by
   faith.'
     __________________________________________________________________

  RIGHTEOUSNESS.

   --that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
   righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith
   of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.--Ep. to the
   Philippians iii. 8, 9.

   What does the apostle mean by the righteousness that is of God by
   faith? He means the same righteousness Christ had by his faith in God,
   the same righteousness God himself has.

   In his second epistle to the Corinthians he says, He hath made him to
   be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness
   of God in him;'--He gave him to be treated like a sinner, killed and
   cast out of his own vineyard by his husbandmen, that we might in him be
   made righteous like God.' As the antithesis stands it is rhetorically
   correct. But if the former half means, he made him to be treated as if
   he were a sinner,' then the latter half should, in logical precision,
   mean, that we might be treated as if we were righteous.'

   That is just what Paul does mean,' insist not a few. He means that
   Jesus was treated by God as if he were a sinner, our sins being imputed
   to him, in order that we might be treated as if we were righteous, his
   righteousness being imputed to us.'

   That is, that, by a sort of legal fiction, Jesus was treated as what he
   was not, in order that we might be treated as what we are not. This is
   the best device, according to the prevailing theology, that the God of
   truth, the God of mercy, whose glory is that he is just to men by
   forgiving their sins, could fall upon for saving his creatures!

   I had thought that this most contemptible of false doctrines had nigh
   ceased to be presented, though I knew it must be long before it ceased
   to exercise baneful influence; but, to my astonishment, I came upon it
   lately in quite a modern commentary which I happened to look into in a
   friend's house. I say, to my astonishment, for the commentary was the
   work of one of the most liberal and lovely of Christians, a dignitary
   high in the church of England, a man whom I knew and love, and hope ere
   long to meet where there are no churches. In the comment that came
   under my eye, he refers to the doctrine of imputed righteousness as the
   possible explanation of a certain passage--refers to it as to a
   doctrine concerning whose truth was no question.

   It seems to me that, seeing much duplicity exists in the body of
   Christ, every honest member of it should protest against any word
   tending to imply the existence of falsehood in the indwelling spirit of
   that body. I now protest against this so-called doctrine, counting it
   the rightful prey of the foolishest wind in the limbo of vanities,
   whither I would gladly do my best to send it. It is a mean, nauseous
   invention, false, and productive of falsehood. Say it is a figure, I
   answer it is not only a false figure but an embodiment of untruth; say
   it expresses a reality, and I say it teaches the worst of lies; say
   there is a shadow of truth in it, and I answer it may be so, but there
   is no truth touched in it that could not be taught infinitely better
   without it. It is the meagre misshapen offspring of the legalism of a
   poverty-stricken mechanical fancy, unlighted by a gleam of divine
   imagination. No one who knows his New Testament will dare to say that
   the figure is once used in it.

   I have dealt already with the source of it. They say first, God must
   punish the sinner, for justice requires it; then they say he does not
   punish the sinner, but punishes a perfectly righteous man instead,
   attributes his righteousness to the sinner, and so continues just. Was
   there ever such a confusion, such an inversion of right and wrong!
   Justice could not treat a righteous man as an unrighteous; neither, if
   justice required the punishment of sin, could justice let the sinner go
   unpunished. To lay the pain upon the righteous in the name of justice
   is simply monstrous. No wonder unbelief is rampant. Believe in Moloch
   if you will, but call him Moloch, not Justice. Be sure that the thing
   that God gives, the righteousness that is of God, is a real thing, and
   not a contemptible legalism. Pray God I have no righteousness imputed
   to me. Let me be regarded as the sinner I am; for nothing will serve my
   need but to be made a righteous man, one that will no more sin.

   We have the word imputed just once in the New Testament. Whether the
   evil doctrine may have sprung from any possible misunderstanding of the
   passage where it occurs, I hardly care to inquire. The word as Paul
   uses it, and the whole of the thought whence his use of it springs,
   appeals to my sense of right and justice as much as the common use of
   it arouses my abhorrence. The apostle says that a certain thing was
   imputed to Abraham for righteousness; or, as the revised version has
   it, reckoned unto him:' what was it that was thus imputed to Abraham?
   The righteousness of another? God forbid! It was his own faith. The
   faith of Abraham is reckoned to him for righteousness. To impute the
   righteousness of one to another, is simply to act a falsehood; to call
   the faith of a man his righteousness is simply to speak the truth. Was
   it not righteous in Abraham to obey God? The Jews placed righteousness
   in keeping all the particulars of the law of Moses: Paul says faith in
   God was counted righteousness before Moses was born. You may answer,
   Abraham was unjust in many things, and by no means a righteous man.
   True; he was not a righteous man in any complete sense; his
   righteousness would never have satisfied Paul; neither, you may be
   sure, did it satisfy Abraham; but his faith was nevertheless
   righteousness, and if it had not been counted to him for righteousness,
   there would have been falsehood somewhere, for such faith as Abraham's
   is righteousness. It was no mere intellectual recognition of the
   existence of a God, which is consistent with the deepest atheism; it
   was that faith which is one with action: He went out, not knowing
   whither he went.' The very act of believing in God after such fashion
   that, when the time of action comes, the man will obey God, is the
   highest act, the deepest, loftiest righteousness of which man is
   capable, is at the root of all other righteousness, and the spirit of
   it will work till the man is perfect. If you define righteousness in
   the common-sense, that is, in the divine fashion--for religion is
   nothing if it be not the deepest common-sense--as a giving to everyone
   his due, then certainly the first due is to him who makes us capable of
   owing, that is, makes us responsible creatures. You may say this is not
   one's first feeling of duty. True; but the first in reality is seldom
   the first perceived. The first duty is too high and too deep to come
   first into consciousness. If any one were born perfect, which I count
   an eternal impossibility, then the highest duty would come first into
   the consciousness. As we are born, it is the doing of, or at least the
   honest trying to do many another duty, that will at length lead a man
   to see that his duty to God is the first and deepest and highest of
   all, including and requiring the performance of all other duties
   whatever. A man might live a thousand years in neglect of duty, and
   never come to see that any obligation was upon him to put faith in God
   and do what he told him--never have a glimpse of the fact that he owed
   him something. I will allow that if God were what he thinks him he
   would indeed owe him little; but he thinks him such in consequence of
   not doing what he knows he ought to do. He has not come to the light.
   He has deadened, dulled, hardened his nature. He has not been a man
   without guile, has not been true and fair.

   But while faith in God is the first duty, and may therefore well be
   called righteousness in the man in whom it is operative, even though it
   be imperfect, there is more reason than this why it should be counted
   to a man for righteousness. It is the one spiritual act which brings
   the man into contact with the original creative power, able to help him
   in every endeavour after righteousness, and ensure his progress to
   perfection. The man who exercises it may therefore also well be called
   a righteous man, however far from complete in righteousness. We may
   call a woman beautiful who is not perfect in beauty; in the Bible men
   are constantly recognized as righteous men who are far from perfectly
   righteous. The Bible never deals with impossibilities, never demands of
   any man at any given moment a righteousness of which at that moment he
   is incapable; neither does it lay upon any man any other law than that
   of perfect righteousness. It demands of him righteousness; when he
   yields that righteousness of which he is capable, content for the
   moment, it goes on to demand more: the common-sense of the Bible is
   lovely.

   To the man who has no faith in God, faith in God cannot look like
   righteousness; neither can he know that it is creative of all other
   righteousness toward equal and inferior lives: he cannot know that it
   is not merely the beginning of righteousness, but the germ of life, the
   active potency whence life-righteousness grows. It is not like some
   single separate act of righteousness; it is the action of the whole
   man, turning to good from evil--turning his back on all that is opposed
   to righteousness, and starting on a road on which he cannot stop, in
   which he must go on growing more and more righteous, discovering more
   and more what righteousness is, and more and more what is unrighteous
   in himself. In the one act of believing in God--that is, of giving
   himself to do what he tells him--he abjures evil, both what he knows
   and what he does not yet know in himself. A man may indeed have turned
   to obey God, and yet be capable of many an injustice to his neighbour
   which he has not yet discovered to be an injustice; but as he goes on
   obeying, he will go on discovering. Not only will he grow more and more
   determined to be just, but he will grow more and more sensitive to the
   idea of injustice--I do not mean in others, but in himself. A man who
   continues capable of a known injustice to his neighbour, cannot be
   believed to have turned to God. At all events, a man cannot be near
   God, so as to be learning what is just toward God, and not be near his
   neighbour, so as to be learning what is unfair to him; for his will,
   which is the man, lays hold of righteousness, chooses to be righteous.
   If a man is to be blamed for not choosing righteousness, for not
   turning to the light, for not coming out of the darkness, then the man
   who does choose and turn and come out, is to be justified in his deed,
   and declared to be righteous. He is not yet thoroughly righteous, but
   is growing in and toward righteousness. He needs creative God, and time
   for will and effort. Not yet quite righteous, he cannot yet act quite
   righteously, for only the man in whom the image of God is perfected can
   live perfectly. Born into the world without righteousness, he cannot
   see, he cannot know, he is not in touch with perfect righteousness, and
   it would be the deepest injustice to demand of him, with a penalty, at
   any given moment, more than he knows how to yield; but it is the
   highest love constantly to demand of him perfect righteousness as what
   he must attain to. With what life and possibility is in him, he must
   keep turning to righteousness and abjuring iniquity, ever aiming at the
   perfection of God. Such an obedient faith is most justly and fairly,
   being all that God himself can require of the man, called by God
   righteousness in the man. It would not be enough for the righteousness
   of God, or Jesus, or any perfected saint, because they are capable of
   perfect righteousness, and, knowing what is perfect righteousness,
   choose to be perfectly righteous; but, in virtue of the life and growth
   in it, it is enough at a given moment for the disciple of the Perfect.
   The righteousness of Abraham was not to compare with the righteousness
   of Paul. He did not fight with himself for righteousness, as did
   Paul--not because he was better than Paul and therefore did not need to
   fight, but because his idea of what was required of him was not within
   sight of that of Paul; yet was he righteous in the same way as Paul was
   righteous: he had begun to be righteous, and God called his
   righteousness righteousness, for faith is righteousness. His faith was
   an act recognizing God as his law, and that is not a partial act, but
   an all-embracing and all-determining action. A single righteous deed
   toward one's fellow could hardly be imputed to a man as righteousness.
   A man who is not trying after righteousness may yet do many a righteous
   act: they will not be forgotten to him, neither will they be imputed to
   him as righteousness. Abraham's action of obedient faith was
   righteousness none the less that his righteousness was far behind
   Paul's. Abraham started at the beginning of the long, slow,
   disappointing preparation of the Jewish people; Paul started at its
   close, with the story of Jesus behind him. Both believed, obeying God,
   and therefore both were righteous. They were righteous because they
   gave themselves up to God to make them righteous; and not to call such
   men righteous, not to impute their faith to them for righteousness,
   would be unjust. But God is utterly just, and nowise resembles a
   legal-minded Roman emperor, or a bad pope formulating the doctrine of
   vicarious sacrifice.

   What, then, is the righteousness which is of God by faith? It is simply
   the thing that God wants every man to be, wrought out in him by
   constant obedient contact with God himself. It is not an attribute
   either of God or man, but a fact of character in God and in man. It is
   God's righteousness wrought out in us, so that as he is righteous we
   too are righteous. It does not consist in obeying this or that law; not
   even the keeping of every law, so that no hair's-breadth did we run
   counter to one of them, would be righteousness. To be righteous is to
   be such a heart, soul, mind, and will, as, without regard to law, would
   recoil with horror from the lightest possible breach of any law. It is
   to be so in love with what is fair and right as to make it impossible
   for a man to do anything that is less than absolutely righteous. It is
   not the love of righteousness in the abstract that makes anyone
   righteous, but such a love of fairplay toward everyone with whom we
   come into contact, that anything less than the fulfilling, with a clear
   joy, of our divine relation to him or her, is impossible. For the
   righteousness of God goes far beyond mere deeds, and requires of us
   love and helping mercy as our highest obligation and justice to our
   fellow men--those of them too who have done nothing for us, those even
   who have done us wrong. Our relations with others, God first and then
   our neighbour in order and degree, must one day become, as in true
   nature they are, the gladness of our being; and nothing then will ever
   appear good for us, that is not in harmony with those blessed
   relations. Every thought will not merely be just, but will be just
   because it is something more, because it is live and true. What heart
   in the kingdom of heaven would ever dream of constructing a
   metaphysical system of what we owed to God and why we owed it? The
   light of our life, our sole, eternal, and infinite joy, is simply
   God--God--God--nothing but God, and all his creatures in him. He is all
   and in all, and the children of the kingdom know it. He includes all
   things; not to be true to anything he has made is to be untrue to him.
   God is truth, is life; to be in God is to know him and need no law.
   Existence will be eternal Godness.

   You would not like that way of it? There is, there can be, no other;
   but before you can judge of it, you must know at least a little of God
   as he is, not as you imagine him. I say as you imagine him, because it
   cannot be that any creature should know him as he is and not desire
   him. In proportion as we know him we must desire him, until at length
   we live in and for him with all our conscious heart. That is why the
   Jews did not like the Lord: he cared so simply for his father's will,
   and not for anything they called his will.

   The righteousness which is of God by faith in the source, the prime of
   that righteousness, is then just the same kind of thing as God's
   righteousness, differing only as the created differs from the creating.
   The righteousness of him who does the will of his father in heaven, is
   the righteousness of Jesus Christ, is God's own righteousness. The
   righteousness which is of God by faith in God, is God's righteousness.
   The man who has this righteousness, thinks about things as God thinks
   about them, loves the things that God loves, cares for nothing that God
   does not care about. Even while this righteousness is being born in
   him, the man will say to himself, Why should I be troubled about this
   thing or that? Does God care about it? No. Then why should I care? I
   must not care. I will not care! If he does not know whether God cares
   about it or not, he will say, If God cares I should have my desire, he
   will give it me; if he does not care I should have it, neither will I
   care. In the meantime I will do my work.' The man with God's
   righteousness does not love a thing merely because it is right, but
   loves the very rightness in it. He not only loves a thought, but he
   loves the man in his thinking that thought; he loves the thought alive
   in the man. He does not take his joy from himself. He feels joy in
   himself, but it comes to him from others, not from himself-from God
   first, and from somebody, anybody, everybody next. He would rather, in
   the fulness of his content, pass out of being, rather himself cease to
   exist, than that another should. He could do without knowing himself,
   but he could not know himself and spare one of the brothers or sisters
   God had given him. The man who really knows God, is, and always will
   be, content with what God, who is the very self of his self, shall
   choose for him; he is entirely God's, and not at all his own. His
   consciousness of himself is the reflex from those about him, not the
   result of his own turning in of his regard upon himself. It is not the
   contemplation of what God has made him, it is the being what God has
   made him, and the contemplation of what God himself is, and what he has
   made his fellows, that gives him his joy. He wants nothing, and feels
   that he has all things, for he is in the bosom of his father, and the
   thoughts of his father come to him. He knows that if he needs anything,
   it is his before he asks it; for his father has willed him, in the
   might and truth of his fatherhood, to be one with himself.

   This then, or something like this, for words are poor to tell the best
   things, is the righteousness which is of God by faith--so far from
   being a thing built on the rubbish heap of legal fiction called
   vicarious sacrifice, or its shadow called imputed righteousness, that
   only the child with the child-heart, so far ahead of and so different
   from the wise and prudent, can understand it. The wise and prudent
   interprets God by himself, and does not understand him; the child
   interprets God by himself, and does understand him. The wise and
   prudent must make a system and arrange things to his mind before he can
   say, I believe. The child sees, believes, obeys--and knows he must be
   perfect as his father in heaven is perfect. If an angel, seeming to
   come from heaven, told him that God had let him off, that he did not
   require so much of him as that, but would be content with less; that he
   could not indeed allow him to be wicked, but would pass by a great
   deal, modifying his demands because it was so hard for him to be quite
   good, and he loved him so dearly, the child of God would at once
   recognize, woven with the angel's starry brilliancy, the flicker of the
   flames of hell, and would say to the shining one, Get thee behind me,
   Satan.' Nor would there be the slightest wonder or merit in his doing
   so, for at the words of the deceiver, if but for briefest moment
   imagined true, the shadow of a rising hell would gloom over the face of
   creation; hope would vanish; the eternal would be as the carcase of a
   dead man; the glory would die out of the face of God--until the groan
   of a thunderous no burst from the caverns of the universe, and the
   truth, flashing on his child's soul from the heart of the Eternal,
   Immortal, Invisible, withered up the lie of the messenger of darkness.

   But how can God bring this about in me?'

   Let him do it, and perhaps you will know; if you never know, yet there
   it will be. Help him to do it, or he cannot do it. He originates the
   possibility of your being his son, his daughter; he makes you able to
   will it, but you must will it. If he is not doing it in you--that is,
   if you have as yet prevented him from beginning, why should I tell you,
   even if I knew the process, how he would do what you will not let him
   do? Why should you know? What claim have you to know? But indeed how
   should you be able to know? For it must deal with deeper and higher
   things than you can know anything of till the work is at least begun.
   Perhaps if you approved of the plans of the glad creator, you would
   allow him to make of you something divine! To teach your intellect what
   has to be learned by your whole being, what cannot be understood
   without the whole being, what it would do you no good to understand
   save you understood it in your whole being--if this be the province of
   any man, it is not mine. Let the dead bury their dead, and the dead
   teach their dead; for me, I will try to wake them. To those who are
   awake, I cry, For the sake of your father and the first-born among many
   brethren to whom we belong, for the sake of those he has given us to
   love the most dearly, let patience have her perfect work. Statue under
   the chisel of the sculptor, stand steady to the blows of his mallet.
   Clay on the wheel, let the fingers of the divine potter model you at
   their will. Obey the Father's lightest word; hear the Brother who knows
   you, and died for you; beat down your sin, and trample it to death.

   Brother, when thou sittest at home in thy house, which is the temple of
   the Lord, open all thy windows to breathe the air of his approach; set
   the watcher on thy turret, that he may listen out into the dark for the
   sound of his coming, and thy hand be on the latch to open the door at
   his first knock. Shouldst thou open the door and not see him, do not
   say he did not knock, but understand that he is there, and wants thee
   to go out to him. It may be he has something for thee to do for him. Go
   and do it, and perhaps thou wilt return with a new prayer, to find a
   new window in thy soul.

   Never wait for fitter time or place to talk to him. To wait till thou
   go to church, or to thy closet, is to make him wait. He will listen as
   thou walkest in the lane or the crowded street, on the common or in the
   place of shining concourse.

   Remember, if indeed thou art able to know it, that not in any church is
   the service done that he requires. He will say to no man, You never
   went to church: depart from me; I do not know you;' but, Inasmuch as
   you never helped one of my father's children, you have done nothing for
   me.' Church or chapel is not the place for divine service. It is a
   place of prayer, a place of praise, a place to feed upon good things, a
   place to learn of God, as what place is not? It is a place to look in
   the eyes of your neighbour, and love God along with him. But the world
   in which you move, the place of your living and loving and labour, not
   the church you go to on your holiday, is the place of divine service.
   Serve your neighbour, and you serve him.

   Do not heed much if men mock you and speak lies of you, or in goodwill
   defend you unworthily. Heed not much if even the righteous turn their
   backs upon you. Only take heed that you turn not from them. Take
   courage in the fact that there is nothing covered, that shall not be
   revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE FINAL UNMASKING.

   For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that
   shall not be known.--Matthew x. 26; Luke xii. 2.

   God is not a God that hides, but a God that reveals. His whole work in
   relation to the creatures he has made--and where else can lie his
   work?--is revelation--the giving them truth, the showing of himself to
   them, that they may know him, and come nearer and nearer to him, and so
   he have his children more and more of companions to him. That we are in
   the dark about anything is never because he hides it, but because we
   are not yet such that he is able to reveal that thing to us.

   That God could not do the thing at once which he takes time to do, we
   may surely say without irreverence. His will cannot finally be
   thwarted; where it is thwarted for a time, the very thwarting subserves
   the working out of a higher part of his will. He gave man the power to
   thwart his will, that, by means of that same power, he might come at
   last to do his will in a higher kind and way than would otherwise have
   been possible to him. God sacrifices his will to man that man may
   become such as himself, and give all to the truth; he makes man able to
   do wrong, that he may choose and love righteousness.

   The fact that all things are slowly coming into the light of the
   knowledge of men--so far as this may be possible to the created--is
   used in three different ways by the Lord, as reported by his
   evangelist. In one case, with which we will not now occupy
   ourselves--Mark iv. 22; Luke viii. 16--he uses it to enforce the duty
   of those who have received light to let it shine: they must do their
   part to bring all things out. In Luke xii. 2, is recorded how he
   brought it to bear on hypocrisy, showing its uselessness; and, in the
   case recorded in Matthew x. 25, he uses the fact to enforce
   fearlessness as to the misinterpretation of our words and actions.

   In whatever mode the Lord may intend that it shall be wrought out, he
   gives us to understand, as an unalterable principle in the government
   of the universe, that all such things as the unrighteous desire to
   conceal, and such things as it is a pain to the righteous to have
   concealed, shall come out into the light.

   Beware of hypocrisy,' the Lord says, for there is nothing covered, that
   shall not be revealed, neither hid, that shall not be known.' What is
   hypocrisy? The desire to look better than you are; the hiding of things
   you do, because you would not be supposed to do them, because you would
   be ashamed to have them known where you are known. The doing of them is
   foul; the hiding of them, in order to appear better than you are, is
   fouler still. The man who does not live in his own consciousness as in
   the open heavens, is a hypocrite--and for most of us the question is,
   are we growing less or more of such hypocrites? Are we ashamed of not
   having been open and clear? Are we fighting the evil thing which is our
   temptation to hypocrisy? The Lord has not a thought in him to be
   ashamed of before God and his universe, and he will not be content
   until he has us in the same liberty. For our encouragement to fight on,
   he tells us that those that hunger and thirst after righteousness shall
   be filled, that they shall become as righteous as the spirit of the
   Father and the Son in them can make them desire.

   The Lord says also, If they have called the master of the house
   Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household! Fear
   them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall not be
   revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.' To a man who loves
   righteousness and his fellow men, it must always be painful to be
   misunderstood; and misunderstanding is specially inevitable where he
   acts upon principles beyond the recognition of those around him, who,
   being but half-hearted Christians, count themselves the law-givers of
   righteousness, and charge him with the very things it is the aim of his
   life to destroy. The Lord himself was accused of being a drunkard and a
   keeper of bad company--and perhaps would in the present day be so
   regarded by not a few calling themselves by his name, and teaching
   temperance and virtue. He lived upon a higher spiritual platform than
   they understand, acted from a height of the virtues they would
   inculcate, loftier than their eyes can scale. His Himalays are not
   visible from their sand-heaps. The Lord bore with their evil tongues,
   and was neither dismayed nor troubled; but from this experience of his
   own, comforts those who, being his messengers, must fare as he. If they
   have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they
   call them of his household!'--If they insult a man, how much more will
   they not insult his servants!' While men count themselves Christians on
   any other ground than that they are slaves of Jesus Christ, the
   children of God, and free from themselves, so long will they use the
   servants of the Master despitefully. Do not hesitate,' says the Lord,
   to speak the truth that is in you; never mind what they call you;
   proclaim from the housetop; fear nobody.'

   He spoke the words to the men to whom he looked first to spread the
   news of the kingdom of heaven; but they apply to all who obey him. Few
   who have endeavoured to do their duty, have not been annoyed,
   disappointed, enraged perhaps, by the antagonism, misunderstanding, and
   false representation to which they have been subjected therein--issuing
   mainly from those and the friends of those who have benefited by their
   efforts to be neighbours to all. The tales of heartlessness and
   ingratitude one must come across, compel one to see more and more
   clearly that humanity, without willed effort after righteousness, is
   mean enough to sink to any depth of disgrace. The judgments also of
   imagined superiority are hard to bear. The rich man who will screw his
   workmen to the lowest penny, will read his poor relation a solemn
   lecture on extravagance, because of some humblest little act of
   generosity! He takes the end of the beam sticking out of his eye to
   pick the mote from the eye of his brother withal! If, in the endeavour
   to lead a truer life, a man merely lives otherwise than his neighbours,
   strange motives will be invented to account for it. To the honest soul
   it is a comfort to believe that the truth will one day be known, that
   it will cease to be supposed that he was and did as dull heads and
   hearts reported of him. Still more satisfactory will be the unveiling
   where a man is misunderstood by those who ought to know him
   better--who, not even understanding the point at issue, take it for
   granted he is about to do the wrong thing, while he is crying for
   courage to heed neither himself nor his friends, but only the Lord. How
   many hear and accept the words, Be not conformed to this world,'
   without once perceiving that what they call Society and bow to as
   supreme, is the World and nothing else, or that those who mind what
   people think, and what people will say, are conformed to--that is, take
   the shape of--the world. The true man feels he has nothing to do with
   Society as judge or lawgiver: he is under the law of Jesus Christ, and
   it sets him free from the law of the World. Let a man do right, nor
   trouble himself about worthless opinion; the less he heeds tongues, the
   less difficult will he find it to love men. Let him comfort himself
   with the thought that the truth must out. He will not have to pass
   through eternity with the brand of ignorant or malicious judgment upon
   him. He shall find his peers and be judged of them.

   But, thou who lookest for the justification of the light, art thou
   verily prepared for thyself to encounter such exposure as the general
   unveiling of things must bring? Art thou willing for the truth whatever
   it be? I nowise mean to ask, Have you a conscience so void of offence,
   have you a heart so pure and clean, that you fear no fullest exposure
   of what is in you to the gaze of men and angels?--as to God, he knows
   it all now! What I mean to ask is, Do you so love the truth and the
   right, that you welcome, or at least submit willingly to the idea of an
   exposure of what in you is yet unknown to yourself-an exposure that may
   redound to the glory of the truth by making you ashamed and humble? It
   may be, for instance, that you were wrong in regard to those, for the
   righting of whose wrongs to you, the great judgment of God is now by
   you waited for with desire: will you welcome any discovery, even if it
   work for the excuse of others, that will make you more true, by
   revealing what in you was false? Are you willing to be made glad that
   you were wrong when you thought others were wrong? If you can with such
   submission face the revelation of things hid, then you are of the
   truth, and need not be afraid; for, whatever comes, it will and can
   only make you more true and humble and pure.

   Does the Lord mean that everything a man has ever done or thought must
   be laid bare to the universe?

   So far, I think, as is necessary to the understanding of the man by
   those who have known, or are concerned to know him. For the time to
   come, and for those who are yet to know him, the man will henceforth,
   if he is a true man, be transparent to all that are capable of reading
   him. A man may not then, any more than now, be intelligible to those
   beneath him, but all things will be working toward revelation, nothing
   toward concealment or misunderstanding. Who in the kingdom will desire
   concealment, or be willing to misunderstand? Concealment is darkness;
   misunderstanding is a fog. A man will hold the door open for anyone to
   walk into his house, for it is a temple of the living God--with some
   things worth looking at, and nothing to hide. The glory of the true
   world is, that there is nothing in it that needs to be covered, while
   ever and ever there will be things uncovered. Every man's light will
   shine for the good and glory of his neighbour.

   Will all my weaknesses, all my evil habits, all my pettinesses, all the
   wrong thoughts which I cannot help--will all be set out before the
   universe?'

   Yes, if they so prevail as to constitute your character--that is, if
   they are you. But if you have come out of the darkness, if you are
   fighting it, if you are honestly trying to walk in the light, you may
   hope in God your father that what he has cured, what he is curing, what
   he has forgiven, will be heard of no more, not now being a constituent
   part of you. Or if indeed some of your evil things must yet be seen,
   the truth of them will be seen--that they are things you are at strife
   with, not things you are cherishing and brooding over. God will be fair
   to you--so fair!--fair with the fairness of a father loving his
   own--who will have you clean, who will neither spare you any needful
   shame, nor leave you exposed to any that is not needful. The thing we
   have risen above, is dead and forgotten, or if remembered, there is God
   to comfort us. If any man sin, we have a comforter with the Father.' We
   may trust God with our past as heartily as with our future. It will not
   hurt us so long as we do not try to hide things, so long as we are
   ready to bow our heads in hearty shame where it is fit we should be
   ashamed. For to be ashamed is a holy and blessed thing. Shame is a
   thing to shame only those who want to appear, not those who want to be.
   Shame is to shame those who want to pass their examination, not those
   who would get into the heart of things. In the name of God let us
   henceforth have nothing to be ashamed of, and be ready to meet any
   shame on its way to meet us. For to be humbly ashamed is to be plunged
   in the cleansing bath of the truth.

   As to the revelation of the ways of God, I need not speak; he has been
   always, from the first, revealing them to his prophet, to his child,
   and will go on doing so for ever. But let me say a word about another
   kind of revelation--that of their own evil to the evil.

   The only terrible, or at least the supremely terrible revelation is
   that of a man to himself. What a horror will it not be to a vile
   man--more than all to a man whose pleasure has been enhanced by the
   suffering of others--a man that knew himself such as men of ordinary
   morals would turn from with disgust, but who has hitherto had no
   insight into what he is--what a horror will it not be to him when his
   eyes are opened to see himself as the pure see him, as God sees him!
   Imagine such a man waking all at once, not only to see the eyes of the
   universe fixed upon him with loathing astonishment, but to see himself
   at the same moment as those eyes see him! What a waking!--into the full
   blaze of fact and consciousness, of truth and violation!

   To know my deed, twere best not know myself!

   Or think what it must be for a man counting himself religious,
   orthodox, exemplary, to perceive suddenly that there was no religion in
   him, only love of self; no love of the right, only a great love of
   being in the right! What a discovery--that he was simply a
   hypocrite--one who loved to appear, and was not! The rich seem to be
   those among whom will occur hereafter the sharpest reverses, if I
   understand aright the parable of the rich man and Lazarus. Who has not
   known the insolence of their meanness toward the poor, all the time
   counting themselves of the very elect! What riches and fancied
   religion, with the self-sufficiency they generate between them, can
   make man or woman capable of, is appalling. Mammon, the most
   contemptible of deities, is the most worshipped, both outside and in
   the house of God: to many of the religious rich in that day, the great
   damning revelation will be their behaviour to the poor to whom they
   thought themselves very kind. He flattereth himself in his own eyes
   until his iniquity is found to be hateful.' A man may loathe a thing in
   the abstract for years, and find at last that all the time he has been,
   in his own person, guilty of it. To carry a thing under our cloak
   caressingly, hides from us its identity with something that stands
   before us on the public pillory. Many a man might read this and assent
   to it, who cages in his own bosom a carrion-bird that he never knows
   for what it is, because there are points of difference in its plumage
   from that of the bird he calls by an ugly name.

   Of all who will one day stand in dismay and sickness of heart, with the
   consciousness that their very existence is a shame, those will fare the
   worst who have been consciously false to their fellows; who, pretending
   friendship, have used their neighbour to their own ends; and especially
   those who, pretending friendship, have divided friends. To such Dante
   has given the lowest hell. If there be one thing God hates, it must be
   treachery. Do not imagine Judas the only man of whom the Lord would
   say, Better were it for that man if he had never been born!' Did the
   Lord speak out of personal indignation, or did he utter a spiritual
   fact, a live principle? Did he speak in anger at the treachery of his
   apostle to himself, or in pity for the man that had better not have
   been born? Did the word spring from his knowledge of some fearful
   punishment awaiting Judas, or from his sense of the horror it was to be
   such a man? Beyond all things pitiful is it that a man should carry
   about with him the consciousness of being such a person--should know
   himself and not another that false one! O God,' we think, how terrible
   if it were I!' Just so terrible is it that it should be Judas! And have
   I not done things with the same germ in them, a germ which, brought to
   its evil perfection, would have shown itself the canker-worm,
   treachery? Except I love my neighbour as myself, I may one day betray
   him! Let us therefore be compassionate and humble, and hope for every
   man.

   A man may sink by such slow degrees that, long after he is a devil, he
   may go on being a good churchman or a good dissenter, and thinking
   himself a good Christian. Continuously repeated sin against the poorest
   consciousness of evil must have a dread rousing. There are men who
   never wake to know how wicked they are, till, lo, the gaze of the
   multitude is upon them!--the multitude staring with self-righteous
   eyes, doing like things themselves, but not yet found out; sinning
   after another pattern, therefore the hardest judges, thinking by
   condemnation to escape judgment. But there is nothing covered that
   shall not be revealed. What if the only thing to wake the treacherous,
   money-loving thief, Judas, to a knowledge of himself, was to let the
   thing go on to the end, and his kiss betray the Master? Judas did not
   hate the Master when he kissed him, but not being a true man, his very
   love betrayed him.

   The good man, conscious of his own evil, and desiring no refuge but the
   purifying light, will chiefly rejoice that the exposure of evil makes
   for the victory of the truth, the kingdom of God and his Christ. He
   sees in the unmasking of the hypocrite, in the unveiling of the
   covered, in the exposure of the hidden, God's interference, for him and
   all the race, between them and the lie.

   The only triumph the truth can ever have is its recognition by the
   heart of the liar. Its victory is in the man who, not content with
   saying, I was blind and now I see,' cries out, Lord God, just and true,
   let me perish, but endure thou! Let me live because thou livest,
   because thou savest me from the death in myself, the untruth I have
   nourished in me, and even called righteousness! Hallowed be thy name,
   for thou only art true; thou only lovest; thou only art holy, for thou
   only art humble! Thou only art unselfish; thou only hast never sought
   thine own, but the things of thy children! Yea, O father, be thou true,
   and every man a liar!'

   There is no satisfaction of revenge possible to the injured. The
   severest punishment that can be inflicted upon the wrong-doer is simply
   to let him know what he is; for his nature is of God, and the deepest
   in him is the divine. Neither can any other punishment than the
   sinner's being made to see the enormity of his injury, give
   satisfaction to the injured. While the wronger will admit no wrong,
   while he mocks at the idea of amends, or while, admitting the wrong, he
   rejoices in having done it, no suffering could satisfy revenge, far
   less justice. Both would continually know themselves foiled. Therefore,
   while a satisfied justice is an unavoidable eternal event, a satisfied
   revenge is an eternal impossibility. For the moment that the sole
   adequate punishment, a vision of himself, begins to take true effect
   upon the sinner, that moment the sinner has begun to grow a righteous
   man, and the brother human whom he has offended has no choice, has
   nothing left him but to take the offender to his bosom--the more
   tenderly that his brother is a repentant brother, that he was dead and
   is alive again, that he was lost and is found. Behold the meeting of
   the divine extremes--the extreme of punishment, the embrace of heaven!
   They run together; the wheel is come full circle.' For, I venture to
   think, there can be no such agony for created soul, as to see itself
   vile--vile by its own action and choice. Also I venture to think there
   can be no delight for created soul--short, that is, of being one with
   the Father--so deep as that of seeing the heaven of forgiveness open,
   and disclose the shining stair that leads to its own natural home,
   where the eternal father has been all the time awaiting this return of
   his child.

   So, friends, how ever indignant we may be, however intensely and
   however justly we may feel our wrongs, there is no revenge possible for
   us in the universe of the Father. I may say to myself with heartiest
   vengeance, I should just like to let that man see what a wretch he
   is--what all honest men at this moment think of him!' but, the moment
   come, the man will loathe himself tenfold more than any other man
   could, and that moment my heart will bury his sin. Its own ocean of
   pity will rush from the divine depths of its God--origin to overwhelm
   it. Let us try to forethink, to antedate our forgiveness. Dares any man
   suppose that Jesus would have him hate the traitor through whom he came
   to the cross? Has he been pleased through all these ages with the
   manner in which those calling themselves by his name have treated, and
   are still treating his nation? We have not yet sounded the depths of
   forgiveness that are and will be required of such as would be his
   disciples!

   Our friends will know us then: for their joy, will it be, or their
   sorrow? Will their hearts sink within them when they look on the real
   likeness of us? Or will they rejoice to find that we were not so much
   to be blamed as they thought, in this thing or that which gave them
   trouble?

   Let us remember, however, that not evil only will be unveiled; that
   many a masking misconception will uncover a face radiant with the
   loveliness of the truth. And whatever disappointments may fall, there
   is consolation for every true heart in the one sufficing joy--that it
   stands on the border of the kingdom, about to enter into ever fuller,
   ever--growing possession of the inheritance of the saints in light.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE INHERITANCE.

   Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers
   of the inheritance of the saints in light.--Ep. to the Colossians i.
   12.

   To have a share in any earthly inheritance, is to diminish the share of
   the other inheritors. In the inheritance of the saints, that which each
   has, goes to increase the possession of the rest. Hear what Dante puts
   in the mouth of his guide, as they pass through Purgatory:--

   Perche s' appuntano i vostri desiri

   Dove per compagnia parte si scema,

   Invidia muove il mantaco a' sospiri.

   Ma se l' amor della spera suprema

   Torcesse n suso l desiderio vostro,

   Non vi sarebbe al petto quella tema;

   Che per quanto si dice piu li nostro,

   Tanto possiede piu di ben ciascuno,

   E piu di caritade arde in quel chiostro.

   Because you point and fix your longing eyes

   On things where sharing lessens every share,

   The human bellows heave with envious sighs.

   But if the loftiest love that dwelleth there

   Up to the heaven of heavens your longing turn,

   Then from your heart will pass this fearing care:

   The oftener there the word our they discern,

   The more of good doth everyone possess,

   The more of love doth in that cloister burn.

   Dante desires to know how it can be that a distributed good should make
   the receivers the richer the more of them there are; and Virgil
   answers--

   Perocche tu rificchi

   La mente pure alle cose terrene,

   Di vera luce tenebre dispicchi.

   Quello nfinito ed ineffabil bene,

   Che lassu e, cosi corre ad amore,

   Com' a lucido corpo raggio viene.

   Tanto si da, quanto trova d' ardore:

   Si che quantunque carita si stende,

   Cresce sovr' essa l' eterno valore.

   E quanta gente piu lassu s' intende,

   Piu v' e da bene amare, e piu vi s' ama,

   E come specchio, l' uno all' altro rende.

   Because thy mind doth stick

   To earthly things, and on them only brood,

   From the true light thou dost but darkness pick.

   That same ineffable and infinite Good,

   Which dwells up there, to Love doth run as fleet

   As sunrays to bright things, for sisterhood.

   It gives itself proportionate to the heat:

   So that, wherever Love doth spread its reign,

   The growing wealth of God makes that its seat.

   And the more people that up thither strain,

   The more there are to love, the more they love,

   And like a mirror each doth give and gain.

   In this inheritance then a man may desire and endeavour to obtain his
   share without selfish prejudice to others; nay, to fail of our share in
   it, would be to deprive others of a portion of theirs. Let us look a
   little nearer, and see in what the inheritance of the saints consists.

   It might perhaps be to commit some small logical violence on the terms
   of the passage to say that the inheritance of the saints in light' must
   mean purely and only the possession of light which is the inheritance
   of the saints.' At the same time the phrase is literally the
   inheritance of the saints in the light;' and this perhaps makes it the
   more likely that, as I take it, Paul had in his mind the light as
   itself the inheritance of the saints--that he held the very substance
   of the inheritance to be the light. And if we remember that God is
   light; also that the highest prayer of the Lord for his friends was
   that they might be one in him and his father; and recall what the
   apostle said to the Ephesians, that in him we live and move and have
   our being,' we may be prepared to agree that, although he may not mean
   to include all possible phases of the inheritance of the saints in the
   one word light, as I think he does, yet the idea is perfectly
   consistent with his teaching. For the one only thing to make existence
   a good, the one thing to make it worth having, is just that there
   should be no film of separation between our life and the life of which
   ours is an outcome; that we should not only know that God is our life,
   but be aware, in some grand consciousness beyond anything imagination
   can present to us, of the presence of the making God, in the very
   process of continuing us the live things he has made us. This is only
   another way of saying that the very inheritance upon which, as the
   twice-born sons of our father, we have a claim--which claim his sole
   desire for us is that we should, so to say, enforce--that this
   inheritance is simply the light, God himself, the Light. If you think
   of ten thousand things that are good and worth having, what is it that
   makes them good or worth having but the God in them? That the
   loveliness of the world has its origin in the making will of God, would
   not content me; I say, the very loveliness of it is the loveliness of
   God, for its loveliness is his own lovely thought, and must be a
   revelation of that which dwells and moves in himself. Nor is this all:
   my interest in its loveliness would vanish, I should feel that the soul
   was out of it, if you could persuade me that God had ceased to care for
   the daisy, and now cared for something else instead. The faces of some
   flowers lead me back to the heart of God; and, as his child, I hope I
   feel, in my lowly degree, what he felt when, brooding over them, he
   said, They are good;' that is, They are what I mean.'

   The thing I am reasoning toward is this: that, if everything were thus
   seen in its derivation from God, then the inheritance of the saints,
   whatever the form of their possession, would be seen to be light. All
   things are God's, not as being in his power--that of course--but as
   coming from him. The darkness itself becomes light around him when we
   think that verily he hath created the darkness, for there could have
   been no darkness but for the light Without God there would not even
   have been nothing; there would not have existed the idea of nothing,
   any more than any reality of nothing, but that he exists and called
   something into being.

   Nothingness owes its very name and nature to the being and reality of
   God. There is no word to represent that which is not God, no word for
   the where without God in it; for it is not, could not be. So I think we
   may say that the inheritance of the saints is the share each has in the
   Light.

   But how can any share exist where all is open?

   The true share, in the heavenly kingdom throughout, is not what you
   have to keep, but what you have to give away. The thing that is mine is
   the thing I have with the power to give it. The thing I have no power
   to give a share in, is nowise mine; the thing I cannot share with
   everyone, cannot be essentially my own. The cry of the thousand
   splendours which Dante, in the fifth canto of the Paradiso,' tells us
   he saw gliding toward them in the planet Mercury, was--

   Ecco chi crescera li nostri amori!

   Lo, here comes one who will increase our loves!

   All the light is ours. God is all ours. Even that in God which we
   cannot understand is ours. If there were anything in God that was not
   ours, then God would not be one God. I do not say we must, or can ever
   know all in God; not throughout eternity shall we ever comprehend God,
   but he is our father, and must think of us with every part of him--so
   to speak in our poor speech; he must know us, and that in himself which
   we cannot know, with the same thought, for he is one. We and that which
   we do not or cannot know, come together in his thought. And this helps
   us to see how, claiming all things, we have yet shares. For the
   infinitude of God can only begin and only go on to be revealed, through
   his infinitely differing creatures--all capable of wondering at,
   admiring, and loving each other, and so bound all in one in him, each
   to the others revealing him. For every human being is like a facet cut
   in the great diamond to which I may dare liken the father of him who
   likens his kingdom to a pearl. Every man, woman, child--for the
   incomplete also is his, and in its very incompleteness reveals him as a
   progressive worker in his creation--is a revealer of God. I have my
   message of my great Lord, you have yours. Your dog, your horse tells
   you about him who cares for all his creatures. None of them came from
   his hands. Perhaps the precious things of the earth, the coal and the
   diamonds, the iron and clay and gold, may be said to have come from his
   hands; but the live things come from his heart--from near the same
   region whence ourselves we came. How much my horse may, in his own
   fashion--that is, God's equine way--know of him, I cannot tell, because
   he cannot tell. Also, we do not know what the horses know, because they
   are horses, and we are at best, in relation to them, only horsemen. The
   ways of God go down into microscopic depths, as well as up into
   telescopic heights--and with more marvel, for there lie the beginnings
   of life: the immensities of stars and worlds all exist for the sake of
   less things than they. So with mind; the ways of God go into the depths
   yet unrevealed to us; he knows his horses and dogs as we cannot know
   them, because we are not yet pure sons of God. When through our
   sonship, as Paul teaches, the redemption of these lower brothers and
   sisters shall have come, then we shall understand each other better.
   But now the lord of life has to look on at the wilful torture of
   multitudes of his creatures. It must be that offences come, but woe
   unto that man by whom they come! The Lord may seem not to heed, but he
   sees and knows.

   I say, then, that every one of us is something that the other is not,
   and therefore knows some thing--it may be without knowing that he knows
   it--which no one else knows; and that it is every one's business, as
   one of the kingdom of light, and inheritor in it all, to give his
   portion to the rest; for we are one family, with God at the head and
   the heart of it, and Jesus Christ, our elder brother, teaching us of
   the Father, whom he only knows.

   We may say, then, that whatever is the source of joy or love, whatever
   is pure and strong, whatever wakes aspiration, whatever lifts us out of
   selfishness, whatever is beautiful or admirable--in a word, whatever is
   of the light--must make a part, however small it may then prove to be
   in its proportion, of the inheritance of the saints in the light; for,
   as in the epistle of James, Every good gift, and every perfect gift is
   from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no
   variableness, neither shadow of turning.'

   Children fear heaven, because of the dismal notions the unchildlike
   give them of it, who, without imagination, receive unquestioning what
   others, as void of imagination as themselves, represent concerning it.
   I do not see that one should care to present an agreeable picture of
   it; for, suppose I could persuade a man that heaven was the perfection
   of all he could desire around him, what would the man or the truth gain
   by it? If he knows the Lord, he will not trouble himself about heaven;
   if he does not know him, he will not be drawn to him by it. I would not
   care to persuade the feeble Christian that heaven was a place worth
   going to; I would rather persuade him that no spot in space, no hour in
   eternity is worth anything to one who remains such as he is. But would
   that none presumed to teach the little ones what they know nothing of
   themselves! What have not children suffered from strong endeavour to
   desire the things they could not love! Well do I remember the pain of
   the prospect--no, the trouble at not being pleased with the
   prospect--of being made a pillar in the house of God, and going no more
   out! Those words were not spoken to the little ones. Yet are they,
   literally taken, a blessed promise compared with the notion of a
   continuous church-going! Perhaps no one teaches such a thing; but
   somehow the children get the dreary fancy: there are ways of
   involuntary teaching more potent than words. What boy, however fain to
   be a disciple of Christ and a child of God, would prefer a sermon to
   his glorious kite, that divinest of toys, with God himself for his
   playmate, in the blue wind that tossed it hither and thither in the
   golden void! He might be ready to part with kite and wind and sun, and
   go down to the grave for his brothers--but surely not that they might
   be admitted to an everlasting prayer-meeting! For my own part, I
   rejoice to think that there will be neither church nor chapel in the
   high countries; yea, that there will be nothing there called religion,
   and no law but the perfect law of liberty. For how should there be law
   or religion where every throb of the heart says God! where every
   song-throat is eager with thanksgiving! where such a tumult of glad
   waters is for ever bursting from beneath the throne of God, the tears
   of the gladness of the universe! Religion? Where will be the room for
   it, when the essence of every thought must be God? Law? What room will
   there be for law, when everything upon which law could lay a shalt not
   will be too loathsome to think of? What room for honesty, where love
   fills full the law to overflowing--where a man would rather drop sheer
   into the abyss, than wrong his neighbour one hair's-breadth?

   Heaven will be continuous touch with God. The very sense of being will
   in itself be bliss. For the sense of true life, there must be actual,
   conscious contact with the source of the life; therefore mere life--in
   itself, in its very essence good--good as the life of God which is our
   life--must be such bliss as, I think, will need the mitigation of the
   loftiest joys of communion with our blessed fellows; the mitigation of
   art in every shape, and of all combinations of arts; the mitigation of
   countless services to the incomplete, and hard toil for those who do
   not yet know their neighbour or their Father. The bliss of pure being
   will, I say, need these mitigations to render the intensity of it
   endurable by heart and brain.

   To those who care only for things, and not for the souls of them, for
   the truth, the reality of them, the prospect of inheriting light can
   have nothing attractive, and for their comfort--how false a
   comfort!--they may rest assured there is no danger of their being
   required to take up their inheritance at present. Perhaps they will be
   left to go on sucking things dry, constantly missing the loveliness of
   them, until they come at last to loathe the lovely husks, turned to
   ugliness in their false imaginations. Loving but the body of Truth,
   even here they come to call it a lie, and break out in maudlin moaning
   over the illusions of life. The soul of Truth they have lost, because
   they never loved her. What may they not have to pass through, what
   purifying fires, before they can even behold her!

   The notions of Christians, so called, concerning the state into which
   they suppose their friends to have entered, and which they speak of as
   a place of blessedness, are yet such as to justify the bitterness of
   their lamentation over them, and the heathenish doubt whether they
   shall know them again. Verily it were a wonder if they did! After a
   year or two of such a fate, they might well be unrecognizable! One is
   almost ashamed of writing about such follies. The nirvana is grandeur
   contrasted with their heaven. The early Christians might now and then
   plague Paul with a foolish question, the answer to which plagues us to
   this day; but was there ever one of them doubted he was going to find
   his friends again? It is a mere form of Protean unbelief. They believe,
   they say, that God is love; but they cannot quite believe that he does
   not make the love in which we are most like him, either a mockery or a
   torture. Little would any promise of heaven be to me if I might not
   hope to say, I am sorry; forgive me; let what I did in anger or in
   coldness be nothing, in the name of God and Jesus!' Many such words
   will pass, many a self-humiliation have place. The man or woman who is
   not ready to confess, who is not ready to pour out a heartful of
   regrets--can such a one be an inheritor of the light? It is the joy of
   a true heart of an heir of light, of a child of that God who loves an
   open soul--the joy of any man who hates the wrong the more because he
   has done it, to say, I was wrong; I am sorry.' Oh, the sweet winds of
   repentance and reconciliation and atonement, that will blow from garden
   to garden of God, in the tender twilights of his kingdom! Whatever the
   place be like, one thing is certain, that there will be endless,
   infinite atonement, ever-growing love. Certain too it is that whatever
   the divinely human heart desires, it shall not desire in vain. The
   light which is God, and which is our inheritance because we are the
   children of God, insures these things. For the heart which desires is
   made thus to desire. God is; let the earth be glad, and the heaven, and
   the heaven of heavens! Whatever a father can do to make his children
   blessed, that will God do for his children. Let us, then, live in
   continual expectation, looking for the good things that God will give
   to men, being their father and their everlasting saviour. If the things
   I have here come from him, and are so plainly but a beginning, shall I
   not take them as an earnest of the better to follow? How else can I
   regard them? For never, in the midst of the good things of this lovely
   world, have I felt quite at home in it. Never has it shown me things
   lovely or grand enough to satisfy me. It is not all I should like for a
   place to live in. It may be that my unsatisfaction comes from not
   having eyes open enough, or keen enough, to see and understand what he
   has given; but it matters little whether the cause lie in the world or
   in myself, both being incomplete: God is, and all is well. All that is
   needed to set the world right enough for me--and no empyrean heaven
   could be right for me without it--is, that I care for God as he cares
   for me; that my will and desires keep time and harmony with his music;
   that I have no thought that springs from myself apart from him; that my
   individuality have the freedom that belongs to it as born of his
   individuality, and be in no slavery to my body, or my ancestry, or my
   prejudices, or any impulse whatever from region unknown; that I be free
   by obedience to the law of my being, the live and live-making will by
   which life is life, and my life is myself. What springs from myself and
   not from God, is evil; it is a perversion of something of God's.
   Whatever is not of faith is sin; it is a stream cut off--a stream that
   cuts itself off from its source, and thinks to run on without it. But
   light is my inheritance through him whose life is the light of men, to
   wake in them the life of their father in heaven. Loved be the Lord who
   in himself generated that life which is the light of men!

   END OF THE THIRD SERIES.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Psalms

   [1]62:12

   Matthew

   [2]9:30   [3]10:25   [4]10:26

   Mark

   [5]1:43   [6]1:43   [7]4:22   [8]14:5

   Luke

   [9]8:16   [10]12:2   [11]12:2

   John

   [12]1:3   [13]1:4   [14]3:19   [15]5:37   [16]5:38   [17]8:32
   [18]8:34-36   [19]9:34   [20]11:33   [21]14:6   [22]18:37

   2 Corinthians

   [23]3:18

   Philippians

   [24]3:8   [25]3:9

   Colossians

   [26]1:12

   1 John

   [27]1:5
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Psalms

   [28]62:12

   Matthew

   [29]10:26

   Luke

   [30]12:2

   John

   [31]1:3   [32]1:4   [33]3:19   [34]5:37   [35]5:38   [36]8:32
   [37]8:34-36   [38]11:33   [39]14:6   [40]18:37

   2 Corinthians

   [41]3:18

   Philippians

   [42]3:8   [43]3:9

   Colossians

   [44]1:12

   1 John

   [45]1:5
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#viii-p1.1
   2. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#x-p2.2
   3. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xii-p4.4
   4. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xii-p1.1
   5. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#x-p2.1
   6. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#x-p5.1
   7. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xii-p4.1
   8. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#x-p3.1
   9. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xii-p4.2
  10. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xii-p1.2
  11. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xii-p4.3
  12. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#ii-p1.1
  13. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#ii-p1.1
  14. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#ix-p2.1
  15. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#iii-p1.1
  16. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#iii-p1.1
  17. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#vi-p1.1
  18. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#vi-p1.1
  19. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#x-p5.2
  20. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#x-p1.1
  21. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#v-p1.1
  22. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#vii-p1.1
  23. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#iv-p1.1
  24. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xi-p1.1
  25. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xi-p1.1
  26. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xiii-p1.1
  27. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#ix-p1.1
  28. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#viii-p0.1
  29. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xii-p0.1
  30. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xii-p0.1
  31. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#ii-p0.1
  32. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#ii-p0.1
  33. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#ix-p0.1
  34. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#iii-p0.1
  35. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#iii-p0.1
  36. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#vi-p0.1
  37. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#vi-p0.1
  38. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#x-p0.1
  39. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#v-p0.1
  40. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#vii-p0.1
  41. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#iv-p0.1
  42. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xi-p0.1
  43. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xi-p0.1
  44. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#xiii-p0.1
  45. file:///ccel/m/macdonald/unspoken3/cache/unspoken3.html3#ix-p0.1
