     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Way to Christ
      Creator(s): Boehme, Jakob (1575-1624)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Mysticism; Proofed
     __________________________________________________________________

by Jacob Behmen (Jakob Boehme) 1575-1624,

The Teutonic Theosopher

SHOWING HOW MAN SHOULD STIR HIMSELF UP IN MIND AND WILL AND WHAT HIS EARNEST
CONSIDERATION AND PURPOSE SHOULD BE

   How Man must stir himself in Mind and Will; and what his Consideration
   and earnest Purpose must be, when he will perform powerful and
   effectual Repentance: And with what Mind he must appear before God,
   when he would ask, so as to obtain, Remission of his Sins.

   John 3.3-8 Jesus said unto Nicodemus, Verily, verily I say unto thee,
   Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Nicodemus
   saith unto Him, How can a Man be born when he is old? Can he enter the
   second Time into his Mother's Womb and be born? Jesus answered, Verily,
   verily, I say unto thee, Except a Man be born of Water, and of the
   Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. That which is born of
   the Flesh is Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.
   Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The Wind
   bloweth where it listeth and thou hearest the Sound thereof, but canst
   not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: So is every one that
   is born of the Spirit.

   Matt 16.26 What is a Man profited if he should gain the whole World,
   and lose his own Soul? or What shall a Man give in exchange for his
   Soul?

   Brought forth in the 1600 s by a humble shoemaker; translated into
   English over 100 years later; suppressed and hidden away until recently
   in theological archives around the world... a worthy personal study not
   just for academics but for all those who are spiritually grounded in
   the WORD, who are learning to hear the Lord, and who hunger for more.

   These writings from out of the Past are in the Public Domain and may be
   freely shared, photocopied, reproduced, faxed or transmitted in any way
   by any means.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dear Reader,

   If thou wilt use these Words aright, and art in good Earnest, thou
   shalt certainly find the Benefit thereof. But I desire thou mayest be
   warned, if thou art not in Earnest, not to meddle with the dear Names
   of God, in and by which the most High Holiness is invoked, moved, and
   powerfully desired, lest they kindle the Anger of God in thy Soul. For
   we must not abuse the Holy Names of God. This little Book is only for
   those that would fain repent, and are in a Desire to begin. Such will
   find what Manner of Words therein, and whence they are born. Be you
   herewith commended to the Eternal Goodness and Mercy of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   When Man will enter upon Repentance, and with his Prayers turn to God,
   he should, before he beginneth to pray, seriously consider the State of
   his own Soul. How it is wholly and altogether turned away from God,
   become faithless to Him, and only bent upon this temporary, frail, and
   earthly Life; bearing no sincere Love towards God and its Neighbor, but
   wholly lusting and walking contrary to the Commandments of God, and
   seeking itself only, in the temporal and transitory Lusts of the Flesh.

   2. In the next Place, he should consider that all this is an utter
   Enmity against God, which Satan hath raised and wrought in him, by his
   Deceit in our first Parents; for which Abomination's Sake we must
   suffer Death, and undergo Corruption with our Bodies.

   3. He should consider the three horrible Chains wherewith our Souls are
   fast bound during the Time of this earthly Life. -- The First is the
   severe Anger of God, the Abyss, and dark World, which is the Center,
   Root, or constituent Principle of the Soul's Life. The Second is the
   Desire of the Devil against the Soul, whereby he continually sifteth
   and tempteth it, and without Intermission striveth to throw it from the
   Truth of God into his own evil Nature and Element, viz. into Pride,
   Covetousness, Envy, and Anger; and with his Desire, bloweth up and
   kindleth those evil Properties in the Soul, whereby its Will turneth
   away from God, and entereth into SELF. The Third and most hurtful Chain
   of all, wherewith the poor Soul is tied, is the corrupt and altogether
   vain, earthly, and mortal Flesh and Blood, full of evil Desires and
   Inclinations. Here he must consider that he lies close Prisoner with
   Soul and Body in the Mire of Sins, in the Anger of God, in the Jaws of
   Hell; that the Anger of God burneth in him in Soul and Body, and that
   he is that very loathsome Keeper of Swine, who hath spent and consumed
   his Father's Inheritance, namely, the precious Love and Mercy of God,
   with the fatted Swine of the Devil in earthly Pleasures, and hath not
   kept the dear Covenant and Atonement of the innocent Death and Passion
   of Jesus Christ; which Covenant God of mere Grace hath given or put
   into our Humanity, and reconciled us in Him. He must also consider that
   he hath totally forgotten the Covenant of Holy Baptism, in which he had
   promised to be faithful and true to his Saviour, and so wholly defiled
   and obscured his Righteousness with Sin, (which Righteousness, God had
   freely bestowed upon him in Christ), that he now stands before the Face
   of God, with the fair Garment of Christ's Innocency which he hath
   defiled, as a dirty, ragged, and patched Keeper of Swine, that hath
   continually eaten the Husks of Vanity with the Devil's Swine, and is
   not worthy to be called a Son of the Father, and Member of Christ.

   4. He should earnestly consider that wrathful Death awaiteth him every
   Hour and Moment, and will lay hold on him in his Sins, in his Garment
   of a Swine-Herd, and throw him into the Pit of Hell as a forsworn
   Person and Breaker of Faith, who ought to be reserved in the dark
   Dungeon of Death to the Judgement of God.

   5. He should consider the earnest and severe Day of God's Final
   Judgement, when he shall be presented living with his Abominations
   before God's Tribunal. That all those whom he hath here offended or
   injured by Words and Works, and caused to do Evil, (so that by his
   Instigation or Compulsion they also have committed Evil), shall come in
   against him, cursing him before the Eyes of Christ and of all Holy
   Angels and Men. That there he shall stand in great Shame and Ignominy,
   and also in great Terror and Desperation, and that it shall forever
   grieve him to reflect that he hath fooled away so glorious and eternal
   a State of Salvation and Happiness, for the Pleasure of so short a
   Time; and that he had not taken care in that short Time to secure to
   himself a Share in the Communion of the Saints, and so to have enjoyed
   with them Eternal Light, and Divine Glory.

   6. He must consider that the ungodly Man has lost his Noble Image - God
   having created him in and for His Image or creaturely Representation -
   and has gotten instead thereof a deformed or monstrous Shape, like a
   hellish Worm or ugly Beast. Wherein he is an enemy to God, to Heaven,
   and to all Holy Angels and Men, and that his Communion is, and will be
   forever, with the Devils and hellish Worms in horrible Darkness.

   7. He must earnestly consider the eternal Punishment and Torture of the
   Damned; how that in eternal Horror they shall suffer Torments in their
   Abominations which they had committed here, and may never see the Land
   of the Saints to all Eternity, nor get any Ease or Refreshment, as
   appears by the Example of the Beggar and the rich Man. All this a Man
   must earnestly and seriously consider, and remember also that God had
   originally created him in such a fair and glorious Image, even in His
   own Likeness, in which He, Himself, would dwell. That He created him
   out of His Goodness, for Man's own eternal Bliss and Glory, to the End
   that he might dwell with the Holy Angels and Children of God in great
   Happiness, Power, and Glory; in the Eternal Light; in the praiseful and
   melodious Harmony of the Angelical and Divine Kingdom of Joy. Where he
   should rejoice continually with the Children of God, without Fear of
   any End. Where no evil Thoughts could touch him, neither Care nor
   Trouble, neither Heat nor Cold. Where no Night is known; where there is
   no Day or limited Time any more, but an everlasting Blessedness,
   wherein Soul and Body tremble for Joy. And where he, himself, should
   rejoice at the infinite Wonders and Virtues appearing in the Brightness
   of Colors, and the Variety of Splendor opened and displayed by the
   Omnipotent Powers and Glories of God, upon the new crystalline Earth,
   which shall be as Transparent Glass. And that he doth so willfully lose
   all this Eternal Glory and Happiness for the Sake of so short and poor
   a Time, which even in this State of Vanity and Corruption, in the evil
   Life of the voluptuous Flesh, is full of Misery, Fear, and utter
   Vexation; and wherein it goeth with the Wicked as with the Righteous,
   as the one must die, so must the other; only the Death of the Saints is
   an Entrance into the Eternal Rest, while the Death of the Wicked is an
   Introduction into the eternal Anguish.

   8. He must consider the Course of this World, that all Things in it are
   but a Play, wherewith he spends his Time in such Unquietness; and that
   it goes with the Rich and Mighty as with the Poor and the Beggar. That
   all of us equally live and move in the four Elements; and that the
   hard-earned Morsel of the Poor is as relishing and savoury to him in
   his Labour, as the Dainties of the Rich are to him in his Cares. Also,
   that all of us subsist by one Breath, and that the rich Man hath
   nothing but the Pleasures of the Palate and the Lust of the Eye, for a
   little while more than his poor Neighbor, for the End of both is the
   Same. Yet for this short-lived Lust's Sake, many foolishly forego so
   inconceivable a Happiness, and bring themselves into such extreme and
   eternal Misery. In the deep Consideration of these weighty Truths, Man
   shall come to feel in his Heart and Mind, especially if he at the same
   Time represents and sets before his own Eyes his own End, a hearty
   Sighing and Longing after the Mercy of God, and will begin to bewail
   his committed Sins; and to be sorry he has spent his Days so ill, and
   not observed or considered that he stands in this World as in a Field,
   in the growing to be a Fruit either in the Love or in the Anger of God.
   He will then first begin to find in himself that he has not yet labored
   at all in the Vineyard of Christ, but that he is a dry fruitless Branch
   of the Vine. And thus in many a one, whom the Spirit of Christ touches
   in such a Consideration, there arises abundant Sorrow, Grief of Heart,
   and inward Lamentation over the Days of his Wickedness which he hath
   spent in Vanity, without any Working in the Vineyard of Christ. Such a
   Man, whom the Spirit of Christ thus brings into Sorrow and Repentance,
   so that his Heart is opened both to know and bewail his Sins, is very
   easily to be helped. He needs but to draw to himself the Promise of
   Christ, viz. That God willeth not the Death of a Sinner but that He
   wisheth them all to come unto Him, and He will refresh them; and, that
   there is great joy in Heaven for one Sinner that repenteth. Let such a
   one but lay hold on the Words of Christ and wrap himself up into His
   meritorious Passion and Death. But I will now speak to those who feel
   indeed in themselves a Desire to repent, and yet cannot come to
   acknowledge and bewail their committed Sins. The Flesh saying
   continually to the Soul, Stay a while, it is well enough; or it is Time
   enough tomorrow; and when tomorrow is come, then the Flesh says again,
   Tomorrow; the Soul in the meanwhile, fighting and fainting, conceiveth
   neither any true Sorrow for the Sins it hath committed nor any Comfort.
   Unto such a one, I say, I will write a Process or WAY, which I myself
   have gone, that he may know what he must do, and how it went with me,
   if peradventure he be inclined to enter into and pursue the same; and
   then he will come to understand what he shall find here afterwards
   written.
     __________________________________________________________________

   When any Man findeth in himself by the former or any other
   Considerations, pressed Home upon his Mind and Conscience, a Hunger or
   Desire to repent, and yet feeleth no true Sorrow in himself for his
   Sins which he hath committed, but only a Hunger or Desire of such
   Sorrow, so that the poor captive Soul continually sighs, fears, and
   must needs acknowledge itself guilty of Sins before the Judgement of
   God. Such a one, I say, can take no better Course than this, namely, to
   wrap up his Senses, Mind, and Reason together, and make to himself
   instantly, as soon as ever he perceiveth in himself the Desire to
   repent, a mighty strong Purpose and Resolution that he will that very
   Hour, nay, that very Minute, immediately enter into Repentance, and go
   forth from his wicked Way, and not at all regard the Power and Respect
   of the World. Yea, and if it should be required, would forsake and
   disesteem all Things for true Repentance Sake; and never depart from
   that Resolution again, though he should be made the Fool and Scorn of
   all the World for it. But that with the full Bent and Strength of his
   Mind, he will go forth from the Beauty and Pleasure of the World, and
   patiently enter into the Passion and Death of Christ in and under the
   Cross, and set all his Hope and Confidence upon the Life to come. That
   even now in Righteousness and Truth he will enter into the Vineyard of
   Christ, and do the Will of God. That in the Spirit and Will of Christ
   he will begin and finish all his Actions in this World, and for the
   Sake of Christ's Word and Promise, which holds forth to us a Heavenly
   Reward, willingly take up and bear every Adversity and Cross so that he
   may be but admitted into the Communion or Fellowship of the Children of
   Christ and in the Blood of the Lamb, Jesus Christ, be incorporated and
   united unto His Humanity.

   He must firmly imagine to himself, and wholly wrap up his Soul in this
   Persuasion, that in his Purpose he shall obtain the Love of God in
   Christ Jesus, and that God will give unto him according to His faithful
   promise, that Noble Pledge, the Holy Ghost, for an Earnest; that, in
   the Humanity of Christ, as to the Heavenly Substance, he shall be born
   again in himself, and that the Spirit of Christ will renew his Mind
   with His Love and Power, and strengthen his weak Faith. Also that in
   his Divine Hunger he shall get the Flesh and Blood of Christ for Food
   and Drink, in the Desire of his Soul, which hungereth and thirsteth
   after It as its proper Nutriment; and with the Thirst of the Soul drink
   the Water of Eternal Life out of the Sweet Fountain of Jesus Christ, as
   Christ's most true and steadfast Promise is.

   He must also wholly and firmly imagine to himself, and set before him,
   the great Love of God. That God willeth not the Death of a Sinner, but
   that he repent and believe; that Christ calleth poor Sinners very
   kindly and graciously to Himself, and will refresh them; that God hath
   sent His Son into the World, to seek and save that which is lost, viz.
   the poor repentant and returning Sinner; and that for the poor Sinner's
   Sake He hath given His Life unto Death, and died for him in our
   Humanity which He took upon Him.

   Furthermore, he must firmly persuade himself that God in Christ Jesus
   will much more readily hear him and receive him to Grace, than he will
   readily come; and that God in the Love of Christ, in the most dear and
   precious Name JESUS, cannot will any Evil. That there is no angry
   Countenance at all in this Name, but that It is the highest and deepest
   Love and Faithfulness, the greatest Sweetness of the Deity, in the
   great Name JEHOVAH, which He has manifested in our Humanity, corrupted
   as it is, and perished as to the Heavenly Part, which in Paradise
   disappeared through Sin. And He was therefore moved in His Heart to
   flow into us with His Sweet Love, that the Anger of His Father, which
   was kindled in us, might be quenched and turned into Love by It. All
   which was done for the poor Sinner's Sake, that he might obtain an open
   Gate of Grace again.

   In this Consideration he must firmly imagine to himself that this very
   Hour and Instant he standeth before the Face of the Holy Trinity, and
   that God is really present within and without him, as the Holy
   Scripture witnesseth, saying, Am not I He that filleth all Things? And
   in another Place, The Word is near thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy
   Heart. Also, We will come unto you and make Our abode with you. And,
   Behold, I am with you always, even to the End of the World. And again,
   The Kingdom of God is within you.

   Thus he must firmly know and believe, that with, and in his Interior he
   standeth really before the Face of Jesus Christ, even before the Holy
   Deity, on whom his Soul hath turned its Back; and must resolve that he
   will this very Hour turn the Eyes and Desire of his Soul towards God
   again, and with the poor, lost, and returning Son, come to the Father.
   He must, with the Eyes of his Mind cast down in Fear and deepest
   Humility, begin to confess his Sins and Unworthiness before the Face of
   God in manner following:

A short Form of Confession before the Face of God

   Everyone, as his Case and Necessity requires, may order and enlarge
   this Confession as the Holy Ghost shall teach him. I will only set down
   a short Direction.

   O Thou great unsearchable GOD, LORD of all Things; Thou, Who in Christ
   Jesus, of great Love towards us, hath manifested Thyself with Thy holy
   Substance in our Humanity: I, poor unworthy sinful Wretch, come before
   Thy Presence, which Thou hast manifested in the Humanity of Jesus
   Christ, though I am not worthy to lift up mine Eyes to Thee,
   acknowledging and confessing before Thee, that I am guilty of
   Unfaithfulness, and Breaking off from Thy great Love and Grace, which
   Thou hast freely bestowed upon us. I have left the Covenant, which of
   mere Grace Thou hast made with me in Baptism, in which Thou didst
   receive me to be a Child and Heir of Eternal Life, and I have brought
   my Desire into the Vanity of this World, and defiled by Soul therewith,
   and made it altogether beastial and earthly. So that my Soul knoweth
   not itself, because of the Mire of Sin; but accounteth itself a strange
   Child before Thy Face, not worthy to desire Thy Grace. I lie in the
   Guilt and Filth of Sin, and the Vanity of my corrupt Flesh, up to the
   very Lips of my Soul, and have but a small Spark of the living Breath
   left in me, which desireth Thy Grace. I am dead in Sin and Corruption,
   so that in this woeful Condition I dare not lift up mine Eyes to Thee.

   O God in Christ Jesus, Thou who for poor Sinners' Sakes didst become
   Man to help them, to Thee I complain; to Thee I have yet a Spark of
   Refuge in my Soul. I have not regarded Thy purchased Inheritance, which
   Thou hast purchased for us poor Men, by Thy bitter Death, but have made
   myself a Partaker of the Heritage of Vanity, in the Anger of my Father
   in the Curse of the Earth, and am ensnared in Sin, and half dead as to
   Thy Kingdom. I lie in Feebleness as to Thy Strength, and the wrathful
   Death waiteth for me. The Devil hath poisoned me, so that I know not my
   Saviour: I am become a wild Branch on Thy Tree, and have consumed mine
   Inheritance which is in Thee, with the Devil's Swine. What shall I say
   before Thee, who am not worthy of Thy Grace? I lie in the Sleep of
   Death which hath captivated me, and am fast Bound with three strong
   Chains. O Thou Breaker-through-Death, assist me, I beseech Thee; I
   cannot, I am able to do nothing! I am dead in myself, and have no
   Strength before Thee, neither dare I, for great Shame, lift up mine
   Eyes unto Thee. For I am the defiled Keeper of Swine, and have spent
   mine Inheritance with the false adulterous Whore of Vanity in the Lusts
   of the Flesh; I have sought myself in my own Lust, and not Thee. Now in
   myself I am become a Fool; I am naked and bare; my Shame stands before
   mine Eyes; I cannot hide it; Thy Judgement waiteth for me. What shall I
   say before Thee, Who art the Judge of all the World? I have nothing to
   bring before Thee. - Here I stand naked and bare in Thy Presence, and
   fall down before Thy Face bewailing my Misery, and fly to Thy great
   Mercy, though I am not worthy of It; yet receive me but in Thy Death,
   and let me but die from my Death in Thine. Cast me down, I pray Thee,
   to the Ground in my innate SELF, and kill this SELF of mine through Thy
   Death, that I may live no more to mySELF, seeing I in mySELF work
   nothing but Sin. Therefore, I pray Thee, cast down to the Ground this
   wicked Beast, which is full of false Deceit and SELF-Desire, and
   deliver this poor Soul of mine from its heavy Bonds.

   O merciful God, it is owing to Thy Love and Long-Suffering that I lie
   not already in Hell. I yield my SELF, with my whole Will, Senses and
   Mind, unto Thy Grace, and fly to Thy Mercy. I call upon Thee through
   Thy Death, from that small Spark of Life in me encompassed with Death
   and Hell, which open their Throat against me, and would wholly swallow
   me up in Death; upon Thee I call, Who hast promised that Thou wilt not
   quench the smoking Flax. I have no other Way to Thee but by Thy Own
   bitter Death and Passion, because Thou hast made our Death to be Life
   by Thy Humanity, and broken the Chains of Death, and therefore I sink
   the Desire of my Soul down into Thy Death, into the Gate of Thy Death,
   which Thou hast broke open.

   O Thou great Fountain of the Love of God, I beseech Thee, help me, that
   I may die from my Vanity and Sin in the Death of my Redeemer, Jesus
   Christ.

   O Thou Breath of the great Love of God, quicken, I beseech Thee, my
   weak Breath in me, that it may begin to hunger and thirst after Thee. O
   Lord Jesus, Thou sweet Strength, I beseech Thee give my Soul to drink
   of Thy Fountain of Grace, Thy sweet Water of Eternal Life, that it may
   awake from Death and thirst after Thee. O how extreme fainting I am for
   Want of Thy Strength! O merciful God, do Thou turn me, I beseech Thee;
   I cannot turn myself. O Thou Vanquisher of Death, help me, I pray Thee,
   to wrestle. How fast doth the Enemy hold me with his three Chains, and
   will not suffer the Desire of my Soul to come before Thee! I beseech
   Thee, come and take the Desire of my Soul into Thyself. Be Thou my
   Drawing to the Father, and deliver me from the Devil's Bonds! Look not
   upon my Deformity in standing naked before Thee, having lost Thy
   Garment! I pray Thee, do but Thou clothe that Breath which yet liveth
   in me and panteth after Thy Grace; and so shall I yet see Thy
   Salvation.

   O Thou deep Love, I pray Thee take the Desire of my Soul into Thee;
   bring it forth out of the Bonds of Death through Thy Death, in Thy
   Resurrection, into Thee. O quicken me in Thy Strength, that my Desire
   and Will may begin to spring up and flourish anew. O Thou Vanquisher of
   Death and of the Wrath of God, do Thou overcome SELF in me; break its
   Will and bruise my Soul, that it may fear before Thee, and be ashamed
   of its OWN Will before Thy Judgement, and that it may be ever obedient
   to Thee as an Instrument of Thine. Subdue it in the Bonds of Death;
   take away its Power, that it may will nothing without Thee.

   O God, the Holy Ghost in Christ my Saviour, teach me, I pray Thee, what
   I shall do, that I may turn to Thee. O draw me in Christ to the Father,
   and help me, that now and from henceforward I may go forth from Sin and
   Vanity, and never any more enter into them again. Stir up in me a true
   Sorrow for the Sins I have committed. O keep me in Thy Bonds; and let
   me not loose from Thee, lest the Devil sift me in my wicked Flesh and
   Blood, and bring me again into the Death of Death. O enlighten Thou my
   Spirit, that I may see the Divine Path, and walk in it continually. O
   take that away from me, which always turneth me away from Thee; and
   give me that which always turneth me to Thee; take me wholly from
   MySELF and give me wholly to THYself. O let me begin nothing, let me
   will, think, and do nothing without Thee. O Lord, how long! Indeed I am
   not worthy of that which I desire of Thee, I pray Thee let the Desire
   of my Soul dwell but in the Gates of Thy Courts; make it but a Servant
   of Thy Servants. O preserve it from that horrible Pit, wherein there is
   no Comfort or Refreshment.

   O God in Christ Jesus! I am blind in my SELF, and know not myself
   because of Vanity. Thou art hidden from me in my Blindness, and yet
   Thou art near unto me; but Thy Wrath which my Desire hath awakened in
   me, hath made me dark. O take but the Desire of my Soul to Thee; prove
   it, O Lord, and bruise it, that my Soul may obtain a Ray of Thy Sweet
   Grace.

   I lie before Thee as a dying Man, whose Life is passing from his Lips,
   as a small Spark going out; kindle it, O Lord, and raise up the Breath
   of my Soul before Thee. Lord, I wait for Thy Promise, which Thou hast
   made, saying, As I live, I will not the Death of a Sinner, but that he
   shall turn and live. I sink myself down into the Death of my Redeemer,
   Jesus Christ, and wait for Thee, whose Word is Truth and Life. Amen.

   In this, or the like Manner, every one may confess his Sins, as he
   himself findeth on examining his Conscience, what Sins he hath brought
   his Soul into. Yet if his Purpose be truly earnest, to use a Form is
   needless, for the Spirit of God, which at that Instant is in the Will
   of the Mind, will Itself make the Prayer for him, in his Interior. For
   it is the Spirit of God, which in a true earnest Desire worketh
   Repentance, and intercedeth for the Soul before God, through the Death
   of Christ.

   But I will not hide from the beloved Reader, who hath a True Christian
   Intent, how it commonly goeth with those who are in such a firm Purpose
   and Resolution; though, indeed, it goeth otherwise with one than with
   another, according as his Purpose is more or less earnest and strong.
   For the Spirit of God is not bound, but useth diverse Ways or Processes
   accordingly as He knoweth to be fittest for every one. Yet a Soldier
   who hath been in the Wars can tell how to fight and instruct another
   that may happen to be in the like Condition.

   Now when such a Heart with strong Resolution and Purpose doth thus come
   before God, and enter into Repentance, it happeneth to it as to the
   Canaanitish Woman; that is, it seems as if God would not hear. The
   Heart remaineth without Comfort as its Sins, Follies, and Neglects also
   present themselves to it, and make it feel itself unworthy of any. The
   Mind is as it were speechless; the Soul groaneth in the Deep; the Heart
   receiveth nothing, nor can it so much as pour forth its Confession
   before God; but it is as if the Heart and Soul were quite shut up. The
   Soul would fain go towards God, but the Flesh keepeth it captive: The
   Devil too shuteth it up strongly, and representeth to it the Way of
   Vanity again, and tickleth it with the Lust of the Flesh, and saith
   inwardly to it, Stay a while, do this or that first; get a Sufficiency
   of Money or Goods beforehand, that thou mayest not stand in Need of the
   World, and afterwards enter into Repentance and a Holy Life; it will be
   Time enough then.

   O how many Hundreds perish in such a Beginning, if they go back again
   into Vanity; and become as young Grafts broken off by the Wind, or
   withered by the Heat!

   Beloved Soul, mark: If thou wilt be a Champion in thy Saviour Christ
   against Death and Hell, and wouldst have thy young Graft grow, and
   become a Tree in the Kingdom of Christ, thou must go on, and stand fast
   in thy first earnest Purpose. It is as much as thy paternal Inheritance
   is worth, and thy Body and Soul too, whether thou, becomest an Angel in
   God, or a Devil in Hell. If thou wilt be crowned, thou must fight; thou
   must overcome in Christ, and not yield to the Devil. Thy Purpose must
   stand firm, thou must not prefer temporal Honor and Goods before It.
   When the Spirit of the Flesh says, Stay a while, it is not convenient
   yet; then the Soul must say, Now is the Time for me to go back again
   into my Native Country, out of which my Father, Adam, hath brought me.
   No Creature shall keep me back, and though thou earthly Body shouldest
   thereby decay and perish, yet I will now enter with my Will and whole
   Desire, into the Rose-Garden of my Redeemer, Jesus Christ; through His
   Suffering and Death into Him, and in the Death of Christ subdue thee,
   thou earthly Body, that hast swallowed up my Pearl from me, which God
   gave to my Father, Adam in Paradise. I will break the Will of thy
   Voluptuousness, which is in Vanity, and bind thee as a mad Dog with the
   Chain of my earnest Purpose; and though hereby thou shouldest become a
   Fool in the Account of all Men, yet thou must and shalt obey the firm
   Resolve of my Soul. Nothing shall unloose thee from this Chain, but the
   temporal Death. Whereunto God and his Strength help me.

   A short Direction how the poor Soul must come before God again, and how
   it must fight for the Noble Garland; what Kind of Weapons it must use,
   if it will go to War against God's Anger, against the Devil, the World
   and Sin, against Flesh and Blood, against the Influence of the Stars
   and Elements, and all its other Enemies.

   BELOVED Soul, there is Earnestness required to do this, and not a bare
   Recital of Words only! No, the earnest resolved Will must drive on this
   Work, else nothing will be effected. For if the Soul will obtain the
   triumphant Garland of Christ from the noble Sophia or Divine Wisdom, it
   must wooe Her for it in great Desire of Love. It must entreat Her in
   Her most Holy Name for It, and come before Her in most modest Humility,
   and not like a lustful Bull or a wanton Venus. For so long as any are
   such, they must not seek these Things; for they shall not obtain them,
   and though something should be obtained by those who are in such an
   impure State, it would be no more than a Glimpse of the true Glory. But
   a chaste and modest Mind may prevail so far as to have the Soul in its
   noble Image, which died in Adam, quickened in the Heavenly Corporality
   as to the inward Ground, and the precious Garland set upon it. Yet if
   this should come to pass, It is taken off again from the Soul, and laid
   by, as a Crown useth to be, after a King is once crowned with it; it is
   then laid by and kept. So it cometh to pass also with the Heavenly
   Garland or Gift. It is taken from the Soul again, because the Soul is
   yet encompassed with the House of Sin; so that if it should unhappily
   fall again, its Crown might not be defiled. This is spoken plainly
   enough for the Children that know and have tried these Things: None of
   the Wicked are worthy to know more about them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   A Man must bring a serious Mind to this Work. He must come before God
   with sincere Earnestness, deep Humility, and hearty Sorrow for his
   Sins, and with a deliberate and firm Resolution, not to enter any more
   into the old broad Way of Vanity. And though the whole World should
   account him a Fool, and he should lose both Honor and Goods, nay, and
   the temporal Life also, for the Sake of his new Choice, yet he must
   resolve firmly to abide by it.

   If ever he will obtain the Love and Marriage of the noble Sophia, he
   must make such a Vow as this in his Purpose and Mind. For Christ
   Himself saith, He that forsaketh not Wife and Children, Brethren and
   Sisters, Money and Goods, and all that he hath, and even his earthly
   Life also, to follow Me, is not worthy of Me. Here Christ meaneth the
   Mind of the Soul, so that if there were any Thing that would keep the
   Mind back from It, though it should have never so fair and glorious a
   Pretence or Show in this World, the Mind must not regard it at all, but
   rather part with it than with the Love of the noble Virgin Sophia, in
   the Bud and Blossom of Christ, in His tender Humanity in us as to the
   Heavenly Corporality. For this is the Flower in Sharon, the Rose in the
   Valley of Jericho, wherewith Solomon delighted himself, and termed it
   his dear Love, his chaste Virgin which he loved; as indeed all other
   Saints before and after him did; whosoever obtained Her, called Her his
   Pearl.

   After what Manner to pray for It, you may see by this short Direction
   following. The Work itself must be committed to the Holy Ghost; He
   formeth and frameth the Prayer for the Soul, in every Heart wherein He
   is sought.
     __________________________________________________________________

   I, a poor unworthy Creature, come before Thee, O Great and Holy God and
   lift up mine eyes to Thee. Though I am not worthy, yet Thy great Mercy,
   and Thy faithful Promise in the Word, have now encouraged me to lift
   the Eyes of the Desire of my Soul up to Thee. For my Soul hath now laid
   hold on the Word of Thy Promise, and received It into itself, and
   therewith cometh to Thee. And though it is but a strange Child which
   was disobedient unto Thee, yet now it desireth to be obedient; and doth
   now infold itself with its Desire into that Word which became Man,
   which became Flesh and Blood, and hath broken Sin and Death in my
   Humanity. Which hath changed the Anger of God into Love unto the Soul,
   hath deprived Death of his Power, and Hell of its Victory over Soul and
   Body; and hath opened a Gate for my Soul to the clear Face of Thy
   Strength and Power. O Great and Most Holy God, I have brought the
   Hunger and Desire of my Soul into this most Holy Word, and now I come
   before Thee, and in my Hunger call unto Thee, Thou living Fountain,
   through Thy Word which became Flesh and Blood. Thy Word being made the
   Life in our Flesh, I receive It firmly into the Desire of my Soul as my
   own Life; and I pierce into Thee with the Desire of my Soul through the
   Word in the Flesh of Christ; through His holy Conception in the Virgin
   Mary, His Incarnation, His holy Nativity, His Baptism in the Jordan,
   His Temptation in the Wilderness - where He overcame the Kingdom of the
   Devil and this World in the Humanity. Through all His Miracles, which
   He did on Earth; through His Reproach and Ignominy, His innocent Death
   and Passion, the Shedding of His Blood, wherein God's Anger in Soul and
   Flesh was drowned. Through His Rest in the Sepulchre, when He awaked
   our Father Adam out of his Sleep, who was fallen into a dead Sleep as
   to the Kingdom of Heaven. Through His Love, which pierced through the
   Anger and destroyed Hell in the Soul. Through His Resurrection from the
   Dead, His Ascension, the Sending of the Holy Spirit into our Soul and
   Spirit, and through all His Promises; one of which is, that Thou, O God
   the Father, wilt give the Holy Spirit to them that ask It, in the Name
   and through the Word which became Man.

   O Thou Life of my Flesh and of my Soul in Christ my Brother, I beseech
   Thee in the Hunger of my Soul, and entreat Thee with all my Powers,
   though they be weak, to give me what Thou hast promised me, and freely
   bestow upon me in my Saviour Jesus Christ, His Flesh for Food, and His
   Blood for Drink, to refresh my poor hungry Soul, that it may be
   quickened and strengthened in the Word which became Man, by which it
   may long and hunger after Thee aright.

   O Thou deepest Love in the most Sweet Name JESUS, give Thyself into the
   Desire of my Soul. For therefore Thou hast moved Thyself, and according
   to Thy great Sweetness manifested Thyself in the Human Nature, and
   called us to Thee, us that hunger and thirst after Thee, and hast
   promised us that Thou wilt refresh us. I now open the lips of my Soul
   to Thee, O Thou Sweet Truth, and though I am not worthy to desire it of
   Thy Holiness, yet I come to Thee through Thy bitter Passion and Death;
   Thou having sprinkled my Uncleanness with Thy Blood, and sanctified me
   in Thy Humanity, and made an open Gate for me through Thy Death, to Thy
   Sweet Love in Thy Blood. Through Thy five holy Wounds, from which Thou
   didst shed Thy Blood, I bring the Desire of my Soul into Thy Love.

   O Jesus Christ, thou Son of God and Man, I pray Thee receive into
   Thyself Thy purchased Inheritance, which Thy Father hath given Thee. I
   cry within me, that I may enter through Thy Holy Blood and Death into
   Thee. Open Thyself in me, that the Spirit of my Soul may reach Thee,
   and receive Thee into it. Lay hold on my Thirst in me with Thy Thirst;
   bring Thy Thirst after us Men, which Thou hadst upon the Cross, into my
   Thirst, and give me Thy Blood to drink in my Thirst. That my Death in
   me which holdeth me captive, may be drowned in the Blood of Thy Love,
   and that my extinguished or suppressed Image, which as to the Kingdom
   of Heaven disappeared in my Father Adam through Sin, may be made alive
   through Thy powerful Blood, and my Soul clothed with It again as with
   the new Body which dwelleth in Heaven. In which Image Thy Holy Power
   and Word that became Man dwelleth, which is the Temple of the Holy
   Spirit, Who dwelleth in us according to Thy Promise, saying We will
   come to you and make Our Abode with you.

   O Thou Great Love of Jesus Christ, I can do no more than sink my Desire
   into Thee; Thy Word which became Man, is Truth; since Thou hast bidden
   me come, now I come. Be it unto me according to Thy Word and Will.
   Amen.

A Warning to the Reader

   Beloved Reader, out of Love to thee, I will not conceal from thee what
   is here earnestly signified to me. If thou lovest the Vanity of the
   Flesh still, and art not in an earnest Purpose on the WAY to the new
   Birth or Regeneration, intending to become a New Man, then leave the
   above-written Words un-named; else they will turn to a Judgement of God
   in thee. Thou must not take the Holy Names in vain, thou art faithfully
   warned: They belong to the thirsty Soul. But if thy Soul be in earnest,
   it shall find by Experience what Words they are.

A Direction how the Soul must meet its Beloved, when She knocketh in its
Center, or Shut-Inner-Chamber

   Beloved Soul, if thou wilt be earnest without Intermission, thou shalt
   certainly obtain the Favor of a Kiss from the Noble Sophia (or Divine
   Wisdom) in the Holy Name JESUS; for She standeth ever before the Door
   of the Soul, knocking, and warning the Sinner of his wicked Way. Now if
   it once thus desireth Her Love, She is ready for it and kisseth it with
   the Beams of Her Sweet Love, from whence the Heart receiveth Joy. But
   She doth not presently lay Herself in the Marriage-Bed with the Soul,
   that is, She doth not presently awaken the extinguished Heavenly Image
   in Herself, which disappeared in Adam in Paradise. No, there might be
   Danger to Man in that; for if Adam and Lucifer fell, having it
   manifested in them, the same may easily happen to Man, who is still so
   strongly enthralled in Vanity.

   The Bond of thy Promise must be firm and steadfast. Before She will
   crown thee, thou must be tempted and tried: She taketh the Beams of Her
   Love from thee again, to see whether thou wilt prove faithful; also She
   letteth thee stand as it were aloof, and answereth thee not so much as
   with one Look of Her Love. For before She will crown thee, thou must be
   judged, that thou mayest taste the bitter Potion of Dregs, which thou
   hast filled for thyself in thine Abominations. Thou must come before
   the Gates of Hell first, and there show forth thy Victory for Her in
   Her Love, in that Strength wherewith She upheld thee in Opposition to
   the Devil's malign influence.

   Christ was tempted in the Wilderness; and if thou wilt put on Him, thou
   must go through His whole Progress or Journey, even from His
   Incarnation to His Ascension. And though thou art not able, nor
   required to do that which He hath done; yet thou must enter wholly into
   His Process, and therein die continually from the Corruption of the
   Soul. For the Virgin Sophia espouseth not Herself to the Soul, except
   in this Property, which springeth up in the Soul through the Death of
   Christ, as a new Plant standing in Heaven. The earthly Body cannot
   comprehend Her in this Life-time, for it must first die from the
   corruptible Vanity; but the Heavenly Image which disappeared in Adam,
   viz. the true Seed of the Woman, wherein God became Man, and into which
   He brought His living Seed, the Heavenly Substantiality, is capable of
   the Pearl, after the Manner wherein it came to pass in Mary, in the End
   or Fulfilling of the Covenant.

   Therefore take heed what thou doest. When thou hast made thy Promise,
   keep it, and then She will crown thee more readily than thou wouldst be
   crowned. But thou must be sure when the Tempter cometh to thee with the
   Pleasure, Beauty, and Glory of the World, that thy Mind reject it, and
   say, I must be a Servant and not a Master in the Vineyard of Christ; I
   am but a Steward of God in and over all that I have, and I must do with
   it as His Word teacheth me; my Heart must sit down with the simple and
   lowly, in the Dust, and be always humble. Whatsoever State and
   Condition thou art in, Humility must be in the Front, or else thou wilt
   not obtain the Noble Virgin in Marriage. The Free Will of thy Soul must
   stand the Brunt as a Champion; for if the Devil cannot prevail against
   the Soul with Vanity, nor catch it with that Bait, then he cometh with
   its Unworthiness and Catalogue of Sins. And there thou must fight hard,
   and the Merits of Christ must be set in the Front, or else the Creature
   cannot prevail against the Devil. For in this Conflict it goeth so
   terribly with many a poor Sinner, that outward Reason thinketh him to
   be distracted, or possessed by an evil Spirit. The Devil defendeth
   himself so horribly in some, especially if he hath had a great Fort of
   Prey in them, that he must be stoutly assaulted before he will depart
   and leave his Castle. In this kind of Combat, Heaven and Hell are
   fighting one against the other.

   Now if the Soul continue constant, and getteth the Victory over the
   Devil in all his Assaults, disesteeming all temporal Things for the
   Love of its Noble Sophia, then the precious Garland will be set upon it
   for a Token or Ensign of Victory.

   Here the Virgin, (which manifesteth Herself in the dear Name of JESUS
   CHRIST, the Treader upon the Serpent, God's Anointed) cometh to the
   Soul, and kisseth it with Her Sweetest Love in the Essence most
   inwardly, and impresseth Her Love into its Desire for a Token of
   Victory. And here Adam in his Heavenly Part riseth again from Death in
   Christ. Of which I cannot write; for there is no Pen in this World that
   can express it: It is the Wedding of the Lamb where the Noble Pearl is
   sown with very great Triumph; though in the beginning it be small as a
   Grain of Mustard-Seed, as Christ saith.

   Now when the Wedding is over, the Soul must take heed that this
   Pearl-Tree, or Tree of Faith spring and grow, as it hath promised the
   Virgin; for then the Devil will presently come with his furious Storm,
   the ungodly People, who will scoff at, contemn, and cry down this WAY
   for Madness; and then a Man must enter into the Process of Christ,
   under his Cross. Here it will appear indeed and in Truth, what Sort of
   a Christian he is. For he must suffer himself to be proclaimed a Fool
   and ungodly Wretch; nay, his greatest Friends, who favored him, or
   flattered him in the Lusts of the Flesh, will now be his Enemies, and
   though they know not why, will hate him. Thus it is that Christ hideth
   his Bride wholly under the Cross, that she may not be known in this
   World: The Devil also striveth that these Children may be hidden from
   the World, lest haply many such Branches should grow in the Garden
   which he supposeth to be his.

   This I have set down for the Information of the Christian-minded
   Reader, that he may know what to do, if the same should befall him.

A very earnest Prayer in Temptation

   Against God's Anger in the Conscience; and also against Flesh and
   Blood, when the Temptation cometh to the Soul, and wrestleth with it.

   Most Deep Love of God in Christ Jesus, leave me not in this Distress. I
   confess I am guilty of the Sins which now rise up in my Mind and
   Conscience; and if Thou forsake me, I must perish. But hast Thou not
   promised me in Thy Word, saying, If a Mother could forget her Child,
   which can hardly be, yet Thou wilt not forget me? Thou hast set me as a
   Sign in Thine Hands, which were pierced through with sharp Nails, and
   in Thy open Side whence Blood and Water gushed out. Poor Wretch that I
   am! I am caught in Thy Anger, and can in my Ability do nothing before
   Thee; I sink myself down into Thy Wounds and Death.

   O Great Mercy of God, I beseech Thee, deliver me from the Bonds of
   Satan. I have no Refuge in any Thing, but only in Thy Holy Wounds and
   Death! Into Thee I sink down in the Anguish of my Conscience; do with
   me what Thou wilt. In Thee I will now live or die, as pleaseth Thee;
   let me but die and perish in Thy Death; do but bury me into Thy Death,
   that the Anguish of Hell may not touch me. How can I excuse myself
   before Thee, that knoweth my Heart and Reins, and settest my Sins
   before mine Eyes? I am guilty of them, and yield myself unto Thy
   Judgement; accomplish Thy Judgement upon me, through the Death of my
   Redeemer Jesus Christ.

   I fly unto Thee, Thou Righteous Judge, through the Anguish of my
   redeemer Jesus Christ, when He did sweat the bloody Sweat on the Mount
   of Olives for my Sake, and was scourged by Pontius Pilate for me, and
   suffered a Crown of Thorns to be pressed upon His Head, so that His
   Blood came forth.

   O Righteous God, hast Thou not set Him in my Stead? He was innocent,
   but I guilty, for whom He suffered, wherefore should I despair under
   Thy Wrath? O blot out Thy Anger in me through His Anguish, Passion and
   Death; I give myself wholly into His Anguish, Passion and Death; I will
   stand still in His Anguish and Passion before Thee; do with me what
   Thou pleasest, only let me not depart from His Anguish. Thou hast
   freely given me His Anguish, and drowned Thy Wrath in Him: And though I
   have not accepted it, but am departed from Him and become faithless,
   yet Thou hast given me this precious Pledge in my Flesh and Blood. For
   He hath taken my Flesh and Soul upon His heavenly Flesh and Blood, and
   hath satisfied the Anger in my Flesh and Soul in Him, with His Heavenly
   Blood. Therefore receive me now in His Satisfaction, and put His
   Anguish, Passion and Death in Thy Wrath, which is kindled in me, and
   break Thy Judgement in me in the Blood of His Love.

   O Great Love! in the Blood and Death of Jesus Christ, I beseech Thee,
   break the strong Fort of Prey which the Devil hath made and built up in
   me, where he resisteth me in the WAY of Thy Grace. Drive him out of me,
   that he may not overcome me; for no one living can stand in Thy Sight,
   if Thou withdraw Thy Hand from him.

   O come, Thou Breaker-Through the Anger of God, destroy its Power, and
   help my poor Soul to fight and overcome it. O bring me into Victory,
   and uphold me in Thee; break in pieces its Seat in my Vanity, that is
   kindled in my Soul and Flesh. O mortify the Desire of my Vanity in
   Flesh and Blood, which the Devil hath now kindled by his false Desire,
   by hellish Anguish and Desperation. O quench it with Thy Water of
   Eternal Life, and bring my Anguish forth through Thy Death, I wholly
   sink myself down into Thee; and though Soul and Body should this hour
   faint and perish in Thy Wrath, yet I will not let Thee go. Though my
   Heart saith utterly, No, no, yet the Desire of my Soul shall hold fast
   on Thy Truth, which neither Death nor the Devil shall take away from
   me; for the Blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, cleanseth us from
   all our Sins. This I lay hold on, and let the Anger of God do what It
   will with my Sin, and let the Devil roar over my Soul in his Fort of
   Prey which he hath made, as much as he will: Neither the Devil, Death,
   nor Hell shall pull me out of my Saviour's Wounds. Thou must at length
   be confounded in me, thou malicious Devil, and thy Fort of Prey must be
   forsaken, for I will drown it in the Love of Jesus Christ, and then
   dwell in it if thou canst. Amen.

An Information in Temptation

   Beloved Reader, this is no jesting Matter; he that accounteth it so,
   hath not tried it, neither hath he yet passed the Judgement; but his
   Conscience is still asleep; and though it should be deferred to his
   latter Days, which is very dangerous, yet he must pass through this
   Judgement or fiery Trial. Happy is he that passeth through it in the
   Time of his Youth, before the Devil buildeth his Fort of Prey strong;
   he may afterwards prove a Labourer in the heavenly Vineyard, and sow
   his Seed in the Garden of Christ; where he shall reap the Fruit in due
   Time. This Judgement continueth a long while upon many a poor Soul;
   several Years, if he doth not earnestly and early put on the Armour of
   Christ, but stayeth till the Judgement of Tribulation first drive him
   to Repentance. But to him that cometh by himself, of his own earnest
   Purpose, and endeavoreth to depart from his evil Ways, the Temptation
   or Trial will not be so hard, neither will it continue so long. Yet he
   must stand out valiantly, till Victory be gotten over the Devil; for he
   shall be mightily assisted, and all shall end in the best for him; so
   that afterwards when the Day breaketh in his Soul, he turneth it to the
   great Praise and Glory of God, that his grand Enemy and Persecutor was
   overcome in the Conflict.
     __________________________________________________________________

   When the Noble Sophia (or Eternal Wisdom) kisseth the Soul with Her
   Love, and offereth Her Love to it

   O Most Gracious and Deep Love of God in Christ Jesus! I beseech Thee
   grant me Thy Pearl, impress It into my Soul, and take my Soul into Thy
   Arms.

   O Thou Sweet Love! I confess I am unclean before Thee. Take away my
   Uncleanness through Thy Death, and carry the Hunger and Thirst of my
   Soul through Thy Death in Thy Resurrection, in Thy Triumph! Cast my
   whole SELF-hood down to the Ground in Thy Death; take it captive, and
   carry my Hunger through in Thy Hunger.

   O Highest Love! Hast Thou not appeared in me? Stay in me, and inclose
   me in Thee. Keep me in Thee, so that I may not be able to depart from
   Thee. Fill my Hunger with Thy Love; feed my Soul with Thy Heavenly
   Substance; give it Thy Blood to drink, and water it with Thy Fountain.

   O Great Love! Awaken my disappeared Image in me, which, as to the
   Kingdom of Heaven disappeared in my Father Adam. By the Word, which
   awakened the same Image in the Seed of the Woman in Mary; quicken It, I
   beseech Thee.

   O Thou Life and Power of the Deity, Who hast promised us, saying, We
   will come to you, and make Our Abode in you. O Sweet Love! I bring my
   Desire into this Word of Thy Promise. Thou hast promised also, that Thy
   Father will give the Holy Spirit to those that ask Him for It;
   therefore I now bring the Desire of my Soul into that Thy Promise, and
   I receive Thy Word into my Hunger. Increase Thou in me my Hunger after
   Thee. Strengthen me, O sweet Love, in Thy Strength: Quicken me in Thee,
   that my Spirit may taste Thy Sweetness. O do thou believe by Thy Power
   in me, for without Thee I can do nothing.

   O Sweet Love! I beseech Thee through that Love wherewith Thou didst
   overcome the Anger of God, and didst change it into Love and Divine
   Joy; I pray Thee also change the Anger in my Soul by that same great
   Love, that I may become obedient unto Thee, and that my Soul may love
   Thee therein forever. O change my Will into Thy Will; bring Thy
   Obedience into my Disobedience, that I may become obedient unto Thee.

   O Great Love of Jesus Christ, I humbly fly to Thee; bring the Hunger of
   my Soul into Thy Wounds, from whence Thou didst shed Thy Holy Blood,
   and didst quench the Anger with Love. I bring my Hunger into Thy open
   Side, from whence came forth Water and Blood, and throw myself wholly
   into It; be Thou mine, and quicken me in Thy Life, and let me not
   depart from Thee.

   O my Noble Vine, I beseech Thee give Sap to me Thy Branch; that I may
   bud and grow in Thy Strength and Sap, in Thy Essence; beget in me true
   Strength by Thy Strength.

   O Sweet Love, art Thou not my Light? Enlighten Thou my poor Soul in its
   close Prison in Flesh and Blood. Bring it into the Right WAY. Destroy
   the Will of the Devil, and bring my Body through the whole Course of
   this World, through the Chamber of Death into Thy Death and Rest; that
   at the Last Day it may arise in Thee from Thy Death, and live in Thee
   forever. O teach me what I must do in Thee; I beseech Thee be Thou my
   Willing, Knowing, and Doing; and let me go no whither without Thee. I
   yield myself wholly up to Thee. Amen.

   A PRAYER-- For obtaining the Divine Working, Protection, and
   Government; showing also how the Mind should work with and in God, in
   Christ the Tree of Life

   O Thou living Fountain, in Thee I lift up the Desire of my Soul, and
   cry with my Desire to enter through the Life of my Saviour Jesus Christ
   into Thee.

   O Thou Life and Power of God, awaken Thyself in the Hunger of my Soul
   with Thy Desire of Love, through the Thirst which Jesus Christ had upon
   the Cross after us Men, and carry my weak Strength through by Thy
   mighty Hand in Thy Spirit; be Thou the Working and Will in me with
   Thine own Strength. Blossom in the Strength of Jesus Christ in me, that
   I may bring forth Praise unto Thee, the true Fruit of Thy Kingdom. O
   let my Heart and Desire never depart from Thee more.

   But I swim in Vanity in this Valley of Misery, in this outward earthly
   Flesh and Blood; and my Soul and Noble Image, which is according to Thy
   Similitude, is encompassed with Enemies on every Side; with the Desire
   of the Devil against me, with the Desire of Vanity in Flesh and Blood;
   also with all the Opposition of wicked Men who know not Thy Name. And I
   swim with my outward Life in the Properties of the Stars and Elements,
   having my Enemies lying in wait for me everywhere, inwardly and
   outwardly, together with Death the Destroyer of this vain Life. I fly
   therefore to Thee, O Holy Strength of God, seeing Thou hast manifested
   Thyself with Thy loving Mercy in our Humanity, through Thy Holy Name
   JESUS, and hast also given It to be a Companion and Guide in us. I
   beseech Thee let His Angels that minister to Him, attend upon the Souls
   of me and mine, and encamp themselves about us, and defend us from the
   fiery Darts of the Desire of that wicked One, which he shooteth into us
   daily by the Curse of the Anger of God which is awakened in our earthly
   Flesh. Keep back by Thy Divine Strength the malignant Influence of the
   Stars in their Opposition, wherein the wicked Enemy of Mankind mingleth
   himself with his Desire and Imagination, in order to poison us in Soul
   and Flesh, and to bring us into false and evil Desires, as also into
   Infirmity and Misery. Turn away these evil Influences by Thy Holy Power
   Jesus, from our Souls and Spirits, that they may not touch us; and let
   Thy Good and Holy Angels stand by us to turn away their noxious Effects
   from our Bodies.

   O Great Love and Sweet Strength JESU, Thou Fountain of Divine
   Sweetness, flowing out of the great Eternal Name JEHOVAH, I cry with
   the Desire of my Soul to come into Thee. My Soul cryeth to come into
   that Spirit, from Which it was breathed into the Body, and Which hath
   formed it in the Likeness of God. It desireth in its Thirst to get the
   Sweet Fountain which springeth from JEHOVAH into itself, to refresh
   God's Breath of Fire, which itself is, that so the Sweet Love of JESUS
   may rise in its Breath of Fire, through the Fountain JESUS springing
   out of JEHOVAH; that CHRIST the Holy One may be manifested, and become
   Man in my disappeared Image of Heavenly Spiritual Corporality, and that
   my poor Soul may receive its beloved Bride again into its Arms, with
   whom it may rejoice forever.

   O IMMANUEL! thou Wedding-Chamber, God and Man, I yield myself up into
   the Arms of Thy Desire towards us, in us; it is Thyself whom I desire.
   O blot out the Anger of Thy Father with Thy Love in me, and manifest
   Thy Strength in my Weakness, that I may overcome and tame the Evil of
   Flesh and Blood, and serve Thee in Holiness and Righteousness.

   O Thou Great and Most Holy Name and Majesty of God, JEHOVAH, Which hast
   stirred Thyself with Thy Most Sweet Power JESUS, in the Limit of the
   covenanted Promise to our Father Adam, in the Woman's Seed; in the
   Virgin Mary, in our disappeared Heavenly Humanity, and brought the
   living Essentiality of Thy Holy Power in the Virgin Wisdom of God into
   our Humanity, which was extinguished as to Thee; and hast given It to
   us, to be our Life, Regeneration, and Victory; I entreat Thee with all
   my Strength, beget a new Holy Life in me, by Thy Sweet Power JESUS,
   that I may be in Thee and Thou in me; that so Thy Kingdom may be made
   manifest in me, and the Will and Conversation of my Soul may be in
   Heaven.

   O Great and Incomprehensible God, thou who fillest all Things, be Thou
   my Heaven in which my new Birth of Christ Jesus may dwell: Let my
   Spirit be the stringed Instrument, Harmony, Sound and Joy of Thy Holy
   Spirit. Strike the Strings in me in Thy Regenerate Image, and carry
   through my Harmony into Thy Divine Kingdom of Joy, in the Great Love of
   God, in the Wonders of Thy Glory and Majesty, in the Communion of the
   Holy Angelical Harmony. Build up the Holy City Zion in me, in which as
   Children of Christ we all live together in one City, which is Christ in
   us. Into Thee I wholly plunge myself; do with me what Thou pleasest.
   Amen.

   A PRAYER -- To be used by a Soul in Tribulation under the Cross of
   Christ, when it is assaulted by its outward Enemies, who persecute and
   hate it for being in the Spirit of Christ, and slander and reproach it
   as an Evil-Doer.

   Poor Man that I am! I walk full of Anguish and Trouble in my Return
   towards my Native Country, from whence I wandered in Adam, and am going
   back again through the Thistles and Thorns of this troublesome World. O
   God my Father, the Briars tear me on every Side, and I am afflicted and
   despised by my Enemies. They scorn my Soul, and revile it as an
   Evil-Doer, who hath broken Faith with them; they deride my walking
   towards Thee, and account it foolish. They think I am senseless,
   because I walk in this straight and thorny Path, and go not along with
   them in their hypocritical broad Way.

   O Lord JESUS CHRIST, I fly to Thee under the Cross; O dear Immanuel
   receive me, and carry me into Thyself through the Path of Thy
   Pilgrimage, in which Thou didst walk in this World, namely through Thy
   Incarnation, Poverty, Reproach, and Scorn; also through Thy Anguish,
   Passion, and Death. Make me conformable unto Thy Example; send Thy good
   Angel along with me, to show me the WAY through the horrible thorny
   Wilderness of this World. Assist me in my Misery; comfort me with that
   Comfort wherewith the Angel comforted Thee in the Garden, when Thou
   didst pray to Thy Father, and didst sweat great Drops of Blood. Support
   me in my Anguish and Persecution, under the Reproach of the Devils, and
   all wicked Men, who know not Thee, and refuse to walk in Thy Paths. O
   great Love of God, they know not Thy Way, and do this in Blindness,
   through the Deceit of the Devil. Have Pity on them, and bring them out
   of their Darkness into Thy Light, that they may learn to know
   themselves, and how they lie Captive in the Filth and Mire of the
   Devil, in a dark Dungeon fast bound with three Chains. O Great God have
   Mercy upon Adam and his Children, redeem them in Christ, the new Adam.

   I fly to Thee, O Christ, God and Man, in this Pilgrimage and Journey
   which I must take through this dark Valley, despised and troubled on
   all Sides, and accounted an ungodly wicked Man. O Lord, it is Thy
   Judgement upon me, that my Sins and inbred Corruption may be judged in
   this earthly Pilgrimage before Thee; and I, as a Curse, be made an open
   Spectacle on which Thy Anger may satiate itself, and thereby may take
   the eternal Reproach away from me. It is the Token of Thy Love, by
   which Thou bringest me into the Reproach, Anguish, Suffering, and Death
   of my Saviour Jesus Christ, that so I may die from Vanity and spring up
   in His Spirit with a new Life, through His Reproach, Ignominy, and
   Death.

   I beseech Thee, O Christ, Thou patient Lamb of God, grant me Patience
   in this my WAY of the Cross, through all Thy Anguish and Reproach, thy
   Death and Passion, Thy Scorn and Contempt upon the Cross, where Thou
   was despised in my Stead; and bring me therein as a patient Lamb to
   Thee, into Thy Victory. Let me live with Thee in Thee; and do Thou
   convert my Persecutors, who (unknown to themselves) by their
   Reproaching sacrifice my Vanity and inbred Sins before Thy Anger. They
   know not what they do; they think they do me Harm, but they do me Good!
   They do that for me which I should do myself before Thee; for I should
   daily lay open and acknowledge my Shame and Vileness before Thee; and
   thereby sink myself down into the Death of Thy beloved Son, that my
   Shame might die in His Death; but I being too negligent, weary, faint,
   and feeble, therefore Thou usest these mine Enemies in Thine Anger, to
   open and discover my Vileness before Thee, which Thy Wrath taketh hold
   of, and sinketh it down into the Death of my Saviour.

   O merciful God, my vain Flesh cannot know how well Thou intendest
   towards me, when Thou sufferest mine Enemies to take my Vileness from
   me, and sacrifice it before Thee. My earthly Mind supposeth that Thou
   afflictest me for my Sins, and I am extremely perplexed at it; but Thy
   Spirit, in my inward new Man, telleth me that it is of Thy Love towards
   me, and that Thou intendest Good to me by it. When Thou sufferest my
   Enemies to persecute me, it is best for me that they perform the Work
   in my Stead, and unfold my Sins before Thee in Thy Anger, that it may
   swallow up the Guilt of them, so that they may not follow me into my
   Native Country; for mine Enemies are strong and mighty still in Thy
   Anger, and therefore can do it better than I that am feeble and
   fainting already in the Will of Vanity. This Thou knowest full well, O
   Thou Righteous God.

   I beseech Thee therefore, O Righteous God, since Thou usest them as
   Friends to me, to do so good an Office for me, though my earthly Reason
   knoweth it not, that Thou wouldst make them also to understand and
   follow my Course, and send them such Friends in turn; but first bring
   them to the Light, that they may know Thee, and give Thee Thanks.

   O Merciful God in Christ Jesus, I beseech Thee out of Thy deep Love
   towards us poor Men, which Thou hast manifested in me in the hidden
   Man, call us all in Thee, to Thee. O stir Thyself in us yet once again
   in this last Trouble; Thy Anger being kindled in us, do Thou resist it,
   lest it swallow us up wholly both Soul and Body.

   O thou Dawning of the Day-Spring of God, break forth to the Full! Art
   Thou not already risen? Manifest Thy Holy City Zion, Thy Holy
   Jerusalem, in us.

   O Great God! I see Thee in the Depth of Thy Power and Strength. Awaken
   me wholly in Thee, that I may be quickened in Thee. Break off the Tree
   of Thy Anger in us, and let Thy Love spring forth and bud in us.

   O Lord, I lie down in Thy Sight, and beseech Thee not to rebuke us in
   Thine Anger. Are we not Thy Possession which thou hast purchased?
   Forgive all of us our Sins, and deliver us from the Evil of Thy Wrath,
   and from the Malice and Envy of the Devil; and bring us under Thy Cross
   in Patience into Paradise again. Amen.

Here followeth a Prayer or Dialogue between the poor Soul and the Noble
Virgin Sophia, in the inward Ground of Man, viz. between the Soul and the
Spirit of Christ in the New Birth, out of His Humanity in us; showing how
great a Joy there is in the Heaven of the New regenerate Man; and how
lovingly and graciously the Noble Sophia presenteth Herself to Her
Bridegroom, the Soul, when it entereth into Repentance, and how the Soul
behaveth itself towards Her, when She appeareth to it.
     __________________________________________________________________

This is understood by none but the Children of Christ, who have known it by
Experience.

   WHEN Christ the Corner-Stone stirreth Himself in the extinguished Image
   of Man, in his hearty Conversion and Repentance, then Virgin Sophia
   appeareth in the Stirring of the Spirit of Christ in the extinguished
   Image, in Her Virgin's Attire before the Soul; at which the Soul is so
   amazed and astonished in its Uncleanness, that all its Sins immediately
   awake in it, and it trembleth before Her; for then the Judgement
   passeth upon the Sins of the Soul, so that it even goeth back in its
   Unworthiness, being ashamed in the Presence of its fair Love, and
   entereth into itself, feeling and acknowledging itself utterly unworthy
   to receive such a Jewel. This is understood by those who are of our
   Tribe, and have tasted of this Heavenly Gift, and by none else. But the
   Noble Sophia draweth near in the Essence of the Soul, and kisseth it in
   friendly Manner, and tinctureth its dark Fire with Her Rays of Love,
   and shineth through it with Her bright and powerful Influence.
   Penetrated with the strong Sense and Feeling of Which, the Soul
   skippeth in its Body for great Joy, and in the Strength of this Virgin
   Love exulteth, and praiseth the Great God for His blessed Gift of
   Grace.

   I will set down here a short Description how it is when the Bride thus
   embraceth the Bridegroom, for the Consideration of the Reader, who
   perhaps hath not yet been in this Wedding-Chamber. It may be that he
   will be desirous to follow us, and to enter into the Inner Choir, where
   the Soul joineth Hands and danceth with Sophia, or the Divine Wisdom.

I.

   When that which is mentioned above cometh to pass, the Soul rejoiceth
   in its Body, and saith,

   PRAISE, Thanksgiving, Strength, Honor, and Glory, be to Thee, O great
   God, in Thy Power and Sweetness, for that Thou hast redeemed me from
   the Anguish of the fiery Driver. O Thou Fair Love! My heart embraceth
   Thee; where hast Thou been so long? I thought I was in Hell in the
   Anger of God. O Gracious Love! Abide with me, I beseech Thee, and be my
   Joy and Comfort. Lead me in the right WAY. I give myself up into Thy
   Love. I am dark before Thee, do Thou enlighten me. O Noble Love, give
   me Thy Sweet Pearl; put it I pray Thee into me.

   O Great God in Christ Jesus, I praise and magnify Thee now in Thy
   Truth, in Thy Great Power and Glory, for that Thou hast forgiven me my
   Sins, and filled me with Thy Strength. I shout for Joy before Thee in
   my new Life, and extol Thee in Thy Firmament of Heaven, which none can
   open but Thy Spirit in Thy Mercy. My Bones rejoice in Thy Strength, and
   my Heart delighteth itself in Thy Love. Thanks be to Thee forever, for
   that Thou has delivered me out of Hell, and turned Death into Life in
   me. O Sweet Love! Let me not depart from Thee again. Grant me Thy
   Garland of Pearl, and abide in me. O be my own proper Possession, that
   I may rejoice in Thee forever.

   Upon this, the Virgin Sophia saith to the Soul,

   MY nobel Bridegroom, my Strength and Power, thou art a thousand Times
   welcome. Why hast thou forgotten Me so long, that I have been
   constrained in great Grief to stand without the Door and knock? Have I
   not always called thee and entreated thee? But thou hast turned away
   thy Countenance from Me, and thine Ears have declined My Entreaties.
   Thou couldst not see My Light, for thou didst walk in the Valley of
   Darkness. I was very near thee, and entreated thee continually, but thy
   Sinfulness held thee Captive in Death, so that thou knewest Me not. I
   came to thee in great Humility, and called thee, but thou wert rich in
   the Power of the Anger of God, and didst not regard My Humility and
   Lowliness. Thou hast taken the Devil to be thy Paramour, who hath
   defiled thee thus, and built up his Fort of Prey in thee, and turned
   thee quite away from My Love and Faith into his hypocritical Kingdom of
   Falsehood; wherein thou hast committed much Sin and Wickedness, and
   torn thy Will off from My Love. Thou hast broken the Bond of Wedlock,
   and set thy Love and Affection upon a Stranger, and suffered Me thy
   Bride, whom God did give thee, to stand alone in the extinguished
   Substance, without the Power of thy fiery Strength. I could not be
   joyful without thy fiery Strength, for thou art My Husband; My shining
   Brightness is made manifest by thee. Thou canst manifest My hidden
   Wonders in thy fiery Life, and bring them into Majesty; and yet without
   Me thou art but a dark House, wherein is nothing but Anguish, Misery,
   and horrible Torment.

   O noble Bridegroom, stand still with thy Countenance towards Me, and
   give Me thy Rays of Fire. Bring thy Desire into Me, and enkindle Me
   thereby, and then I will bring the Rays of My Love, from My Meekness
   into thy fiery Essence, and be united with thee forever.

   O My Bridegroom, how well am I, now that I am in Union with thee! O
   kiss Me with thy Desire in thy Strength and Power, and then I will show
   thee all My Beauty, and will rejoice and solace Myself with thy sweet
   Love and shining Brightness in thy fiery Life. All the Holy Angels
   rejoice with us, to see us united again. My dear Love, I now entreat
   thee to stay faithful to Me, and do not turn thy Face away from Me any
   more. Work thou thy Wonders in My Love, for which Purpose God hath
   created thee and brought thee into Being.

II.

   The Soul saith again to its Noble Sophia , its Love, that is born again
   in it,

   O my Noble Pearl, and opened Flame of Light in my anxious fiery Life,
   how Thou changest me into Thy Joy! O Beautiful Love, I have broken my
   Faith with Thee in my Father Adam, and with my fiery Strength have
   turned myself to the Pleasure and Vanity of the outward World. I have
   fallen in Love with a Stranger, and would have been constrained to walk
   in the Valley of Darkness in this strange Love, if Thou hadst not come
   into the House of my Misery, in Thy great Faithfulness, by Thy piercing
   through and destroying God's Anger, Hell, and dark Death, and restoring
   Thy Meekness and Love to my fiery Life.

   O Sweet Love! Thou hast brought the Water of Eternal Life out of the
   Fountain of God, with Thee into me, and refreshed me in my great
   Thirst. I behold in Thee the Mercy of God, which was hidden from me
   before by the strange Love. In Thee I can rejoice; Thou changest my
   Anguish of Fire into great Joy in me. O amiable Love, give me Thy
   Pearl, that I may continue in this Joy forever.

   Upon this the Noble Sophia answereth the Soul again, and saith,

   MY dear Love and faithful Treasure, thou highly rejoicest Me in thy
   Beginning. I have indeed broken into thee through the deep Gates of
   God, through God's Anger, through Hell and Death, into the House of thy
   Misery, and have graciously bestowed My Love upon thee, and delivered
   thee from the Chains and Bonds wherewith thou wert fast bound. I have
   kept My Faith with thee, even though thou hast not kept thine with Me.
   But now thou desireth an exceeding great Thing of Me, which I cannot
   willingly trust in thy Hands. Thou wouldest have My Pearl as thy proper
   own. Remember, I pray, O My beloved Bridegroom, that thou didst
   carelessly lose it before in Adam; and thou thyself standest yet in
   great Danger, and walkest in two dangerous Kingdoms; for in thy
   original Fire thou walkest in that Country wherein God calleth Himself
   a strong jealous God, and a consuming Fire. The other Kingdom which
   thou walkest in, is the outward World, wherein thou dwellest in the
   vain corrupt Flesh and Blood, and where the Pleasures of the World and
   Assaults of the Devil beset thee every Hour. Thou mayest perhaps in thy
   great Joy bring Earthliness again into My Beauty, and thereby darken My
   Pearl; or thou mayest possibly grow proud, as Lucifer did, when he had
   the Pearl in his Possession, and so turn thyself away from the Harmony
   of God, as he did, and then I must be deprived of My Love forever
   afterwards.

   No. I will keep My Pearl in Myself, and dwell in the Heaven in thee, in
   thy extinguished, but now in Me, revived, Humanity, and reserve My
   Pearl for Paradise, until thou puttest away this Earthliness from thee,
   and then I will give it to thee to possess. But I will readily present
   to thee My pleasant Countenance, and the sweet Rays of the Pearl,
   during the Time of this Earthly Life. I will dwell with the Pearl
   Itself in the inner Choir, and be thy faithful loving Bride. I cannot
   espouse Myself with thy earthly Flesh, for I am a heavenly Queen, and
   My Kingdom is not of this World. Yet I will not cast thy outward Life
   away, but refresh it often with My Rays of Love; for thy outward
   Humanity shall return again. But I cannot admit to My Embraces the
   Beast of Vanity, neither did God create It in Adam with a Purpose to
   have It so gross and earthly. But in Adam thy Desire, through the Power
   of its strong Lust, formed this beastial Grossness, from and with all
   the Essences of the awakened Vanity of the earthly Property, wherein
   Heat and Cold, Pain and Enmity, Division and Corruption subsist.

   Now, My dear Love and Bridegroom, do but yield thyself up into My Will;
   I will not forsake thee in this earthly Life in thy Danger. Though the
   Anger of God should pass upon thee, so that thou shouldst grow
   affrighted and disheartened, or shouldst think that I had deserted
   thee, yet I will be with thee and preserve thee, for thou thyself
   knowest not what thine Office is. Thou must work and bear Fruit in this
   Life's Time. Thou art the Root of this Pearl-Tree; Branches must be
   produced out of thee, which must all be brought forth in Anguish. But I
   come forth together with thy Branches in their Sap, and produce Fruit
   upon thy Boughs, and thou knowest it not; for the Most High hath
   ordered, that I should dwell with and in thee.

   Wrap thyself up therefore in Patience, and take Heed of the Pleasure of
   the Flesh. Break the Will and Desire thereof; bridle it as an unruly
   Horse; and then I will often visit thee in the fiery Essence, and give
   thee My Kiss of Love. I will bring a Garland for thee out of Paradise
   with Me, as a Token of My Affection, and put it upon thee, and thou
   shalt rejoice in it. But I give thee not My Pearl for a Possession
   during this Life's Time. Thou must continue in Resignation, and hearken
   what the Lord playeth on His Instrument in thy Harmony in thee.
   Moreover, thou must give Sound and Essence to thy Tune, out of My
   Strength and Virtue, for thou art now a Messenger of His Word, and must
   set forth His Praise and Glory. For this Cause it is that I have
   contracted Myself a-new with thee, and set My triumphal Garland upon
   thee; which I have gotten in the Battle against the Devil and Death.
   But the Crown of Pearl wherewith I crowned thee, I have laid aside for
   thee. Thou must wear that no more till thou art become pure in My
   Sight.

III.

   The Soul saith further to the Noble Sophia,

   O Thou Fair and Sweet Consort, what shall I say before Thee? Let me be
   wholly committed unto Thee; I cannot preserve myself. If Thou wilt not
   give me Thy Pearl, I submit to Thy Will; but give me Thy Rays of Love,
   and carry me safely through my Pilgrimage. Do Thou awaken and bring
   forth what Thou wilt in me; I will from henceforth be Thy own. I will
   or desire nothing for myself, but what Thou Thyself wilt through me. I
   had fooled away Thy Sweet Love, and broken my Faith with Thee, whereby
   I was fallen into the Anger of God. But seeing that of Love Thou didst
   come to me into the Anguish of Hell, and hast delivered me from
   Torment, and received me again for Thy Consort, I will now therefore
   break my Will for Thy Love's Sake, and be obedient unto Thee, and wait
   for Thy Love. I am satisfied now that I know Thou art with me in all my
   Troubles, and wilt not forsake me.

   O Gracious Love, I turn my fiery Countenance to Thee. O fair Crown,
   take me quickly into Thee, and bring me forth from Unquietness. I will
   be Thine forever, and never depart from Thee more.

   The Noble Sophia answereth the Soul very comfortably, and saith,

   MY noble Bridegroom, be of good Comfort. I have betrothed thee to Me in
   My highest Love, and contracted Myself with thee in My Faithfulness. I
   will be with thee and in thee always to the End of the World. I will
   come to thee and make My Abode with thee, in thy inner Chamber. Thou
   shalt drink of My Fountain; for now I am thine, and thou art Mine; the
   Enemy shall not separate Us. Work thou in thy fiery Property, and I
   will put My Rays of Love into thy Working. And so We will plant and
   manure the Vineyard of Jesus Christ. Afford thou the Essence of Fire,
   and I will afford the Essence of Light, and the Increase. Be thou the
   Fire, and I will be the Water, and thus We will perform that in this
   World for which God hath appointed Us, and serve Him in His Temple,
   which We ourselves are. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   BELOVED Reader, count not this an uncertain Fiction; it is the true
   Ground, Sum and Substance of all the Holy Scriptures. For the Book of
   the Life of Jesus Christ is plainly set forth therein, as the Author of
   a Certainty knoweth; it being the WAY that he himself hath gone. He
   giveth thee the best Jewel that he hath. God grant His Blessing with
   it. A heavy Sentence and Judgement are gone forth against the Mocker of
   this. Be thou therefore warned, that thou mayest avoid the Danger, and
   obtain the Benefit.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Commending ourselves to God when we rise, before we suffer any other
   Thing to enter into us.

   BLESS me, O God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Thou only True God. I
   thank Thee through Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour, for the
   Preservation of me, and for all other Benefits. I now commend myself,
   both Soul and Body, and all that Thou hast set me to do in my
   Employment and Calling, into Thy Protection. Be Thou the Beginning of
   my Conceptions, my Undertakings, and all my Doings. Work Thou so in me,
   that I may begin all Things to the Glory of Thy Name, and accomplish
   them in Thy Love for the Good and Service of my Neighbor. Send Thy holy
   Angel along with me, to turn the Temptations of the Devil and corrupt
   Nature away from me. Preserve me from the Malice of evil Men; make all
   my Enemies reconcilable to me, and bring my Mind into Thy Vineyard,
   that I may labor in my Office and Employment, and behave as Thy
   obedient Servant therein. Bless me, and all that I am to go about and
   do this Day, with the Blessing of Thy Love and Mercy. Continue Thy
   Grace and Love in Jesus Christ upon me, and give me a Mind cheerfully
   to follow Thy Leading and execute Thine Appointment. Let Thy Holy
   Spirit guide me in my Beginning, and my Progress, on to my Last End,
   and be the Willing, Working, and Accomplishing of all in me. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   When we have finished our daily Employment, and are going to Rest

   I LIFT my Heart to Thee, O God, Thou Fountain of Eternal Life, and give
   Thee Thanks through Jesus Christ, Thy Beloved Son, our Lord and
   Saviour, for having protected and preserved me this Day from all
   Mischief that might have befallen me. I commend to Thy Disposal my
   Condition and Employment, together with the Work of my Hands, and
   humbly repose them on Thee. So fill my Soul with Thy Spirit, that
   neither the grand Enemy, the Devil, nor any other evil Influence or
   Desire, may find Harbour therein. Let my Mind only delight in Thee in
   Thy Temple, and let Thy good Angel stay with me, that I may rest safely
   in Thy Power, and under Thy Protection. Amen.

Rev. 21, 6-7: I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End. I will give
unto him that is athirst of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely. He that
overcometh shall inherit all Things, and I will be his God, and he shall be
My Son.
     __________________________________________________________________

by Jacob Behmen (Jakob Boehme) 1575-1624,

The Teutonic Theosopher

How he that earnestly seeketh Salvation, must suffer himself to be brought
out of the confused and contentious Babel, by the Spirit of CHRIST, that he
may be born a-new in the Spirit of CHRIST, and live to Him only.

   Rev xviii.4 Come out of Babylon, my People, that ye be not Partakers of
   her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues; for her Sins have
   reached unto Heaven, and God hath remembered her Iniquity.

   Brought forth in the 1600 s by a humble shoemaker; translated into
   English over 100 years later; suppressed and hidden away until recently
   in theological archives around the world... a worthy personal study not
   just for academics but for all those who are spiritually grounded in
   the WORD, who are learning to hear the Lord, and who hunger for more.

   These writings from out of the Past are in the Public Domain and may be
   freely shared, photocopied, reproduced, faxed or transmitted in any way
   by any means.
     __________________________________________________________________

     Though I have in my other Writings, set down a clear description of
     Regeneration, or the New-Birth, from the Ground thereof; yet because
     everyone hath them not, neither hath everyone the Capacity to
     understand them; I have therefore, as a Service to the simple
     Children of Christ, here set down a short Sum concerning the
     New-Birth.

     But if any desire to search the deep Ground from whence all floweth,
     and have the Gift to understand it, let them read

     I. The Three Principles of the Divine Essence.

     II. The Threefold Life of Man.

     III. The Forty Questions of the Original Essence, Substance, Nature,
     and Property of the Soul.

     IV. The Incarnation and Birth of Jesus Christ the Son of God; also
     of his Suffering, Death, and Resurrection.

     V. The Six Points treating of the Three Worlds how they are in one
     another as one; and yet make Three Principles, viz., Three Births or
     Centers.

     VI. The Mysterium Magnum, which is an Interpretation upon Genesis.

     And in them he shall find all that he can ask, and that as deep as
     the Mind of Man is able to reach. I have written this for the true
     Israelites, that is, for the Hungry and Thirsty Hearts that long
     after the Fountain of Christ, who are my Fellow Members in the
     Spirit of Christ: But not for the Ishmaelites and Scorners, for they
     have a Book within them, wherewith they vex, persecute, and suppress
     the Children of Christ that are under the Cross; and yet, though it
     be unwillingly and unwittingly to themselves, they must be Servants
     to such Children of Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

Showing how Man should consider himself.

     CHRIST said, Except ye turn and become as Children, ye shall not see
     the kingdom of God. Again, he said to Nicodemus; Except a Man be
     born again, of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
     Kingdom of God; for that which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, and
     that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.

     2. Also the Scripture positively declareth, that the fleshly natural
     Man receiveth not the Things of the Spirit of God, for they are
     Foolishness unto him, neither can he know or conceive them.

     3. Now seeing that all of us have Flesh and Blood and are mortal, as
     we find by Experience, and yet the Scripture saith, that We are the
     Temples of the Holy Ghost, who dwelleth in us, and that the Kingdom
     of God is within us, and that Christ must be formed in us; also,
     that He will give us his Flesh for Food, and his Blood for Drink:
     And that, Whosoever shall not eat of the Flesh of the Son of Man,
     and drink his Blood hath no Life in him. Therefore we should
     seriously consider, what kind of Man in us it is, that is capable of
     being thus like the Deity.

     4. For it cannot be said of the mortal Flesh that turneth to Earth
     again, and liveth in the Vanity of this World, and continually
     lusteth against God; that it is the Temple of the Holy Ghost; much
     less can it be said that the New Birth cometh to pass in this
     earthly Flesh, which dieth and putrifieth, and is a continual House
     of Sin.

     5. Yet seeing that it remaineth certain, that a True Christian is
     born of Christ, and that the New Birth is the Temple of the Holy
     Ghost which dwelleth in us, and that the New Man only, that is born
     of Christ, partaketh of the Flesh and Blood of Christ; it appeareth
     that is is not so easy a Matter to be a Christian.

     6. And that Christianity doth not consist in the mere knowing of the
     History, and applying the Knowledge thereof to ourselves, saying
     that Christ died for us, and hath destroyed Death and turned it into
     Life in us, and that He hath paid the Ransom for us, so that we need
     do nothing but comfort ourselves therewith, and steadfastly believe
     that it is so.

     7. For we find of ourselves that Sin is living, lusting, strong, and
     powerfully working in the Flesh, and therefore it must be somewhat
     else, which doth not co-operate with Sin in the Flesh, nor willeth
     it, that is the New-Birth in Christ.

     8. For St. Paul saith, There is no Condemnation to them that are in
     Christ Jesus. And further, Should we that are Christians be yet
     Sinners? God forbid, seeing we are dead to Sin in Christ.

     9. Besides, the Man of Sin cannot be the Temple of the Holy Ghost;
     and yet, there is no Man that sinneth not, for God hath shut up all
     under Sin. As the Scripture saith, No one living is righteous in thy
     Sight, if thou imputest his Sins to him. The righteous Man falleth
     seven Times a Day; and yet it cannot be meant that the righteous
     falleth and sinneth, but his mortal and sinful Man. For the
     righteousness of a Christian in Christ cannot Sin.

     10. Moreover, St. Paul saith, Our Conversation is in Heaven, from
     whence we expect our Saviour Jesus Christ. Now, if our Conversation
     be in Heaven, then Heaven must be in us; Christ dwelleth in Heaven;
     and then if we are his Temple, that Temple Heaven must be in us.

     11. But for all this, seeing Sin tempteth us within us, whereby the
     Devil hath within us an Access to us, therefore Hell also must be in
     us too, for the Devil dwelleth in Hell; wheresoever he is, he is in
     Hell. and cannot come out of it. Yea, when he possesseth a Man, he
     dwelleth in Hell, viz., in the Anger of God in that Man.

     12. Therefore we ought to consider well what Man is, and how he is a
     Man; and then we shall find that a true Christian is not a mere
     historical new Man, as if it were enough for us outwardly to confess
     Christ, and believe that he is the Son of God, and hath paid the
     Ransom for us. For Righteousness availeth nothing, imputed from
     without, that is, by believing only that it is so imputed. But it is
     an inherent Righteousness born in us, by which we become the
     Children of God, that availeth.

     13. And as the earthly Flesh must die, so also the Life and Will
     must die from Sin, and be as a Child that knoweth nothing, but
     longeth only after the Mother which brought it forth. So likewise
     must the Will of a Christian enter again into its Mother, viz., into
     the Spirit of Christ, and become a Child in itself, in its own Will
     and Power, having its Will and Desire inclined and directed only
     towards its Mother. And a new Will and Obedience in Righteousness,
     which willeth Sin no more, must rise from Death out of the Spirit of
     Christ in him.

     14. For that Will is not born a-new, which desireth and admitteth
     Vanity into itself; and yet there remaineth a Will which longeth
     after Vanity, and sinneth, even in the new-born or regenerate Man.
     Therefore the Image or Nature of Man should be well understood, and
     how the New-birth cometh to pass; seeing it is not wrought in the
     mortal Flesh, and yet is wrought truly and really in us, in Flesh
     and Blood, in Water and Spirit, as the Scripture saith.

     15. We should therefore rightly understand what Kind of Man it is in
     us, that is the Member of Christ, and Temple of God who dwelleth in
     Heaven. And then also what Kind of Man it is, that the Devil ruleth
     and driveth; for he cannot meddle with the Temple of Christ, nor
     doth he care much for the mortal Flesh; and yet there are not three
     Men in one another, for all make but one Man.

     16. Now if we will understand this rightly, we must consider Time
     and Eternity, and how they are in one another; also Light and
     Darkness, Good and Evil; but especially the Original of Man.

     This may be thus apprehended.

     17. THE outward World with the Stars and four Elements, wherein Man
     and all Creatures live, neither is, nor is called God. Indeed God
     dwelleth in it, but the Substance of the outward World
     comprehendedeth him not.

     18. We see also that the Light shineth in Darkness, and the Darkness
     comprehendeth not the Light, and yet they both dwell in one another.
     The four Elements are also an Example of this; which in their
     Original are but one Element, which is neither hot nor cold, nor
     dry, nor moist; and yet by its stirring separateth itself into Four
     Properties, viz., into Fire, Air, Water, and Earth.

     19. Who would believe that Fire produceth or generateth Water? And
     that the Original of Fire could be in Water, if we did not see it
     with our Eyes in Tempests of Thunder, Lightening, and Rain; and did
     not find also, that in living Creatures, the essential Fire of the
     Body dwelleth in the Blood, and that the Blood is the Mother of the
     Fire, and the Fire is the Father of the Blood.

     20. And as God dwelleth in the World, and filleth all Things, and
     yet possesseth nothing; and as the Fire dwelleth in Water, and yet
     possesseth it not: Also, as the Light dwelleth in Darkness, and yet
     possesseth not the Darkness; as the Day is in the Night, and the
     Night in the Day, Time in Eternity, and Eternity in Time; so is Man
     created according to the outward Humanity; he is the Time, and in
     the Time, and the Time is the outward World, and it is also the
     outward Man.

     21. The inward Man is Eternity and the Spiritual Time and World,
     which also consisteth of Light and Darkness, viz., of the Love of
     God, as to the eternal Light, and of the Anger of God as to the
     eternal Darkness; whichsoever of these is manifest in him, his
     Spirit dwelleth in that, be it Darkness or Light.

     22. For Light and Darkness are both in him, but each of them
     dwelleth in itself, and neither of them possesseth the other; but if
     one of them entereth into the other, and will possess it, then that
     other loseth its Right and Power.

     23. The passive loseth its Power; for if the Light be made manifest
     in the Darkness, then the Darkness loseth its Darkness, and is not
     known or discerned. Also on the contrary, if the Darkness arise in
     the Light and get the upper-hand, then the Light and the Power
     thereof are extinguished. This is to be observed also in Man.

     24. The Eternal Darkness of the Soul is Hell, viz., an aching Source
     of Anguish, which is called the Anger of God; but the Eternal Light
     in the Soul is the Kingdom of Heaven, where the fiery Anguish of
     Darkness is changed into Joy.

     25. For the same Nature of Anguish, which in the Darkness is a Cause
     of Sadness, is in the Light a Cause of the outward and stirring Joy.
     For the Source or Original in Light, and the Source in Darkness are
     but one Eternal Source, and one Nature, and yet they, viz., the
     Light and Darkness, have a mighty Difference in the Source; the one
     dwelleth in the other and begetteth the other, and yet is not the
     other. The Fire is painful and consuming, but the Light is yielding,
     friendly, powerful, and delightful, a sweet and amiable Joy.

     26. This may be found also in Man; he is and liveth in three Worlds;
     the First is the Eternal dark World, viz., the Centre of the Eternal
     Nature, which produceth or generateth the Fire, viz., the Source or
     Property of Anguish.

     27. The Second is the Eternal light World, which begetteth the
     Eternal Joy, which is the Divine Habitation wherein the Spirit of
     God dwelleth, and wherein the Spirit of Christ receiveth the human
     Substance, and subdueth the Darkness, so that it must be a Cause of
     Joy in the Spirit of Christ in the Light.

     28. The Third is the outward visible World in the four Elements and
     the visible Stars; though indeed every Element hath its peculiar
     Constellation in itself, whence the Desire and Property arise, and
     is like a Mind.

     29. Thus you may understand, that the Fire in the Light is a Fire of
     Love, a Desire of Meekness and Delightfulness; but the Fire in the
     Darkness is a Fire of Anguish, and is painful, irksome, inimicitious
     and full of Contrariety in its Essence. The Fire of the Light hath a
     good Relish or Taste, but the Taste in the Essence of Darkness is
     unpleasant, loathsome and irksome. For all the Forms or Properties
     in the Eternal Nature, till they reach to Fire, are in great
     Anguish.
     __________________________________________________________________

How Man is created.

     HERE we are to consider the Creation of Man. Moses saith, God
     created Man in His Image, in the Image of God created he him. This
     we understand to be both out of the eternal and temporal Birth; out
     of the inward and spiritual World, which he breathed into him, into
     the created Image; and then out of the Substance of the inward
     spiritual World, which is holy.

     31. For as there is a Nature and Substance in the outward World; so
     also in the inward spiritual World there is a Nature and Substance
     which is spiritual; from which the outward World is breathed forth,
     and produced out of Light and Darkness, and created to have a
     Beginning and Time.

     32. And out of the Substance of the inward and outward World Man was
     created; out of, and in the Likeness of the Birth of all Substances.
     The Body is a Limbus (an Extract or a kind of Seed, which containeth
     all that which the Thing from whence it is taken hath) of the Earth,
     and also a Limbus of the heavenly Substance; for the Earth is
     breathed forth out-spoken, or created out of the dark and light
     World. In the Word Fiat (or creating Word) viz., in the eternal
     Desire Man was taken out of the Earth, and so created an Image out
     of Time and Eternity.

     33. This Image was in the inward and spiritual Element, from whence
     the four Elements proceed and are produced. In that one Element was
     Paradise; for the Properties of Nature from the
     Fire-dark-and-light-World were all in Harmony and Agreement in
     Number, Weight, and Measure. One of them was not manifested more
     eminently than another, therefore was there no Frailty therein. For
     no one Property was predominant over another, neither was there any
     Strife or Contrariety among the Powers and Properties.

     34. Into this created Image God breathed the Spirit and Breath of
     Understanding out of the three Worlds, as one only Soul which, as to
     its Original Principle or Essence, is, or consisteth in, the inward
     dark Fire-World of the eternal spiritual Nature; according to which
     God calleth himself a strong jealous God, and a consuming Fire.

     35. And this now is the eternal creaturely great Soul, a magical
     Breath of Fire, in which Fire consisteth the Original of Life, from
     the great Power of Separation. God's Anger, or the eternal Darkness,
     is in this Property, so far as Fire reacheth without giving Light.

     36. The second Property of the Breath of God is the Spirit of the
     Source of Light, proceeding from the great fiery Desire of Love,
     from the great Meekness; according to which God calleth himself a
     loving, merciful God; in which consisteth the true Spirit of
     Understanding, and of Life in Power.

     37. For as Light shineth from Power, and as the Power of
     Understanding is discerned in the Light, so the Breath of the Light
     was joined to the Breath of the Fire of God, and breathed into the
     Image of Man.

     38. The third Property of the Breath of God was the outward Air with
     its Constellation or Astrum, wherein the Life and Constellation of
     the outward Substance and Body did consist. This he breathed into
     his Nostrils; and as Time and Eternity hang together, and as Time is
     produced out of Eternity, so the inward Breath of God hung to the
     outward.

     39. This three-fold Soul was at once breathed into Man; and each
     Substance of the Body received the Spirit according to its Property.
     The outward Flesh received the outward Air and its Constellations,
     for a rational and vegetative Life, to the Manifestation of the
     Wonders of God; and the Light Body or Heavenly Substance received
     the Breath of the Light of the great Divine Powers and Virtues;
     which Breath is called the Holy Ghost.

     40. Thus the Light pierced through the Darkness, viz., through the
     dark Breath of Fire, and also through the Breath of the outward Air
     and its Constellation or Astrum, and so deprived all the Properties
     of their Power, that neither the Anguish of the Breath of Fire in
     the inward Property of the Soul, nor Heat nor Cold, nor any of all
     the Properties of the outward Constellation, might or could be
     manifested.

     41. The Properties of all the three Worlds in Soul and Body were in
     equal Agreement, Temperature, and Weight. That which was inward and
     holy ruled through and over the outward, that is, the outward Parts
     of the outward Life, of the outward Stars and Constellations and the
     Four Elements; and that original and universal Power of the inward
     over the outward constituted the Holy Paradise.

     42. And thus Man was both in Heaven and also in the outward World,
     and was Lord over all the Creatures of this World. Nothing could
     destroy him.

     43. For such was the Earth also, until the Curse of God broke forth.
     The Holy Property of the Spiritual World sprung up through the
     Earth, and brought forth Holy Paradisaical Fruits, which Man could
     then eat in a magical Paradisaical Manner.

     44. And had neither need of Teeth, nor Entrails in his Body. For as
     the Light swalloweth up Darkness, and as the Fire devoureth Water,
     and yet is not filled therewith, just such a Centre Man also had for
     his Mouth to eat withal, according to the Manner of Eternity.

     45. And he could also generate his Like out of himself, without any
     dividing or opening of his Body and Spirit, in such a Manner as God
     generated the outward World; who did not divide himself; but did in
     his Desire, viz., in the Word Fiat, manifest himself, and brought
     that same Desire into a Figure according to the Eternal Spiritual
     Birth. So also Man was created an Image and Likeness of God in that
     Respect, according to Time and Eternity, out of both Time and
     Eternity, yet in and for an immortal Life, which was without Enmity
     or Contrariety.

     46. But the Devil having himself been a Prince and Hierarch in the
     Place of this World, and cast out for his Pride into the dark,
     anguishing, painful and hostile Property and Source, into the Wrath
     of God, envied Man the Glory of being created in and for the
     Spiritual World, the Place which he himself once possessed; and
     therefore brought his Imagination or Desire into the Image of Man,
     and made it so lusting, that the dark World, and also the outward
     World arose in Man, and departed from the equal Agreement and
     Temperature wherein they stood, and so one predominated over the
     other.

     47. And then the Properties were each of them separately made
     manifest in itself, and each of them lusted after that which was
     like itself. That which was out of the Birth of the dark World, and
     also that which was out of the Birth of the light World, would each
     of them eat of the Limbus of the Earth, according to its Hunger; and
     so Evil and Good became manifest in Adam.

     48. And when the Hunger of the Properties went into the Earth, from
     whence the Properties of the Body were extracted, then the Fiat drew
     such a Branch out of the Earth, as the Properties could eat of in
     their awakened Vanity; for this was possible.

     49. For the Spirit of the strong and great magical Power of Time and
     Eternity was in Adam, from which the Earth with its Properties was
     breathed forth; and so the Fiat, viz., the strong Desire of the
     eternal Nature, attracted the Essence of the Earth. And thus God let
     the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil grow for Adam, according to
     his awakened Properties; for the great Power of the Soul and of the
     Body caused it.

     50. And then Man must be tried, whether he would stand and subsist
     in his own Powers, before the Tempter the Devil, and before the
     Wrath of the eternal Nature; and whether the Soul would continue in
     the equal Agreement of the Properties in true Resignation under God
     s Spirit, as an Instrument of God s Harmony, a tuned Instrument of
     divine Joyfulness for the Spirit of God to strike upon. This was
     tried by that Tree, and this severe Commandment was added, Thou
     shalt not eat thereof, for on that Day that thou eatest thereof,
     thou shalt surely die.

     51. But it being known to God that Man would not stand, and that he
     had already imagined and lusted after Good and Evil, God said, It is
     not good for Man to be alone, we will make him an Help-meet for him.

     52. For God saw that Adam could not then generate magically, having
     entered with his Lust into Vanity. Now therefore Moses saith, God
     caused a deep Sleep to fall upon him, and he slept; that is, seeing
     Man would not continue in the Obedience of the Divine Harmony in the
     Properties, submitting himself to stand still as an Instrument of
     the Spirit of God; therefore God suffered him to fall from the
     Divine Harmony into an Harmony of his own, viz., into the awakened
     Properties of Evil and Good; the Spirit of his Soul went into these.

     53. And there in this Sleep he died from the Angelical World, and
     fell under the Power of the outward Fiat, and thus bade farewell to
     the Eternal Image which was of God s begetting. Here his Angelical
     Form and Power fell into a Swoon and lay on the Ground.

     54. And then by the Fiat God made the Woman out of him, out of the
     Matrix of Venus, viz., out of that Property wherein Adam had the
     Begettress in himself; and so out of one Body he made two, and
     divided the Properties of the Tinctures, viz., the watery and fiery
     Constellations in the Element; yet not wholly in Substance but in
     the Spirit, viz., the Properties of the watery and fiery Soul.

     55. And yet it is but one Thing still, only the Property of the
     Tincture was divided; the Desire of Self-Love was taken out of Adam,
     and formed into a Woman according to his Likeness. And thence it is
     that Man now so eagerly desireth the Matrix of the Woman, and the
     Woman desireth the Limbus of the Man, viz., the Fire-Element, the
     Original of the true Soul, by which is meant the Tincture of Fire;
     for these two were one in Adam, and therein consisted the Magical
     Begetting.

     56. And as soon as Eve was made out of Adam in his Sleep, both Adam
     and Eve were at that Instant set and constituted in the outward
     natural Life, having the Members given them for Propagation, after
     the manner of the Brute Animals, and also the fleshly Carcase, into
     which they might put their gross Earthliness, and live like Beasts.

     57. Of which the poor Soul that is captivated in Vanity is at this
     Day ashamed; and sorry that its Body hath gotten such a beastial
     monstrous Shape. Nothing can be clearer than this. For it is because
     Mankind are ashamed of their Members and Nakedness, that they borrow
     their Clothing from the earthly Creatures. For this they would not
     havedone, had they not lost the Angelical Form, and assumed that of
     a Beast.

     58. This borrowed Clothing, together with the awakened Earthliness,
     and Subjection to the Powers of Heat and Cold, is a plain and full
     Proof to Man, that he is not truly at Home in this World. For all
     earthly Appetites, Cares, and Fears, together with this false
     Clothing, must perish and be severed from the Soul again.

     59. Now when Adam awoke from Sleep, he beheld his Wife, and knew
     that she came out of him; for he had not yet eaten of Vanity with
     his outward Mouth, but with the Imagination, Desire, and Lust only.

     60. And it was the first Desire of Eve, that she might eat of the
     Tree of Vanity, of Evil and Good, to which the Devil in the Form of
     a Serpent persuaded her, saying, That her Eyes should be opened, and
     she should be as God himself; which was both a Lie and a Truth.

     61. But He told her not, that she should lose the Divine Light and
     Power thereby: He only said, her Eyes should be opened, that she
     might taste, prove, and know Evil and Good, as he had done. Neither
     did he tell her that Heat and Cold would awake in her, and that the
     Property of the outward Constellations would have great Power over
     the Flesh and over the Mind.

     62. His only Aim was that the Angelical Image, viz., the Substance
     which came from the inward Spiritual World, might disappear in them.
     For then they would be constrained to live in Subjection to the
     gross Earthliness, and the Constellations or Stars; and then he knew
     well enough that when the outward World perished, the Soul would be
     with him in Darkness. For he saw that the Body must die, which he
     perceived by that which God had intimated; and so he expected still
     to be Lord to all Eternity in the Place of this World, in his false
     Shape which he had gotten; and therefore he seduced Man.

     63. For when Adam and Eve were eating the Fruit, Evil, and Good,
     into the Body, then the Imagination of the Body received Vanity in
     the Fruit, and then Vanity awaked in the Flesh, and the dark World
     got the Upperhand and Dominion in the Vanity of the Earthliness;
     upon which the fair Image of Heaven, that proceeded out of the
     Heavenly Divine World, instantly disappeared.

     64. Here Adam and Eve died to the Kingdom of Heaven, and awaked to
     the outward World, and then the fair Soul as it stood in the Love of
     God, disappeared as to the holy Power, Virtue, and Property; and
     instead thereof, the wrathful Anger, viz., the dark Fire World,
     awoke in it, and so the Soul became in one Part, viz., in the inward
     Nature, a half Devil, and in the outward Part as related to the
     outward World, a Beast.

     65. Here are the Bounds of Death and the Gates of Hell, for which
     Cause God became Man, that he might destroy Death, defeat the Devil
     s Purpose, and change Hell into great Love again.

     66. Let this be told you, Ye Children of Men; it is told you in the
     Sound of a Trumpet, that you should instantly go forth from the
     abominable Vanity, for the Fire thereof burneth.
     __________________________________________________________________

Of the lamentable Fall of Man, and of the Means of his Deliverance.

     NOW when Adam and Eve fell into this Vanity, then the Wrath of
     Nature awoke in each Property, and in or through the Desire
     impressed the Vanity of the Earthliness and Wrath of God into
     itself.

     68. And then the Flesh became gross and rough, as the Flesh of a
     Beast, and the Soul was captivated in that Essence therewith, and
     saw that its Body was become a Beast, and had gotten the Bestial
     Members for Multiplication, and the filthy Carcase into which the
     Desire would stuff the Loathsomeness which it was ashamed of in the
     Presence of God; and therefore Adam and Eve hid themselves under the
     Trees of the Garden of Eden. Heat and Cold also seized on them.

     69. And here the Heaven in Man trembled for Horror; as the Earth
     quaked in Wrath, when this Anger was destroyed on the Cross by the
     sweet Love of God; there the Anger trembled before the sweet Love of
     God.

     70. And for this Vanity's Sake which was thus awakened in Man, God
     cursed the Earth; lest the holy Element should spring or shine forth
     any more through the outward Fruit, and bring forth Paradisaical
     Fruit. For there was then no Creature that could have enjoyed it;
     neither was the earthly Man worthy of it any more.

     71. God would not cast the precious Pearls before Beasts; an ungodly
     Man in his Body being but a mere gross beastial Creature; and though
     it be of a noble Essence, yet it is wholly poisoned and loathsome in
     the Sight of God.

     72. Now when God saw that his fair Image was spoiled, he manifested
     himself to fallen Adam and Eve, and had Pity on them, and promised
     himself to them for an everlasting Possession, and that with his
     great Love in the received Humanity he would destroy the Power of
     the Serpentine Property, viz., of the Vanity in the Wrath of God
     awakened in them. And this was the breaking of the Head of the
     Serpent, which he would perform, viz., he would destroy the dark
     Death, and subdue the Anger with his great Love.

     73. And this Covenant of his Incarnation which was to come, he put
     into the Light of Life; to which Covenant the Jewish Sacrifices
     pointed as to a Mark or Limit, to which God had promised himself
     with his Love; for the Faith of the Jews entered into the Sacrifices
     and Offerings, and God s Imagination entered into the Covenant.

     74. And the Offering was a Figure of the Restitution of that which
     Adam hath lost, and so God did expiate his Anger in the human
     Property, through the offering in the Limit of the Covenant.

     75. In which Covenant the most holy sweet Name JESUS, proceeding out
     of the holy Name and great Power of JEHOVAH, had incorporated
     itself; so that he would again move and manifest himself in the
     Substance of the Heavenly World which disappeared in Adam, and
     kindle the holy divine Life therein again.

     76. This Mark or Limit of the Covenant was propagated from Adam and
     his Children, from Man to Man, and did go through from one upon all,
     as Sin also and the awakened Vanity did go through from one upon
     all.

     77. And it stood in the Promise of the Covenant at the End, in the
     Root of David in the Virgin Mary, who was, in the inward Kingdom of
     the hidden Humanity, (viz., of the Essentiality that disappeared as
     to the Kingdom of God) the Daughter of God s Covenant, but in the
     outward according to the natural Humanity, she was begotten by her
     true bodily Father Joachim and her true Mother Anna, out of the
     Essences and Substance of their Souls and Bodies, like all other
     Children of Adam; a true Daughter of Eve.

     78. In this Mary from the Virgin (viz., the Wisdom of God) in the
     promised Limit of the Covenant, of which all the Prophets have
     prophesied. - the eternal Speaking Word, which created all Things,
     did in the Fullness of Time move itself in the Name JESUS, according
     to its highest and deepest Love and Humility, and bring again
     living, divine, and heavenly Substantiality into the Humanity of the
     heavenly Part, which disappeared in Adam, and from which he died in
     Paradise, into the Seed of Mary, into the Tincture of Love, into
     that Property wherein Adam should have propagated himself in a
     magical and heavenly Manner, into the true Seed of the Woman, of
     heavenly Substantiality, which disappeared in Paradise.

     79. And when the Divine Light in the Heavenly Essence was
     extinguished, the Word of God, viz., the Divine Power of the
     Understanding, did bring in Heavenly and living Substantiality, and
     awakened the disappeared Substantiality in the Seed of Mary, and
     brought it to Life.

     80. And so now God's Substance, wherein He dwelleth and worketh, and
     the disappeared Substance of Man, are become one Person; for the
     Holy Divine Substantiality did anoint the disappeared; therefore
     that Person is called CHRISTUS, the Anointed of God.

     81. And this is the dry Rod of Aaron, which blossomed and bare
     Almonds, and the true High Priest; and it is that Humanity of which
     Christ spake, saying, that He was come from Heaven and was in
     Heaven; and that no Man could ascend into Heaven but the Son of Man
     which is come from Heaven, and is in Heaven.

     82. Now when he saith, He is come from Heaven, it is meant of the
     Heavenly Substance, the Heavenly Corporeality; for the Power and
     Virtue of God needeth no coming any whither, for it is every where
     altogether immeasurable and undivided. But Substance needeth coming;
     the Power or Virtue needeth to move itself, and manifest itself in
     Substance.

     83. And that Substance entered into the human Substance, and
     received it; not that Part only of Heavenly Substantiality, which
     disappeared in Adam, but the whole human Essence in Soul and Flesh,
     according to all the three Worlds.

     84. But he hath not received, or taken upon himself, the awakened or
     impressed Vanity, which the Devil, by his Imagination, brought into
     the Flesh, by which the Flesh did commit Sin; though he hath indeed
     taken upon him the awakened Forms of Life, as they were gone forth
     from their equal Agreement, each of them into its own Desire.

     85. For therein lay our Infirmity, and the Death, which He was to
     drown with his Heavenly holy Blood. Herein he took upon himself all
     our Sins and Infirmities, also Death and Hell in the Wrath of God,
     and destroyed their Power in the human Properties.

     86. The Wrath of God was the Hell into which the Spirit of Christ
     went, when He had shed that heavenly Blood into our outward human
     Blood, and tinctured it with the Love; thereby changing that Hell of
     the human Property into Heaven, and reducing the human Properties
     into equal Agreement, into the Heavenly Harmony.
     __________________________________________________________________

How we are born a-new; and how we may fall into God's Anger again.

     NOW here we may rightly understand what our New-Birth, or
     Regeneration, is; and how we may become, and continue to be, the
     Temple of God; though in this Life's Time, according to the outward
     Humanity, we are sinful mortal Men. 88. Christ in the human Essence
     hath broken up and opened the Gates of our inward Heavenly Humanity,
     which was shut up in Adam; so that nothing is now wanting, but that
     the Soul draw its Will out of the Vanity of the corrupted Flesh, and
     bring it into this open Gate in the Spirit of Christ. 89. Great and
     strong Earnestness is required here; and not only a learning and
     knowing, but a real Hunger and Thirst after the Spirit of Christ.
     For to know only, is not Faith; but an Hunger and Thirst after that
     which I want, so that I draw it in thereby to myself, and lay hold
     on it with the Desire and Imagination, and, make it my own; this is
     the Truth and Essence of a Christian s Faith.

     90. The Will must go forth from the Vanity of the Flesh, and
     willingly yield itself up to the Suffering and Death of Christ, and
     to all the Reproach of Vanity, which derideth it, because it goeth
     forth from its own House wherein it was born, and regardeth Vanity
     no more, but merely desireth the Love of God in Christ Jesus.

     91. In such a Hunger and Desire the Will receiveth and impresseth
     into itself the Spirit of Christ with his Heavenly Corporality; that
     is, the Soul in its great Hunger and Desire taketh hold of, and
     draweth the Body of Christ, viz., the Heavenly Substantiality, into
     its disappeared Image, within which the Word of the Power of God is
     the Working.

     92. The Hunger of the Soul bringeth its Desire quite through the
     bruised Property of its Humanity in the Heavenly Part, which
     disappeared in Adam; which Humanity, the sweet Fire of Love in the
     Death of Christ did bruise, when the Death of that Heavenly Humanity
     was destroyed.

     93. And so the Hunger of the Soul received into it, into its
     disappeared Corporality, through the Desire, the holy Heavenly
     Substance, viz., Christ s Heavenly Corporality, which filleth the
     Father all over, and is nigh unto all, and through all Things; and
     through that the disappeared Heavenly Body riseth in the Power of
     God, in the sweet Name JESU..

     94. And this raised Heavenly Spiritual Body is the Member of Christ,
     and the Temple of the Holy Ghost, a true Mansion of the Holy
     Trinity, according to Christ s Promise, saying, We will come to you,
     and make our Abode in you.

     95. The Essence of that Life eateth the Flesh of Christ, and
     drinketh his Blood. For the Spirit of Christ, viz., the Word, which
     made itself visible with the Humanity of Christ out of, and in our
     disappeared Humanity, through the outward Man of the Substance of
     this World, swalloweth its holy Substance into its fiery; for every
     Spirit eateth of its own Body.

     96. Now if the Soul eat of this sweet, holy, and Heavenly Food, then
     it kindleth itself with the great Love in the Name and Power of
     JESUS; whence its Fire of Anguish becometh a great Triumph of Joy
     and Glory, and the true Sun ariseth to it, wherein it is born to
     another Will.

     97. And here cometh to pass the Wedding of the Lamb, which we
     heartily wish that the titular and Lip-Christians might once find by
     Experience in themselves, and so pass from the History into the
     Substance.

     98. But the Soul obtaineth not this Pearl of the Divine Wisdom and
     Virtue for its own Property during the Time of this Life; because it
     hath the outward Bestial Flesh sticking to its outward Man.

     99. The Power of which Pearl of Divine Wisdom espouseth itself in
     this Wedding of the Lamb, and sinketh itself down into the Heavenly
     Image, viz., into the Substance of the Heavenly Man, who is the
     Temple of Christ; and not into the Fire-Breath of the Soul, which is
     yet, during this whole Life's Time, fast bound to the outward
     Kingdom, to the Bond of Vanity, with the Breath of the Air, and is
     in great Danger.

     100. It darteth its Beams of Love indeed very often into the Soul,
     whereby the Soul receiveth Light; but the Spirit of Christ yieldeth
     not itself up to the Fire-Breath in this Life's Time, but to the
     Breath of Light only which was extinguished in Adam, in which the
     Temple of Christ is, for that is the true and holy Heaven.

     101. Understand aright now, what the New-Birth or Regeneration is,
     and how it cometh to pass, as followeth. The outward earthly mortal
     Man is not born anew in this Life's Time; that is, neither the
     outward Flesh, nor the outward Part of the Soul. They continue both
     of them in the Vanity of their Wills which awoke in Adam. They love
     their Mother, in whose Body they live, viz., the Dominion of this
     outward World; and therein the Birth of Sin is manifest.

     102. The outward Man in Soul and Flesh, (we mean the outward part of
     the Soul) hath no Divine Will, neither doth he understand any Thing
     of God, as the Scripture saith, The natural Man perceiveth not the
     Things of the Spirit of God. &c.

     103. But the Fire-Breath of the inward World, if it be once
     enlightened, understandeth it; it hath a great Longing, Sighing,
     Hunger, and Thirst after the sweet Fountain of Christ; it refresheth
     itself by hungering and desiring, (which is the true Faith in) the
     sweet Fountain of Christ from his new Body, from the Heavenly
     Substantiality, as a hungry Branch in the Vine Christ.

     104. And the Reason why the fiery Soul cannot attain to Perfection
     during this Life's Time, is because it is fast bound with the
     outward Bond of Vanity, through which the Devil continually casteth
     his venomous Rays of Influence upon it, and so sifteth it, that it
     often biteth at his Bait, and poisoneth itself. From whence Misery
     and Anguish arise, so that the Noble Sophia hideth herself in the
     Fountain of Christ, in the Heavenly Humanity; for she cannot draw
     near to Vanity.

     105. For she knew how it went with her in Adam, when she lost her
     Pearl, which is of Grace freely bestowed again upon the inward
     Humanity; therefore she is called Sophia, viz., the Bride of Christ.

     106. Here she faithfully calleth to her Bridegroom the fiery Soul,
     and exhorteth him to Repentance, and to the unburthening of himself,
     or going forth from the Abomination of Vanity.

     107. And now War assaulteth the whole Man. The outward fleshly Man
     fighteth against the inward spiritual Man, and the spiritual against
     the fleshly; and so Man is in continual Warfare and Strife, full of
     Trouble, Misery, Anguish, and Care.

     108. The inward Spirit saith to the fiery Soul: O my Soul! O my
     love! Turn I beseech thee and go forth from Vanity, or else thou
     loseth my Love and the noble Pearl.

     109. Then saith the outward Reason, viz., the Beastial Soul; Thou
     art foolish; wilt thou be a Laughing-stock, and the Scorn of the
     World? Thou needest the outward World to maintain this Life. Beauty,
     Power, and Glory are thy proper Happiness; wherein only thou canst
     rejoice and take Delight. Why wilt thou cast thyself into Anguish,
     Misery, and Reproach? Take thy Pleasure, which will do both thy
     Flesh and thy Mind good.

     110. With such Filth the true Man is often defiled; that is, the
     outward Man defileth himself, as a Sow in the Mire, and obscureth
     his noble Pearl. For the more vain the outward Man groweth, the more
     dark the inward Man cometh to be, until at length it disappeareth
     altogether.

     111. And then the fair Paradisaical Tree is gone, and it will be
     very hard to recover it again. For when the outward Light, viz., the
     outward Soul is once enlightened, so that the outward Light of
     Reason is kindled by the inward Light; then the outward Soul
     commonly useth to turn Hypocrite, and esteem itself Divine, even
     though the Pearl be gone; which lamentable Error sticketh hard to
     many a Man.

     112. And thus it comes to pass that the Tree of Pearl in the Garden
     of Christ is often spoiled; concerning which the Scripture maketh a
     hard Knot or Conclusion, viz., That those who have once tasted the
     Sweetness of the World to come, and fall away from it again, shall
     hardly see the Kingdom of God.

     113. And though it cannot be denied, but that the Gates of Grace
     still stand open, yet the false and dazzling Light of the outward
     Reason of the Soul so deceiveth and hindereth such Men, that they
     suppose they have the Pearl, while they yet live to the Vanity of
     this World, and dance with the Devil after his Pipe.
     __________________________________________________________________

How a Man may call himself a Christian, and how not.

     HERE therefore a Christian should consider why he calleth himself a
     Christian, and examine truly whether he be one or not. For surely my
     learning to know and confess that I am a Sinner, and that Christ
     hath destroyed my Sins on the Cross, and shed His Blood for me, doth
     not make me a Christian.

     115. The Inheritance belongeth only to the Children. A Maid-Servant
     in a House knoweth well enough what the Mistress would have to be
     done, and yet that maketh her not the Heiress of her Mistress's
     Goods. The very Devils know that there is a God, yet that doth not
     change them into Angels again. But if the Maid-Servant in the House
     shall be married to the Son of her Mistress, then she may come to
     inherit her Mistress's Goods. And so it is to be understood also in
     the Matter of being a Christian.

     116. The Children of the History are not the Heirs of the Goods of
     Christ, but the legitimate Children regenerated by the Spirit of
     Christ are the only true Heirs. For God said to Abraham, Cast out
     the Son of the Bondwoman, he shall not inherit with the Son of the
     Free. For he was a Scorner, and but an Historical Son of the Faith
     and Spirit of Abraham; and so long as he continued such a one, he
     was not a true Inheritor of the Faith of Abraham, and therefore God
     commanded he should be cast out from inheriting his Goods.

     117. This was a Type of the future Christendom. For the Promise of
     Christendom was made to Abraham: Therefore the Type was then also
     set forth by two Brethren, Isaac and Ishmael; foreshewing by them
     the diverse State and Manners of Christendom; how that two sorts of
     Men would be in it, viz., True Christians and Lip-Christians. Which
     latter, under the Title or outward Profession of Christianity, would
     be but mockers, as Ishmael was and Esau, who also was a Type of the
     outward Adam, as Jacob was a Type of Christ, and His true
     Christendom.

     118. Thus every one who will call himself a Christian, must cast out
     from himself the Son of the Bond-Woman, that is, the earthly Will,
     and be evermore killing and destroying it, and not settle it in the
     Inheritance.

     119. Nor give the Pearl to the Beastial Man, for him to please and
     amuse himself with in the outward Light, in the Lust of the Flesh.
     But we must, with our Father Abraham bring the Son of the right Will
     to Mount Moriah, and be ready in Obedience to God to offer it up,
     ever in Will dying from Sin in the Death of Christ, giving no place
     to the Beast of Vanity in the Kingdom of Christ, nor letting it grow
     wanton, proud, covetous, envious, and malicious. For all these are
     the Properties of Ishmael the Son of the Bond-Woman whom Adam begat
     in his Vanity on the wanton Whore the false Bond-Woman, by the Devil
     s Imagination, out of the earthly Property in Flesh and Blood.

     120. This Mocker and titular Christian is the Son of the false
     Bond-Woman, and must be cast out; for he shall not possess the
     Inheritance of Christ in the Kingdom of God. He is not fit, he is
     but Babel, a Confusion of that one Language into many. He is but a
     Talker and a Wrangler about the Inheritance; he means to get it to
     himself by Talking and Wrangling, by the Hypocrisy of his Lips and
     seeming Holiness, although in his Heart he is no better than a
     blood-thirsty Murderer of his brother Abel, who is the right Heir.

     121. Therefore we say what we know, that he that will call himself a
     true Christian must try himself, and find what Kind of Properties
     drive and rule him, whether the Spirit of Christ moveth him to Truth
     and Righteousness, and to the Love of his Neighbour, so that he
     would willingly do what is right if he knew but how.

     122. Now if he find that he hath a real Hunger after such Virtue,
     then he may justly think that he is drawn. And then he must begin to
     practise accordingly, and not be content with a Will only, without
     Doing. The drawing of the Father to Christ consisteth in the Will,
     but the true Life consisteth in the Doing; for the right Spirit
     doeth that which is right.

     123. But if there be the Will to do, and yet the Doing followeth
     not, then the true Man is still shut up in vain Lust, which
     suppresseth the Doing. And therefore such a one is but an Hypocrite
     and an Ishmaelite; he speaketh one Thing and doth another, and
     witnesseth thereby that his Mouth is a Lyar; for he himself doth not
     that which he teacheth, and consequently only serveth the Beastial
     Man in Vanity.

     124. For he that will say, I have a Will, and would willingly do
     Good, but the earthly Flesh which I carry about me, keepeth me back,
     so that I cannot; yet I shall be saved by Grace, for the Merits of
     Christ. I comfort myself with His Merit and Sufferings; who will
     receive me of mere Grace, without any Merits of my own, and forgive
     me my Sins. Such a one, I say, is like a Man that knoweth what Food
     is good for his Health, yet will not eat of it, but eateth Poison
     instead thereof, from whence Sickness and Death, will certainly
     follow.

     125. For what good doth it to the Soul to know the Way to God, if it
     will not walk therein, but go on in a contrary Path? What good will
     it do the Soul to comfort itself with the Filiation of Christ, with
     His Passion and Death, and so flatter itself with the Hopes of
     getting the Patrimony thereby, if it will not enter into the Filial
     Birth, that it may be a true Child, born out of the Spirit of
     Christ, out of His Suffering, Death and Resurrection? Surely, the
     tickling and flattering itself with Christ's Merits, without the
     true innate Childship, is Falsehood and a Lie, whosoever he be that
     teacheth it.

     126. This Comfort belongeth only to the penitent Sinner, who
     striveth against Sin and the Anger of God. When Temptations come,
     and the Devil assaulteth such a poor repentant Soul, then it must
     wholly wrap itself up in the Merits and Death of Christ, as its sole
     Armour of Defence.

     127. Christ alone indeed hath merited Redemption for us; but not in
     such a Way as that for His own proper Merit s Sake, he will freely
     grant us his Childship by an outward Adoption only, and so receive
     us for Children, when we are none. No,. he himself is the Merit; he
     is the open Gate that leadeth through Death; and through that Gate
     we must enter. He receiveth no Beast into his Merit, but those only
     that turn, and become as Children. Those Children that thus come to
     him are his Reward, which he hath merited.

     128. For thus he said, Father, the Men were thine and thou hast
     given them to me (as my Reward) and I will give them eternal Life.
     But the Life of Christ will be given to none, unless they come to
     him in his Spirit, into his Humanity, Sufferings, and Merit, and
     therein be born true Children of the Merit.

     129. We must be born of his Merit, and put on the Merit of Christ in
     his Passion and Death; not outwardly with verbal Flattery only, and
     bare comforting of ourselves therewith, while we still remain Aliens
     and strange Children, of a strange Essence or Nature. No; the
     strange Essence inheriteth not the Childship, but the innate Essence
     inheriteth it.

     130. This innate Essence is not of this World, but in Heaven, of
     which St Paul speaketh saying, Our Conversation is in Heaven. The
     filial Essence walketh in Heaven, and Heaven is in Man.

     131. But if Heaven in Man be not open, and the Man stand without
     Heaven flattering himself, and say, I am still without, but Christ
     will take me in through his Grace; is not his Merit mine? Such a one
     is in Vanity and Sin with the outward Man, and with the Soul in
     Hell, viz., in the Anger of God.

     132. Therefore learn to understand rightly what Christ hath taught
     us, and done for us. He is our Heaven; he must get a Form in us, or
     else we shall not be in Heaven. Thus then the Soul's inward Man,
     with the holy Body of Christ, viz., in the New Birth, is in Heaven,
     and the outward mortal Man is in the World, of which Christ spake
     saying, My Sheep are in my Hand, and none shall pluck them away; the
     Father which gave them to me is greater than all.
     __________________________________________________________________

Of the right and of the wrong going to Church, receiving the Sacraments, and
Absolution.

     Of the right and of the wrong going to Church, receiving the
     Sacraments, and Absolution.

     BELOVED Brethren, we will teach you faithfully, not with flattering
     Lips to please the Antichrist, but from our Pearl, the Virtue,
     Power, and Spirit of Christ in us, from a Christian Essence and
     Knowledge; not from the Husk and History, but from a New-born
     Spirit, from Christ's Knowledge, as a Branch growing on the Vine
     Christ; from the Measure of that Knowledge which is opened in us,
     according to the Will and Counsel of God.

     134. Men tie us in these Days to the History, and to the material
     Churches of Stone; which Churches are indeed good in their Kind, if
     Men did also bring the Temple of Christ into them. They teach
     moreover, that their Absolution is a Forgiving of Sins, and that the
     Supper of the Lord taketh away Sin: Also that the Spirit of God
     cometh into Men through their Ministry. All which hath a proper
     Meaning, if it was rightly understood; and if Men did not cleave
     merely to the Husk.

     135. Many a Man goeth to Church twenty or thirty Years, heareth
     Sermons, receiveth the Sacraments, and heareth Absolution read or
     declared, and yet is as much a Beast of the Devil and Vanity at the
     last as at the first. A Beast goeth into the Church, and to the
     Supper, and a Beast cometh out from thence again.

     136. How will he eat that hath no Mouth? Can any Man eat that Food
     which is so shut up that he cannot get it? How will he drink that
     can come at no Water? Or how will he hear that hath no Hearing?

     137. What good End doth it answer, for me to go to the material
     Churches of Stone, and there fill my Ears with empty Breath? or to
     go to the Supper, and feed nothing but the earthly Mouth, which is
     mortal and corruptible? Cannot I feed and satisfy that with a Piece
     of Bread at Home? What good doth it to the Soul, which is an
     immortal Life, to have the Beastial Man observe the Form, and
     venerate the Shell of Christ s Institution, if it cannot obtain the
     Kernel thereof? For St Paul saith of the Supper, - You receive it to
     Condemnation, because ye discern not the Lord's Body.

     138. The Covenant stands firm, and is stirred in the Use of the
     Institution. Christ proffereth his Spirit to us in His Word (viz.,
     in his preached Word) and His Body and Blood in the Sacrament, and
     His Absolution in a brotherly Reconciliation one to another.

     139. But what good doth it in a Beast to stand and listen, who hath
     no Hearing to receive the inward living Word, nor any Ground wherein
     to lay the Word, that it may bring forth Fruit? Of such Christ
     saith, The Devil plucketh the Word out of their Hearts, lest they
     should believe and be saved. But how can he do so? Because the Word
     findeth no Place in the hearing Mind to take Root in.

     140. And thus it is with Absolution also: What Benefit is it to me
     for one to say, I pronounce or declare to thee the Forgiveness of
     thy Sins, when my Soul is wholly shut up in Sin? Whosoever saith
     thus to a Sinner so shut up, erreth; and he that receiveth it
     without the Voice of God within himself confirming the same,
     deceiveth himself. None can forgive Sins but God only.

     141. The Preacher hath not Forgiveness of Sins in his own Power; but
     it is the Spirit of Christ in the Voice of the Priest that hath the
     Power, provided the Priest himself is a Christian.

     142. What good did it to those that heard Christ himself teaching on
     Earth, when he said, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
     laden, and I will give you Rest ? What good did this blessed Promise
     to those that heard it, if they laboured not, nor were heavy laden?
     What became of the Refreshment or Rest then? Seeing they had dead
     Ears, and heard only the outward Christ, and not the Word of the
     Divine Power; certainly they were not refreshed. Just so much good
     the Beastial Man hath of his Absolution and Sacraments.

     143. The Covenant is open in the Sacraments; and in the Office or
     Ministry of teaching also the Covenant is stirred; the Soul doth
     receive it, but in that Property only of which the Mouth of the Soul
     is.

     144. That is, the outward Beast receiveth Bread and Wine, which it
     may have as well at Home. And the fiery Soul receiveth the Testament
     according to its Property, viz., in the Anger of God it receiveth
     the Substance of the eternal World, but according to the Property of
     the dark World; it receiveth therefore, as the Scripture saith, to
     its own Judgement or Condemnation. For as the Mouth is, so is the
     Food which is taken in by the Mouth. And after this Manner also it
     is that the Wicked shall behold Christ at the last Judgement as a
     severe Judge; but the Saints shall behold him as a loving Immanuel.

     145. God s Anger standeth open in his Testaments towards the Wicked;
     but towards the Saints the heavenly loving Kindness, and in it the
     Power of Christ in the holy Name JESUS, standeth open. What good
     then doth the holy Thing do to the Wicked, who cannot enjoy it? Or
     what is there, that can take away his Sins, when his Sin is only
     stirred and made manifest thereby?

     146. The Sacraments do not take away Sin; neither are Sins forgiven
     thereby. But it is thus: When Christ ariseth, then Adam dyeth in the
     Essence of the Serpent; as when the Sun riseth, the Night is
     swallowed up in the Day, and the Night is no more: Just so are Sins
     forgiven.

     147. The Spirit of Christ eateth of his Holy Substance, the inward
     Man is the Receiver of the Holy Substance; he receiveth what the
     Spirit of Christ bringeth into him viz., the Temple of God, Christ s
     Flesh and Blood. But what doth this concern a Beast? Or what doth it
     concern the Devils? Or the Soul that is in the Anger of God? These
     eat of the Heavenly Blood, that is in the Heaven wherein they dwell,
     which is the Abyss, or bottomless Pit.

     148. And thus it is also in the Office or Ministry of Preaching: The
     ungodly Man heareth what the outward Soul of the outward World
     preacheth; that he receiveth, viz., the History; and if there be
     Straw or Stubble in that which is taught, he sucketh the Vanity out
     of that. Yea, if the Preaching be mere Calumny, Railing, and
     uncharitable Abuse, as is sometimes the Case, then his Soul sucketh
     the venomous Poison, and the murdering Cruelty of the Devil from it,
     wherewith it tickleth itself, and is pleased with learning how to
     judge and condemn others.

     149. Thus if the Preacher be one that is dead, and hath no true Life
     in him, but soweth only Venom and Reproach proceeding out of his
     evil Affections, then it is the Devil that teacheth, and the Devil
     that heareth. Such teaching is received into a wicked heart, and
     bringeth forth wicked Fruits. By which Means the World is become a
     mere Den of murdering Devils. So that if you look among the Herd of
     such Teachers and Hearers, there is little to be found but
     Revilings, Slanderings, and Reproachings; together with Contention
     about Words, and Wrangling about the Husk.

     150. But the Holy Ghost teacheth in the holy Teachers, and the
     Spirit of Christ heareth through the Soul, which is the Divine House
     of the Divine Sound or Voice in the holy Hearer.

     151. The holy Man hath his Church in himself, wherein he heareth and
     teacheth. But Babel hath a Heap of Stones, into which she goeth with
     her seeming Holiness and real Hypocrisy. There she loved to be seen
     in fine Clothes, and maketh a very devout and godly Shew; the Church
     of Stone is her God, in which she putteth her Confidence.

     152. But the holy Man hath his Church about him every where, even in
     himself; for he always standeth and walketh, sitteth and lyeth down
     in his Church. He liveth in the true Christian Church; yea, in the
     Temple of Christ. The Holy Ghost preacheth to him out of every
     Creature. Whatsoever he looketh upon, he seeth a Preacher of God
     therein.

     153. Here now the Scoffer will say that I despise the Church Of
     Stone, where the Congregation meeteth; but I say that I do not. For
     I do but discover the hypocritical Whore of Babylon, which
     committeth Whoredom with the Church of Stone, and termeth herself a
     Christian, but is indeed a Strumpet.

     154. A true Christian brings his holy Church with him into the
     Congregation. For the Heart is the true Church, where a Man must
     practise the Service of God. If I should go a thousand Times to
     Church, and to the Sacrament every Week, and hear Absolution
     declared to me every Day, and have not Christ in me, all would be
     false, an unprofitable Fiction and graven Image in Babel, and no
     forgiving of Sins.

     155. A holy Man doth holy Works from the holy Strength of his Mind.
     The Work is not the Atonement of Reconciliation, but it is the
     Building which the true Spirit buildeth in his Substance; it is his
     Habitation. But the Fiction and Fancy is the Habitation of the false
     Christian, into which his Soul entereth with Dissimulation. The
     outward Hearing reacheth but to the outward, and worketh in the
     outward only; but the inward Hearing goeth into the inward, and
     worketh in the inward.

     156. Dissemble, roar, cry, sing, preach, and teach as much as thou
     wilt; yet if thine inward Teacher and Hearer be not open, all is
     nothing but a Babel a Fiction, and a graven Image, whereby the
     Spirit of the outward World doth model and make to itself a graven
     Image in Resemblance of the inward; and maketh a Holy Shew
     therewith, as if he performed some divine or holy Service to God;
     whereas many Times in such Service and Worship, the Devil worketh
     mightily in the Imagination, and very much tickleth the Heart with
     those Things wherein the Flesh delighteth. Which indeed not seldom
     happeneth to the Children of God, as to their outward Man, if they
     do not take great Heed to themselves; so busily doth the Devil beset
     and sift them.
     __________________________________________________________________

Of unfprofitable Opinions, and Strife about the Letter.

     Of unfprofitable Opinions, and Strife about the Letter.

     A true Christian, who is born a-new of the Spirit of Christ, is in
     the Simplicity of Christ, and hath no Strife or Contention with any
     Man about Religion. He hath Strife enough in himself, with his own
     Beastial evil Flesh and Blood. He continually thinketh himself a
     great Sinner, and is afraid of God: But the Love of Christ by
     degrees pierceth through, and expelleth that Fear, as the Day
     swalloweth up the Night.

     159. But the Sins of the impenitent Man rest in the Sleep of Death,
     bud forth in the Pit, and produce their Fruit in Hell.

     160. The Christiandom that is in Babel, striving about the Manner
     how Men ought to serve God, and glorify him; also how they are to
     know him, and what he is in his Essence and Will. And they preach
     positively, that whosoever is not one and the same with them in
     every Particular of Knowledge and Opinion, is no Christian, but a
     Heretick.

     161. Now I would fain see how all their Sects can be brought to
     agree in that one which might be called a true Christian Church;
     when all of them are Scorners, every Party of them reviling the
     rest, and proclaiming them to be false.

     162. But a Christian is of no Sect: He can dwell in the midst of
     Sects, and appear in their Services, without being attached or bound
     to any. He hath but one Knowledge, and that is, Christ in him. He
     seeketh but one Way, which is the Desire always to do and teach that
     which is right; and he putteth all his knowing and willing into the
     Life of Christ.

     163. He sigheth and wisheth continually that the Will of God might
     be done in him, and that his Kingdom might be manifested in him. He
     daily and hourly killeth Sin in the Flesh; for the Seed of the
     Woman, viz., the inward Man in Christ, continually breaketh the Head
     of the Serpent, that is, the Power of the Devil, which is in Vanity.

     164. His Faith is a Desire after God and Goodness; which he wrappeth
     up in a sure Hope, trusting to the Words of the Promise, and liveth
     and dieth therein; though as to the true Man, he never dieth.

     165. For Christ saith, Whosoever believeth in me, shall never die,
     but hath pierced through from Death to Life; and Rivers of living
     Water shall flow from him, viz., good Doctrine and Works.

     166. Therefore I say, that whatsoever fighteth and contendeth about
     the Letter, is all Babel. The Letters of the Word proceed from, and
     stand all in, one Root, which is the Spirit of God; as the various
     Flowers stand all in the Earth and grow about one another. They
     fight not with each other about their Difference of Colour, Smell,
     and Taste, but suffer the Earth, the Sun, the Rain, the Wind, the
     Heat and Cold, to do with them as they please; and yet every one of
     them groweth in its own peculiar Essence and Property.

     167. Even so it is with the Children of God; they have various Gifts
     and Degrees of Knowledge, yet all from one Spirit. They all rejoice
     at the great Wonders of God, and give Thanks to the most High in His
     Wisdom. Why then should they contend about him in whom they live and
     have their Being, and of whose Substance they themselves are?

     168. It is the greatest Folly that is in Babel for People to strive
     about Religion, as the Devil hath made the World to do; so that they
     contend vehemently about Opinions of their own forging, viz., about
     the Letter; when the Kingdom of God consisteth in no Opinion, but in
     Power and Love.

     169. As Christ said to his Disciples, and left it with them at the
     last, saying, Love one another, as I have loved you; for thereby Men
     shall know, that ye are my Disciples. If Men would as fervently seek
     after Love and Righteousness as they do after Opinions, there would
     be no Strife on Earth, and we should be as Children of One Father,
     and should need no Law, or Ordinance.

     170. For God is not served by any Law, but only by Obedience. Laws
     are for the Wicked, who will not embrace Love and Righteousness;
     they are, and must be, compelled and forced by Laws.

     171. We all have but one only Order, Law, or Ordinance, which is to
     stand still to the Lord of all Beings, and resign our Wills up to
     him, and suffer His Spirit to play what Musick he will. And thus we
     give to him again as His own Fruits, that which he worketh and
     manifesteth in us.

     172. Now if we did not contend about our different Fruits, Gifts,
     Kinds and Degrees of Knowledge, but did acknowledge them in one
     another, like Children of the Spirit of God, what could condemn us?
     For the Kingdom of God consisteth, not in our knowing and supposing,
     but in Power.

     173. If we did not know half so much, and were more like Children,
     and had but a brotherly Mind and good Will, towards one another, and
     lived like Children of one Mother, and as Branches of one Tree,
     taking our Sap all from one Root, we should be far more holy than we
     are.

     174. Knowledge serves only to this End, viz., to know that we have
     lost the Divine Power, in Adam, and are become now inclined to Sin;
     that we have evil Properties in us, and that doing Evil pleaseth not
     God; so that with our knowledge we might learn to do right. Now if
     we have the Power of God in us, and desire with all our Hearts to
     act and to live aright, then our Knowledge is but our Sport, or
     Matter of Pleasure, wherein we rejoice.

     175. For true Knowledge is the Manifestation of the Spirit of God
     through the Eternal Wisdom. He knoweth what He will in His Children;
     He showeth his Wisdom and Wonders by his Children, as the Earth
     putteth forth its various Flowers.

     176. Now if we dwell one with another, like humble Children, in the
     Spirit of Christ, one rejoicing at the Gift and Knowledge of
     another, who would judge or condemn us? Who judgeth or condemneth
     the Birds in the Woods, that praise the Lord of all Beings with
     various Voices, every one in its own Essence? Doth the Spirit of God
     reprove them for not bringing their Voices into one Harmony? Doth
     not the Melody of them all proceed from His power, and do they not
     sport before Him.

     177. Those Men therefore that strive and wrangle about the Knowledge
     and Will of God, and despise one another on that Account, are more
     foolish than the Birds in the Woods, and the wild Beasts that have
     no true Understanding. They are more unprofitable in the Sight of
     the holy God than the Flowers of the Field, which stand still in
     quiet Submission to the Spirit of God, and suffer him to manifest
     the Divine Wisdom and Power through them. Yea, such Men are worse
     than Thistles and Thorns that grow among fair Flowers, for they at
     least stand still and are quiet, whereas those Wranglers are like
     the ravenous Beasts and Birds of Prey, which fright the other Birds
     from singing and praising God.

     178. In short; they are the Issue, Branches or Sprouts of the Devil
     in the Anger of God, who, notwithstanding must by their very
     tormenting be made to serve the Lord; for by their plaguing and
     persecuting, they press out the Sap through the Essence in the
     Children of God, so that they move and stir themselves in the Spirit
     of God, with praying and continual sighing, in which Exercise of
     their Powers the Spirit of God moveth himself in them.

     179. For thereby the Desire is exerted, and so the Children of God
     grow green, flourish, and bring forth Fruit; for the Children of God
     are manifested in Tribulation; as the Scripture saith, When thou
     chastiseth them, they cry fervently to thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

Wherein Christian Religion consisteth; and how Men should serve God and their
Brethren.

     Wherein Christian Religion consisteth; and how Men should serve God
     and their Brethren.

     ALL Christian Religion wholly consisteth in this, to learn to know
     ourselves; whence we are come, and what we are; how we are gone
     forth from the Unity into Dissension, Wickedness, and
     Unrighteousness; how we have awakened and stirred up these Evils in
     us; and how we may be delivered from them again, and recover our
     original Blessedness.

     181. First, how we were in the Unity, when we were the Children of
     God in Adam before he fell. Secondly, how we are now in Dissension
     and Disunion, in Strife and Contrariety. Thirdly, Whither we go when
     we pass out of this corruptible Condition; whither with the
     immortal, and whither with the mortal Part.

     182. And Lastly, how we may come forth from Dis-union and Vanity,
     and enter again into that one Tree, Christ in us, out of which we
     all sprung in Adam. In these four Points all the necessary Knowledge
     of a Christian consisteth.

     183.So that we need not strive about any Thing; we have no Cause of
     Contention with each other. Let every one only exercise himself in
     learning ahow he may enter again into the Love of God and his
     Brother.

     184. The Testaments of Christ are nothing else but a loving Bond or
     brotherly Covenant, wherewith God in Christ bindeth himself to us
     and us to him. All teaching, willing, living, and doing, must imply,
     aim at, and refer to that. All teaching and doing otherwise,
     whatsoever it be, is Babel and a Fiction; a mere graven Image of
     Pride in unprofitable Judgings, a disturbing of the World, and an
     Hypocrisy of the Devil, wherewith he blindeth Simplicity.

     185. Every Preacher void of the Spirit of God, who without Divine
     Knowledge, setteth himself up for a Teacher of Divine Things,
     pretending to serve God thereby, is false, and doth but serve the
     Belly, his Idol, and his own proud insolent Mind, in desiring to be
     honoured on that Account, and esteemed Holy, or a Divine in Holy
     Orders. He beareth an Office, to which he is set apart and chosen by
     the Children of Men, who do but flatter him, and for Favour have
     ordained him thereunto.

     186. Christ said, Whosoever entereth not by the Door, that is,
     through his Spirit, into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other
     Way, the same is a Thief and a Murderer, and the Sheep follow him
     not, for they know not his Voice.

     187. He hath not the Voice of the Spirit of God, but the Voice of
     his own Art and Learning only; the Man teacheth, and not the Spirit
     of God. But Christ saith, Every Plant which my Heavenly Father hath
     not planted, shall be plucked up by the Roots.

     188. How then will he that is ungodly plant Heavenly Plants, when he
     hath no Seed alive in its Power in himself? Christ saith expressly,
     The Sheep hear not his Voice, they follow him not.

     189. The written Word is but an Instrument whereby the Spirit
     leadeth us to itself within us. That Word which will teach, must be
     living in the literal Word. The Spirit of God must be in the literal
     Sound, or else none is a Teacher of God, but a mere Teacher of the
     Letter, a Knower of the History, and not of the Spirit of God in
     Christ.

     190. All that Men will serve God with, must be done in Faith, viz.,
     in the Spirit. It is the Spirit that maketh the Work perfect, and
     acceptable in the Sight of God. All that a Man undertaketh and doeth
     in Faith, he doth in the Spirit of God, which Spirit of God doth
     cooperate in the Work, and then it is acceptable to God. For he hath
     done it himself, and his Power and Virtue is in it: It is holy.

     191. But whatsoever is done in Self, without Faith, is but a Figure
     and Shell, or Husk of a true Christian Work.

     192. If thou servest thy brother, and doest it but in Hypocrisy, and
     givest him unwillingly, then thou servest not God. For thy Faith
     proceedeth not from Love, nor entereth into Hope, in thy Gift.
     Indeed thou servest thy Brother, and he for his Part thanketh God
     and blesseth thee, but thou blessest not him. For thou givest him
     thy Gift with a grudging Spirit, which entereth not into the Spirit
     of God, into the Hope of Faith; therefore thy Gift is but half
     given, and thou hast but half thy Reward for it.

     193. The same is true of receiving a Gift. If any giveth in Faith,
     in Divine Hope, he blesseth his Gift by his Faith: But whoso
     receiveth it unthankfully, and murmureth in his Spirit, he curseth
     it in the Use or Enjoyment of it. Thus it is, that every one shall
     have his own; Whatsoever he soweth, that shall he also reap.

     194. So likewise it is in the Office of teaching; whatsoever a Man
     soweth, that also he reapeth. For if any Man sow good Seed from the
     Spirit of Christ, it sticketh in the good Heart, and bringeth forth
     good Fruit; but in the Wicked, who are not capable of receiving the
     good Seed, the Anger of God is stirred.

     195. If any sow Contentions, Reproaches, and Misconstructions, all
     ungodly People receive that unto them; which sticketh in them also,
     and bringeth forth Fruit accordingly. So that they learn thereby to
     despise, revile, slander, and misrepresent one another. Out of which
     Root the great Babel is sprung and grown; wherein Men, from mere
     Pride and Strife, contend about the History, and the Justification
     of a poor Sinner in the Sight of God; thereby causing the simple to
     err and blaspheme, insomuch that one Brother revileth and curseth
     the other, and excommunicateth, or casteth him to the Devil, for the
     Sake of the History and Letter.

     196. Such Railers and Revilers fear not God, but raise the great
     Building of Dissension. And seeing corrupt Lust lieth in all Men, in
     the earthly Flesh still, therefore they raise and awaken
     Abominations even in the simple Children of God, and make the People
     of God, as well as the Children of Iniquity, to blaspheme. And thus
     they become Master-Builders of the great Babel of the World, and are
     as useful in the Church, as a fifth Wheel in a Waggon; yea, what is
     worse than that, they erect the hellish Building too.

     197. Therefore it is highly necessary for the Children of God to
     pray earnestly, that they may learn to know this false Building, and
     go forth from it with their Minds, and not help to build it up, and
     persecute their Fellow-Children of God. For by that Means they keep
     themselves back from the Heavenly Kingdom, and turn aside from the
     right Way.

     198. According to the saying of Christ to the Pharisees, Woe unto
     you Pharisees; for you compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte,
     and when he is one, you make him two-fold more the Child of Hell
     than yourselves. Which is truly too much the Case with the modern
     Factions and Sects among these Cryers and Teachers of Strife.

     199. I desire therefore, out of my Gifts, which are revealed to me
     from God, that all the Children of God, who desire to be the true
     Members of Christ, be faithfully warned to depart from such
     abominable Contentions and bloody Firebrands, and to go forth from
     all Strife with their Brethren, and strive only after Love and
     Righteousness towards all Men.

     200. For he that is a good Tree must bring forth good Fruits, and
     must sometimes suffer Swine to devour his Fruits, and yet must
     continue a good Tree still, and be always willing to work with God,
     and not suffer any Evil to overcome him. And then he standeth and
     groweth in the Field of God, and bringeth forth Fruit to be set upon
     God s Table, which he shall enjoy forever. Amen, All that hath
     Breath, praise the Name of the Lord. Hallelujah.
     __________________________________________________________________

by Jacob Behmen (Jakob Boehme) 1575-1624,

The Teutonic Theosopher

SHOWING

How Man must DAILY die to his OWN Will in SELF; how he must bring his Desire
into God, and what he should ask and desire of God.

LIKEWISE

How he must spring up out of the dying sinful Man, with a new Mind and Will
through the Spirit of Christ.

ALSO

What the Old and New Man are, and what each of them is in Life, Will and
Practice.

Composed by a Soul that loveth all

who are Children of JESUS CHRIST, under the Cross.

   Brought forth in the 1600 s by a humble shoemaker; translated into
   English over 100 years later; suppressed and hidden away until recently
   in theological archives around the world... a worthy personal study not
   just for academics but for all those who are spiritually grounded in
   the WORD, who are learning to hear the Lord, and who hunger for more.

   These writings from out of the Past are in the Public Domain and may be
   freely shared, photocopied, reproduced, faxed or transmitted in any way
   by any means.

   Christ saith, If any Man will come after Me, let him DENY HIMSELF, and
   take up his Cross daily, and follow Me.Matthew 16,24 ;Mark 8,34 ;Luke
   9,23.

   Peter saith to Christ, Behold, we have forsaken All, and followed
   Thee.Matthew 19,27 ;Mark 10,28 ;Luke 18,28.
     __________________________________________________________________

     We have a clear Example in Lucifer, and also in Adam the first Man,
     of what SELF doeth, when it getteth the Light of Nature to be its
     OWN, and when it can walk with the Understanding in its OWN
     Dominion. We see also in Men learned in Arts and Sciences, that when
     they get the Light of this outward World or Nature into the
     Possession of their Reason, nothing cometh of it but Pride of
     themSELVES. And yet all the World so vehemently desireth and seeketh
     after this Light as the best Treasure; and indeed it is the best
     Treasure this World affordeth, if it be rightly used.

     2. But while SELF, viz. Reason, is captivated and fast bound in a
     close and strong Prison, that is to say, in the Anger of God, and in
     Earthliness, it is very dangerous for a Man to make Use of the Light
     of Knowledge in SELF, as if it were in the Possession of SELF.

     3. For the Wrath of the Eternal and Temporary Nature will soon take
     Pleasure in it, and then SELF and a Man's own Reason, will rise up
     in Pride, and depart from the true resigned Humility towards God,
     and will no longer eat of the Fruit of Paradise, but instead eat of
     the Property of SELF, viz. of that Dominion of Life, wherein Good
     and Evil are mixed as Lucifer and Adam did. Who both entered with
     the Desire of SELF back again into the Original, out of which the
     Creatures were brought forth and entered into the Condition of the
     Creatures; Lucifer into the Center and wrathful Nature, into the
     Matrix or Womb which bringeth forth Fire, and Adam into the earthly
     Nature, into the Matrix of the outward World, viz. into the Lust
     after Good and Evil.

     4. This happened to them both, because they had the Light of
     Understanding shining in SELF, in which they could behold
     themselves, whereby the Spirit of SELF went into the Imagination,
     (viz. into a Desire to get to the Center,) that they might exalt
     themselves in Might, Power, and Knowledge. Now when Lucifer sought
     after the Mother of Fire in his Center, and thought to reign
     therewith over the Love of God and all the Angels, and when Adam
     also desired to try in the Essence what the Mother or Root was from
     whence Evil and Good did spring, and purposely brought his Desire
     thereinto, in order to thereby become knowing and full of
     Understanding thereby: Both Lucifer and Adam were captivated in
     their evil or false Desire in the Mother, and broke off themselves
     from Resignation which proceeds from God, and so were caught by the
     Spirit of the Will, by the Desire in the Mother. Which Desire
     immediately got the Dominion in Nature; and so Lucifer stuck fast in
     the wrathful Source of Fire, and that Fire became manifest in the
     Spirit of his Will, whereby the Creature in its Desire became an
     Enemy to the Love and Meekness of God.

     5. Adam in like Manner, was immediately caught by the earthly
     Mother, which is Evil and Good, created out of the Anger and Love of
     God, and compacted into one Substance. Whereupon the earthly
     Property instantly got the Dominion in Adam, and from thence Heat
     and Cold, Envy and Anger, and all Malice and Contrariety to God
     became manifest, and bore Rule in him.

     6. But if they had not brought the Light of Knowledge into SELF,
     then the Glass of the Knowledge of the Center and of the Original of
     the Creature, viz. of the Power which it had in itself would not
     have been manifested, from whence the Imagination and Lust did
     arise.

     7. As also we often see at this Day how the same Error bringeth
     Danger upon the enlightened Children of God; in whom when the Sun of
     the great Presence of God's Holiness shineth, by which the Life
     passeth into Triumph, and then Reason beholds itself therein as in a
     Glass, and the Will goeth on in SELF, in its OWN searching, and will
     try what the Center is out of which the Light shineth, and will of
     its OWN Motion and Strength force itSELF into it, how that from
     thence arise abominable Pride and SELF-Love; so that its (the
     Creature's) own Reason, which is but a Mirror or Glass of the
     Eternal Wisdom, supposeth itSELF to be greater than it is; and then
     whatsoever it doeth, it thinketh God's Will doeth in and by it, and
     that he is a Prophet; though it is moved only by itSELF, and goeth
     on in its OWN Desire, in which the Center of Nature presently riseth
     up, and entereth into that false Desire of SELF against God, and so
     the Will entereth into SELF-Conceit and Exaltation.

     8. Then the subtle Devil insinuateth himself into the Creature, and
     sifteth the Center of Nature, and bringeth evil or false Desires
     into it, so that a Man becometh as it were drunken in SELF, and
     still persuades himself that he is driven by God, by which Means the
     good Beginning, wherein the Divine Light shone in Nature, cometh to
     be spoiled, and so the Light of God departeth from him.

     9. Yet the outward Light of the outward Nature still remaineith
     shining in the Creature; for its own SELF throweth itself thereinto,
     and supposeth that it is still the first Light of God; but it is not
     so. And into this SELF-Exaltation in the Light of its outward
     Reason, the Devil throweth himself again, (though in the first
     Light, which was Divine, he had been forced to depart) now returning
     with the seven-fold Desire, of which Christ spake, saying, When the
     unclean Spirit departeth out of a Man, he wandereth through dry
     Places seeking Rest, and findeth none; and then he taketh to himself
     seven Spirits worse than himself, and returneth to his first House;
     and finding it swept and garnished, he dwelleth therein, and so it
     is worse with that Man than it was before.

     10. This House, that is thus swept and garnished, is the Light of
     Reason in SELF. For if a Man bringeth his Desire and Will into God,
     and then goeth on in Abstinence from this wicked Life, and heartily
     desireth the Love of God, then that Love will indeed manifest itself
     to him with its most friendly and cheerful Countenance, by which the
     outward Light also is kindled. For where the Light of God is
     kindled, there all will be Light; the Devil cannot stay there, but
     must depart thence; and then he searcheth through the Mother of the
     Original of Life, viz. the Center, but finds that it is become a dry
     feeble Place. For the Anger of God, viz, the Center of Nature, is in
     its own Property altogether feeble, barren and dry and cannot get
     the Dominion in its own wrathful Principle. Satan continually
     searcheth through these Places to find an open Gate to enter with
     his Desire, and so to sift the Soul that it might come to exalt its
     SELF.

     11. And now if the Spirit of the Will of the Creature throweth
     itself with the Light of Reason back into the Center, viz. into
     SELF, and entereth into SELF-Exaltation, then it goeth forth again
     from the Light of God, and presently the Devil findeth an open Gate
     for him to enter in at, and a garnished House to dwell in, viz. the
     Light of Reason. Then he taketh to himself the seven Forms of the
     Property of Life in SELF, viz. the Flatterers which are departed
     from God into SELF; and there he entereth and putteth his Desire
     into the Lust of SELF and evil Imaginations, wherein the Spirit of
     the Will beholdeth itself in the Forms of the Properties of Life in
     the outward Light, and then the Man sinketh into himself as if he
     were drunk, and the Stars lay hold on him, and bring their strong
     Influences into him, (into outward Reason) that he might seek the
     Wonders of God there, that so they may manifest themselves therein.
     For all Creatures groan and long after God. And though the Stars
     cannot apprehend the Spirit of God, yet they would rather have a
     House of Light wherein they may rejoice, than a House shut up,
     wherein they can have no Rest.

     12. Thus such a Man goeth on as if he were drunk, in the Light of
     the outward Reason, which is called the Stars, and apprehendeth
     great and wonderful Things, and hath a continual Guide, therein. And
     then the Devil presently watcheth to see if any Gate standeth open
     for him, through which he may kindle the Centre of Life, that so the
     Spirit of the Will may mount aloft in Pride, Self-Conceit, or
     Covetousness; (from whence Self-Arrogancy ariseth, the Will of
     Reason desiring to be honored;) for it supposeth it hath attained
     the Sum of all Happiness, when it hath gotten the Light of Reason,
     and can judge the House of hidden Mysteries that is shut up; which
     nevertheless God can easily unlock. The deluded Man thereupon
     supposeth that now he hath reached the Mark, and that Honour is due
     to him, because he hath gotten the Understanding of Reason, and
     never considereth that the Devil maketh himself merry with his
     Desire in his seven Forms of Life of the Center of Nature, nor what
     abominable Error he setteth up.

     13. From this Understanding of Reason false Babel is brought forth
     in the Christian Church on Earth, wherein Men rule and teach by the
     Conclusions of Reason, and have set the Child which is drunk in its
     own Pride and SELF-Desire, as a fair Virgin upon the Throne.

     14. But the Devil is entered into its seven Forms of Life of the
     Center, viz. into its own SELF-conceited Reason, and continually
     bringeth his Desire into this trimmed and decorated Virgin, which
     the Stars receive. He is her Beast on which she rideth, well adorned
     with her own Powers of Life, as may be seen in the Revelation of St.
     John. Thus hath this Child of SELF taken into its Possession the
     outward Glance of Divine Holiness, viz. the Light of Reason, and
     supposeth itSELF to be the fair Child in the House, though the Devil
     hath his Lodging within it all the while.

     15. And thus it is with all those who have been once enlightened by
     God, and afterwards go forth again from true Resignation, and wean
     themselves from the pure Milk of their Mother, viz. true Humility.
     __________________________________________________________________

     Here Reason will object and say, Is it not right for a Man to attain
     the Light of God, and also the Light of the outward Nature and
     Reason, that he may be able to order his Life wisely, as the
     Scripture directeth?

     2. Yes, it is very right; nothing can be more profitable to a Man,
     neither is he capable of any Thing better; nay, it is a Treasure
     above all Earthly Treasures for a Man to have the Light of God and
     of Time, for it is the Eye of Time and of Eternity.

     3. But mark how thou oughtest to use it; when the Light of God first
     manifesteth itself in the Soul, it shineth forth as Light from a
     Candle, and kindleth the outward Light of Reason immediately; yet it
     yieldeth not itself wholly up to Reason, so as to be under the
     Dominion of the outward Man. No, the outward Man beholdeth himself
     in this through-shining Lustre, as he doth his Likeness in a
     Looking-Glass, whereby he presently learneth to know himself, which
     is good and profitable to him.

     4. Now, when he doth so, Reason, which is the creaturely SELF,
     cannot do better than to behold itself in the SELF of the Creature,
     and not enter with the Will of the Desire into the Center in seeking
     itself. If it doth, it breaketh itself off from the Substance of
     God, (which riseth together with the Light of God, of which the Soul
     ought to eat, and refresh itself therewith,) and eateth of the
     outward Substance and Light, and thereby draweth the Venom into
     itself again.

     5. The Will of the Creature ought to sink wholly into itself with
     all its Reason and Desire, accounting itself an unworthy Child that
     is no whit worthy of this so high a Grace; nor should it arrogate
     any Knowledge or Understanding to itself, or desire of God to have
     any Understanding in its creaturely SELF; but sincerely and simply
     sink down into the Grace and Love of God in Christ Jesus, and desire
     to be as it were dead to itSELF and its own Reason, in the Divine
     Life, and wholly resign itself to the Spirit of God in Love, that He
     may do how and what He will with it as with His own Instrument.

     6. Its own Reason ought not enter upon any Speculation as to the
     Ground of Divine or human Matters; nor to will and desire any Thing
     but the Grace of God in Christ. And as a Child continually longeth
     after the Breasts of the Mother, so must its Hunger be continually
     entering into the Love of God, and not suffer itself to be broken
     off from that Hunger by any Means. When the outward Reason or SELF
     riseth up and triumpheth in the Light, saying, I have the true
     Child, then the Will of the Desire must bow itSELF down to the
     Earth, and bring itself into the deepest Humility and most simple
     Ignorance, and say, Thou art foolish, and hast nothing but the Grace
     of God. Thou must wrap thySELF up in that Belief with great
     Humility, and become nothing at all in thySELF, and neither know nor
     love thy SELF. All that thou hast, or is in thee, must esteem itSELF
     as nothing but a mere Instrument of God; and thou must bring thy
     Desire only into God's Mercy, and go forth from all thy OWN Knowing
     and Willing; and esteem it as nothing at all, nor ever entertain any
     Will to enter into it again.

     7. As soon as this is done the natural Will becometh weak and faint,
     and then the Devil is not able to sift it thus any more with his
     evil Desire, for the Places of his Rest become very powerless,
     barren and dry; and then the Holy Spirit proceeding from God, taketh
     Possession of the Forms of Life, and maketh His Dominion to prevail.
     He kindleth the Forms of Life with His Flames of Love, and then the
     high Knowledge of the Center of all Things ariseth, according to the
     inward and outward Constellation or Complexion of the Creature, in a
     very subtle drying Fire, attended with great Delight. Whereupon the
     humbled Soul presently desires to sink down into that Light, and
     esteems itself to be nothing and quite unworthy of It.

     8. And thus its own Desire pierceth into that nothing, viz.(into
     that wherein God createth) and doth what God wills therein, and the
     Spirit of God springeth forth through the Desire of the resigned
     Humility, and so the human Self immediately followeth the Spirit of
     God in Trembling and humble Joy; and thus it may behold what is in
     Time and Eternity, for All is present before it.

     9. When the Spirit of God riseth up as a Fire and Flame of Love,
     then the Sprit of the Soul descendeth, and saith, Lord, Glory be to
     Thy Name, not to me; Thou art able to take to Thyself Virtue, Power,
     Strength, Wisdom, and Knowledge; do as Thou wilt; I can do nothing;
     I know nothing; I will go no whither but whither Thou leadest me as
     Thy Instrument; do Thou in me and with me what Thou wilt.

     10. In such a humble and total Resignation the Spark of Divine Power
     falleth into the Center of the Forms of Life, as a Spark into
     Tinder, and kindleth it, viz. the Fire of the Soul, which Adam had
     made to be a dark Coal in himself, so that it glimmereth. And when
     the Light of Divine Power hath kindled itself therein, the Creature
     must go on as an Instrument of God's Spirit, and speak what the
     Spirit of God dictateth to it; and then it is no more in its own
     proper Possession, but is the Instrument of God.

     11. But the Will of the Soul must without ceasing, in this fiery
     driving, sink into nothing, viz. into the deepest Humility in the
     Sight of God. For no sooner doth the Will of the Soul in the least
     Measure go on in its OWN Speculation or Searching, but Lucifer
     layeth hold of it in the Center of the Forms of Life, and sifteth it
     so that it entereth into SELF. It must therefore continue close to
     resigned Humility, as a Well doth to its Spring, and must suck and
     drink of God's Fountain, and not depart from the Ways of God at all.

     12. For as soon as the Soul eateth of SELF, and of the Light of
     outward Reason, it goeth on in its OWN Opinion; and then its Doings,
     which it sets forth for Divine, are but from the outward
     Constellation, or Influence of the Stars, which presently layeth
     hold on the Soul, and maketh it dry. And then the Soul goeth on in
     Errors, till it yield itSELF up again into Resignation, and
     acknowledging itSELF anew to be a defiled Child, resisteth Reason
     and so getteth the Love of God again. Which is harder to do in that
     Case than it was at first; for the Devil bringeth in strong Doubts
     now, and will not easily leave his Fort of Prey.

     13. This may be seen clearly in the Saints of God from the Beginning
     of the World. For many who have been driven by the Spirit of God,
     have yet oftentimes departed from Resignation into SELF, viz. into
     their OWN Reason and Will, in which Satan hath cast them into Sins,
     and into the Anger of God; as appeareth by David and Solomon, also
     by the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles; who have oftentimes
     committed great Errors when they have departed from Resignation into
     SELF, viz. into their own Reason and Lust.

     14. Therefore, it is necessary for the Children of God to know how
     to behave themselves when they will learn the WAY of God. They must
     beat down and cast away their very Thoughts; and desire nothing, nor
     have the least Will to learn any Thing, unless they find themselves
     to be in true Resignation; so that God's Spirit leadeth, teacheth,
     and guideth Man's Spirit, and that the human Will which is attached
     to itSELF, be wholly broken off from its OWN Lust, and resigned to
     God.

     15. All Speculation in the Wonders of God is very dangerous, for the
     Spirit of the Will may soon be captivated therewith, unless the
     Spirit of the Will goeth or walketh after the Spirit of God, and
     then it hath Power in the resigned Humility to behold the Wonders of
     God.

     16. I do not say that a Man should search and learn nothing in
     natural Arts and Sciences. No; such Knowledge is useful to him; but
     a Man must not begin with his OWN Reason. Man ought not only to
     govern his Life by the Light of outward Reason, which is good in
     itself; but should sink with that Light into the deepest Humility
     before God, and set the Spirit and Will of God foremost in all his
     searching, so that the Light of Reason may see and know Things
     through the Light of God. And though Reason may be very wise in its
     own Sphere, and help a Man to much Knowledge, yet it must not
     arrogate such Wisdom and Knowledge to itSELF, as if they were in its
     OWN Possession, but give the Glory thereof to God, to Whom alone all
     Wisdom and Knowledge belongeth.

     17. For the more deeply Reason sinketh itSELF down into simple
     Humility in the Sight of God, and the more unworthy it accounts
     itSELF in His Sight; the more truely it dieth from SELF-desire and
     the more thoroughly the Spirit of God penetrateth it, and bringeth
     it into the highest Knowledge, so that at length it may come to
     behold the great Mysteries and Wonders of God. For the Spirit of God
     worketh only in resigned Humility, in that which neither seeketh nor
     desireth itSELF. The Spirit of God taketh hold of whatsoever
     desireth to be simple and lowly before Him, and bringeth it into His
     Wonders. He hath Pleasure only in those that fear and bow themSELVES
     before Him.

     18. For God hath not created us for ourSELVES only, but to be
     Instruments of His Wonders, by which He desireth to manifest His
     Wonders. The resigned Will trusteth God, and expecteth all Good from
     Him alone; but SELF-Will ruleth itself, for it is broken off from
     God. All that SELF-Will doeth is Sin and is against God; for it is
     gone out of that Order wherein He created it, into Disobedience, and
     desireth to be its OWN Lord and Master.

     19. When a Man's OWN Will dieth from itSELF, then it is free from
     Sin, for it desireth nothing but that which God desireth of His
     Creature; it desireth only to do that for which God hath created it
     and that which God will do by it; and though it is and must be
     involved in the Doing, yet it is but the Instrument of the Doing, by
     which God doth what He will.

     20. For this is the true Faith in Man, viz. to die from himSELF;
     that is, from his OWN Desire; and in all his Undertakings and
     Designs to bring his Desire into the Will of God, and arrogate the
     doing of nothing to himSELF, but esteem himSELF in all his Doings to
     be a Servant or Minister of God, and to think that all he doeth, and
     undertaketh, is for God. For in such a Disposition the Spirit of God
     leadeth him into true Uprightness and Faithfullness towards his
     Neighbor. For he thinketh thus within himself, I do my Work not for
     myself, but for God, Who hath called and appointed me to do it; I am
     but a Servant in His Vineyard. He listeneth continually after the
     Voice of his Master, Who within him commandeth him what he shall do.
     The Lord speaketh in him, and biddeth him do what He would have to
     be done by him.

     21. But SELF doeth what outward Reason from the Stars commandeth,
     into which Reason the Devil flyeth with his Desire. All whatever
     SELF doth is without the Will of God, and is done altogether in the
     Fantasy, that the Anger of God may accomplish its Pastime therewith.

     22. No Work done without the Will of God can reach the Kingdom of
     God; it is all but an unprofitable Imagery, or SELF-wrought work, in
     this great Agitation of Mankind. For nothing is pleasing to God, but
     what He Himself doth by the resigned Will, as His Instrument. For
     there is but one only God in the Essence of all Essences, and all
     that which worketh with Him in that Essence, is one Spirit with Him;
     but that which worketh in itSELF only, in its OWN Will, is in itSELF
     only, and not in His Dominion. It is indeed under that universal
     Dominion of Nature, whereby He holdeth subject to Him every Life,
     evil and good, but not under that special Divine Government in
     Himself, which comprehendeth the Good only. Nothing is Divine which
     walketh and worketh not in the Will of God.

     23. Christ saith, Every Plant which my heavenly Father hath not
     planted, shall be rooted out and burned in the Fire. All the works
     of Man, which he hath wrought without the Will of God, shall be
     burnt up in the last Fire and given to the Wrath of God, viz. to the
     Pit of Darkness to recreate itself withal. For Christ saith, He that
     is not with Me is against Me; and he that gathereth not with Me
     scattereth. Whosoever worketh, and doeth it not in a resigned Will
     with Confidence in God, doeth but make desolate and scatter; it is
     not acceptable to God. For nothing is pleasing to Him but that which
     He willeth with His Spirit, and doeth by His own Instrument.

     24. Therefore, whatsoever is done by the Conclusions of human SELF
     in Matters of Religion, is a mere Fiction. It is Babel, and but a
     Work of the Stars, and of the outward World, and not acknowledged by
     God to be His Work. It is only the Play of the wrestling Wheel of
     Nature, wherein Good and Evil wrestle one with the other; what the
     one buildeth, the other destroyeth. And this is the great Misery of
     the vain Turmoiling of Men, the Issue whereof must be left to the
     Judgement of God.

     25. Whosoever therefore stirreth or laboreth much in such
     Turmoilings, worketh but for the Judgement of God; for no whit of it
     is perfect and permanent. It must all be separated in the
     Putrefaction. For that which is wrought in the Anger of God will be
     received thereby, and kept in the Mystery of its Desire to the Day
     of God's Judgement, when Evil and Good shall be severed.

     26. But if a Man turn and go forth from himSELF, and enter into the
     Will of God, then also that Good which hath been wrought in and by
     him, shall be freed from the Evil which he hath wrought. As Isaiah
     saith, Though your Sins be as red as Scarlet, yet if ye turn and
     repent, they shall become as Wool, yea, as white as Snow. For the
     Evil shall be swallowed up in the Wrath of God into Death, and the
     Good shall spring forth as a Sprout out of the wild Earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

     Whosoever therefore intendeth to do any good and perfect Work,
     wherein he hopeth eternally to rejoice, let him depart from himSELF,
     viz. from his OWN Desire, and enter into Resignation, into the Will
     of God, and work with God. And then though the earthly Desire of
     SELF in Flesh and Blood cleaveth to him, yet if the Will of the Soul
     doth not receive that Desire into it, SELF cannot perform any Work.
     For the resigned Will continually destroyeth the Substance of SELF
     again, so that the Anger of God cannot reach it. And if it should
     happen to reach it sometimes, as may be the Case, yet the resigned
     Will prevaileth with its superior Power, and then it beareth the
     Figure of a victorious Work in the Wonders, and may inherit the
     Filiation [or Childship]. Therefore it is not good to speak or do
     any Thing, when Reason is kindled in and by the Desire of SELF
     because that Desire springeth from, and worketh in, the Anger of
     God; by which a Man would suffer Loss. For his Work is brought into
     that Anger, and kept there to the great Day of God's Judgement.

     2. Every evil or false Desire, whereby a Man deviseth how to gather
     to himSELF by Craft much worldly Gain from his Neighbor to his
     Neighbor's Hurt, is taken into the Anger of God, and belongeth to
     the Judgement. Wherein all Things shall be made manifest and every
     Power and Essence, every Cause and Effect, both in Good and Evil,
     shall be presented to every one in the Mystery of the Revelation.

     3. All evil Works, done purposely, belong to the Judgement of God.
     But he that turneth from the SELF Will, goeth out from the Power of
     them, and those his Works belong to the Fire. All Things shall and
     must be made manifest in the End. For therefore God brought His
     working Power into Essence or Substance, that His Love and Anger
     might be made manifest, and become a Representation of His Deeds of
     Wonder, to His Glory.

     4. And every Creature ought to know that it should continue in that
     Condition wherein it was created; otherwise it runneth on in
     Contrariety and Enmity to the Will of God, and bringeth itself into
     Pain. For every intelligent Creature that hath lost its Place or
     State wherein God first created it, is in Disorder and Misery, till
     it recovereth the same. A Creature which is created out of Darkness
     hath no Pain in the Darkness; as a venomous Serpent hath no Pain
     from its Venom. The Venom is its Life; but if it should lose its
     Venom, and have some good Thing instead brought into it, and be made
     manifest in its Essence, that would be Pain and Death to it. Thus
     Good is Torment to a Being whose nature is evil, and Evil is in like
     Manner Pain and Death to the Good.

     5. Man was created of, for, and in Paradise; of, for and in the Love
     of God; but if he brings himself into Anger, which is as a poisonous
     Pain and Death, then that contrary Paradisical Life of Love is a
     Pain and Torment to him.

     6. If the Devil had been created out of the wrathful Matrix, for and
     in Hell, and had not had the Divine Ens or Essence, he could have no
     Pain in Hell. But he, being created for and in Heaven, and yet
     having stirred up the Source or Property of Darkness in himself, and
     thereby brought himself totally into Darkness, therefore the Light
     is now a Pain to him; that is, it causeth an everlasting Despair of
     God's Grace, and a continual Enmity to God; because God cannot
     endure him in Himself, but hath cast him out. Therefore, the Devil
     is angry and wrathful against his own Mother, of whose Essence and
     Substance he hath his Original, viz. the Eternal Nature, which
     keepeth him Prisoner in his own Place, as a Revolter or fallen
     Spirit, and sporteth in him with its Property of Anger. And, seeing
     he would not bear his Part in promoting the Divine Joy, in and for
     which he was created, therefore he must now do the contrary, and be
     an Enemy to all Goodness. For, of God, and in Him, are all Things,
     Darkness and Light, Anger and Love, Fire and Light; but He calleth
     Himself God, only as to the Light of His Love.

     7. There is an eternal Contrariety between Darkness and Light,
     neither of them comprehendeth the other, and neither of them is the
     other; and yet there is only one Essence, Being, or Substance,
     wherein they both subsist. But there is a Difference in the Quality
     and Will; yet the Essence or Substance is not divided, but a
     Principle maketh the Division. So that the one is a nothing in the
     other, and yet it is there, but not manifest in the Property of that
     Thing wherein it is.

     8. For the Devil continued in his own Dominion or Principality, not
     indeed in that wherein God created him, but in the aching painful
     Birth of Eternity, in the Center of Nature and Property of Wrath, in
     the Property which begetteth Darkness, Anguish and Pain. Indeed he
     is a Prince in the Place of this World, but in the first Principle,
     in the Kingdom of Darkness, in the Pit or Abyss.

     9. Not in the Kingdom of the Sun, Stars, and Elements; he is no Lord
     or Prince there, but only in the wrathful Part, viz. in the Root of
     the Evil of every Thing; and yet he hath not Power to do what he
     pleaseth with that.

     10. For there is some Good in every Thing, which holdeth the Evil
     captive and shut up in the Thing; but he can walk and rule only in
     the evil Part or Property when it stirreth up an evil Desire in
     itSELF, and bringeth its Desire into Wickedness. This indeed the
     inanimate Creature cannot do; but Man can do it through the
     inanimate Creature, if he brings the Center of his Will, with the
     Desire out of the Eternal Center into it, which is the Ground of
     Enchantment and false Magic. The Will of the Devil can also enter
     into that Evil whereinto Man bringeth the Desire of his Soul, which
     is born also out of the Eternal Nature.

     11. For the Original of the Soul and of Angels, out of the Eternal
     Nature is the same. But the Devil hath no further Power over the
     Time, or temporary Condition of this World, than in the great Turba
     or Turba Magna, the Curse; wheresoever that kindleth itself in the
     eternal and temporal Wrath, there he is busy, as in Wars, Fighting,
     and Strife, as also in great Tempests without Water. In fire he
     proceeds as far as the Turba (Mischief or Hurt) goeth in great
     Showers or Tempests of Thunder, Lightning, and Hail; but he cannot
     direct them, for he is not Lord or Master in them, but Servant only.

     12. Thus the Creature stirreth up with its own Desire, Good and
     Evil, Life and Death. The human Angelical Desire standeth in the
     Center of the eternal Nature which is without Beginning; and
     wherever it kindleth itself, whether in Good or Evil, it
     accomplisheth its Work in that.

     13. Now God created every Thing for and in that wherein it should
     be; the Angels for and in Heaven, and Man for and in Paradise. If
     therefore the Desire of the Creature goeth forth from its own
     Mother, then it entereth into the contrary Will and into Enmity, and
     it is tormented with the Contrariety therein, and so a false Will
     ariseth in a good; and then the good Will entereth into its nothing
     again, viz. into the End of Nature and Creature, and so leaveth the
     Creature in its OWN Evil or Wickedness, as appeareth by Lucifer and
     also Adam; and had not the Will of the Love of God met with Adam,
     and of mere Mercy entered into the Humanity or human Nature again,
     there could be no good Will in Man.

     14. Therefore all Speculation and Inquiry about God's Will is a vain
     Thing, unless the Mind be converted. For when the Mind standeth
     captivated in the SELF-Desire of the earthly Life, it cannot
     comprehend what the Will of God is; it runneth on but in SELF, from
     one Way into another, and yet findeth no Rest; for SELF-Desire
     evermore bringeth Disquiet. But when it sinketh itself wholly into
     the Mercy of God, desiring to die from itSELF, and to have God's
     Will for a Guide to the Understanding, so that it acknowledgeth and
     esteemeth itSELF as nothing, and willeth nothing but what God
     willeth, then shall it both know and do the Will of God. And if the
     Desire of Anger in the earthly Flesh should go along or join with
     the Devil's Imagination, and assault the Will of the Soul, yet the
     resigned Desire cryeth to God and saith, Abba, loving Father,
     deliver me from Evil. And then, though the earthly Will should grow
     too strong in the Wrath of God by the Infection of the Devil, the
     Desire of Anger would work but in or upon itself. According to what
     St. Paul saith, Now, if I sin, I do it not, but Sin that dwelleth in
     my Flesh: Also, Now I serve the Law of God in my Mind, but in my
     Flesh the Law of Sin. Paul meaneth not that the Will of the Mind or
     Soul should consent to the Will of the Flesh; but Sin is so strong
     in the Flesh, viz. the awakened Anger of God in SELF, that
     oftentimes the Mind is brought into Lust, as it were by Force,
     through the evil Incitements of the wicked, or else by beholding
     worldly Pomp and Glory; so that it absolutely beareth down the
     resigned Will, and ruleth by Force.

     15. Now when Sin is wrought in the Flesh, then the Wrath sporteth
     itself therewith, and catcheth at the resigned Will; and then the
     resigned Will cryeth to God for Deliverance from the Evil, and
     prayeth that God would remove the Guilt away from it, and bring Sin
     into the Centre, viz. into Death, that it might die.

     16. And St. Paul saith further, Now, there is no Condemnation to
     those who are in Christ Jesus, who are called according to the
     Purpose of God; that is, those who in that Purpose of God in which
     He first called Man, are again called in the same Calling, to stand
     again in that Purpose of God, wherein he originally created Man to
     be His Image and Likeness.

     17. So long as Man's OWN Will standeth in SELF, so long it is not in
     the Purpose and Calling of God; it is not called, for it is gone
     forth from its original right Place; but when the Mind turneth
     itself back again into the Calling, viz. into Resignation, then the
     Will is in the Calling of God, that is, in the Place for and in
     which God created it, and then it hath Power to become the Child of
     God again; as it is written, He hath given us Power to become the
     Children of God.

     18. The Power which He hath given us is His Purpose, for and in
     which He created Man in His Image. This God hath brought again into
     the human Nature, and hath given Power unto that Power to break the
     Head of Sin in the Flesh, namely, the Will and Desire of the
     Serpent; that is, the resigned Will in Christ treadeth upon the Head
     of the Desire of the sinful Will of the Serpent, and killeth again
     the Sins which were committed. This Power that is given becometh a
     Death to Death, and the Power of Life to Life.

     19. Therefore no Man can make any Excuse, as if he could not will.
     Indeed, while he sticketh fast in himSELF, in his OWN Desire, and
     serveth only the Law of Sin in the Flesh, he cannot. For he is kept
     back, as being a Servant of Sin; but when he turneth the Center of
     his Mind away, and directeth it into the Will and Obedience of God,
     then he can.

     20. Now the Center of the Mind is come out of Eternity, out of God's
     Omnipotence; it can bring itself into what it will, and whither it
     will. For that which is out of the Eternal, hath no Law. But the
     Will hath a Law to obey God, and is born out of the Mind, and must
     not rend or tear itself away from that out of which God created it.

     21. Now God created the Will of the Mind for and in Paradise, to be
     a Companion, with Him in the Kingdom of Divine Joy. It ought not to
     have removed itself from thence; but since it hath removed itself
     from thence, God hath brought His Will again into the Flesh, and in
     His new-brought-in Will, hath given us Power to bring our Wills into
     it, and to kindle a new Light therein, and so to become His Children
     again.

     22. God hardeneth no Man; but Man's OWN Will, which goeth on in the
     fleshly Life of Sin, hardeneth his OWN Heart. The Will of SELF
     bringeth the Vanity of this World into the Mind, which is thereby
     shut up, and continueth so.

     23. God, so far as He is called God, and is God, cannot will any
     Evil; for there is but one only Will in God, and that is Eternal
     Love, a Desire of that which is His Like, viz. Power, Beauty, and
     Virtue.

     24. God desireth nothing but what is like His own Desire: His Desire
     receiveth nothing but what Itself is.

     25. God receiveth no Sinner into His Power and Virtue, unless the
     Sinner go forth from His Sins, and enter with the Desire into God.
     And then, He will not cast out those that so come unto Him. He hath
     given to the Will an open Gate in Christ, saying, "come unto Me all
     ye that are heavy laden with Sins, and I will refresh you; take My
     Yoke upon you, that is, the Cross of the Enmity in the Flesh. This
     was the Yoke of Christ, which He had to bear for the Sins of all
     Men. This Cross or Yoke the resigned Will must also take upon itself
     in the evil earthly sinful Flesh, and bear it after Christ in
     Patience and Hope of Deliverance. It must also continually break the
     Head of the Serpent, in and through Christ's Will and Spirit, and
     kill and destroy the earthly Will in God's Anger, not letting it
     rest on the soft Bed when Sin is committed, and thinking to repent
     one Time or other.

     26. No, no, the earthly Will groweth strong, fat, and wanton upon
     this soft Bed, but as soon as the Light of God shineth in thee, and
     sheweth Sin to thee, the Will of thy Soul must sink itself down into
     the Passion and Death of Christ, and wrap itself up close therein.
     It must take the Passion of Christ into its Possession, and be a
     Lord over the Death of Sin by the Death of Christ, and kill and
     destroy it in the Death of Christ.

     27. The Will of Sin [thy outward SELF] must die, though it be never
     so unwilling. Be at Enmity therefore with the voluptuous earthly
     Flesh; give it not what it would have; let it fast and suffer Hunger
     till its tickling ceases. Account the Will of the Flesh thine Enemy,
     and do not do what the Desire in the Flesh willeth, and then thou
     shalt bring a Death upon the deathful Property in the Flesh.

     28. Regard not any Scorn of the World, as considering that it doth
     but scorn thine Enemy, and that is become a Fool to it. Nay, do thou
     thyself account it thy Fool, which Adam caused thee to possess, and
     made to be thy false Heir. Cast out of the House the Son of the
     Bond-Woman, that strange Child which God did not give to be in the
     House of Life in Adam at the Beginning; for the Son of the
     Bond-Woman must not inherit with the Son of the Free-Woman.

     29. The earthly Will is but the Son of the Bond-Woman. For the Four
     Elements should have been Man's Servants, but Adam hath brought them
     into the Sonship, or adopted them into himself. Therefore God said
     to Abraham, when He had opened the Covenant of the Promise in him,
     Cast out the Son of the Bond-Woman, for he shall not inherit with
     the Son of the Free. This Son of the Free is Christ, which God of
     His Grace hath brought again into the Flesh for us, namely, a new or
     renewed Mind, wherein the Will, viz. the Eternal Will of the Soul,
     may draw and drink the Water of Life, of which Christ speaketh,
     saying, Whosoever shall drink of this Water that I will give him, It
     shall spring up in him, and be a Fountain of Eternal Life. This
     Fountain is the Renovation of the Mind or Will of the Soul.

     30. Therefore I say that all Fictions and Devices to come to God by,
     let them have what Name soever they will, which Men contrive and
     invent for Ways to God, are but lost Labor and vain Endeavours,
     without a new Mind. There is no other Way to God, but a new Mind,
     which turneth from Wickedness, and entereth into Repentance for the
     Sins it hath committed. Which goeth forth from its Iniquity and
     willeth it no more; but wrappeth its Will up in the Death of Christ,
     and with all Earnestness dieth from the Sin of the Soul in the Death
     of Christ, so that it willeth Sin no more.

     31. And though all the Devils should press hard upon it, and enter
     with their Desire into the fleshly Mind, yet the Will of the Soul
     must stand still and hide itself in the Death of Christ, willing and
     desiring nothing but the Mercy of God.

     32. No hypocritical Flattery, or outward comforting ourselves
     availeth at all; as when Men will cover Sin and Iniquity in the
     Flesh with the Satisfaction of Christ, while they remain in SELF
     still. Christ saith, Except ye turn and become as Children, ye shall
     not see the Kingdom of God. The Mind must become as wholly new, as
     in a Child that knoweth nothing of Sin. Christ saith also, Ye must
     be born anew, or else, ye shall not see the Kingdom of God. There
     must arise a Will wholly new in the Death of Christ. It must be
     brought forth out of Christ's Incarnation or Entering into the
     Humanity, and rise in Christ's Resurrection.

     33. Now before this can be done, the Will of the Soul [SELF] must
     die in the Death of Christ; for in Adam it received the Son of the
     Bond-Woman, viz. Sin into it. This the Will must cast out, and the
     poor captive Soul must wrap itself up in the Death of Christ
     earnestly with all the Power it hath, so that the Son of the
     Bond-Woman, viz. the Sin that is in it may die in the Death of
     Christ.

     34. In very deed Sin must die in the Will of the Soul, or else there
     can be no Vision of God. For the earthly Will, in Sin and the
     wrathful Nature, shall not see God. It is only the regenerated
     Nature, the new inward Man, that is capable of the Divine Vision or
     Enjoyment. The Soul must put on the Spirit and Flesh of Christ; it
     cannot inherit the Kingdom of God in this earthly Tabernacle. For
     the Kingdom of Sin hangeth to it outwardly, which must putrify in
     the Earth, and rise again in new Power.

     35. Hypocrisy, Flattery, and verbal Forgiveness, avail nothing. We
     must be Children, not by outward Imputation, but by being born of
     God from within, in the new inward Man, which is resigned in and to
     God.

     36. All such Flattery of ourselves by saying, Christ hath paid the
     Ransom, and made satisfaction for Sin, and that He died for our
     Sins, is a false and vain Comfort, if we also do not die from Sin in
     Him, and put on His Merit in new Obedience, and live therein.

     37. He that is a bitter Enemy and Hater of Sin, can and may comfort
     himself with the Sufferings of Christ. He that doth not willingly
     see, hear, or taste Sin, but is at Enmity with it, and would
     willingly always do that which is well and right, if he knew but
     what he ought to do; such a one hath indeed put on the Sprirt and
     Will of Christ, and is His true Disciple.

     38. But the outward Flattery of being accounted a Child of God by
     Imputation or external Application, is false and vain. The Work done
     in, or by, the outward Flesh only, doth not make the Child of God;
     but the working of Christ in the Spirit maketh, and indeed is, the
     Child of God. Which inward Working is so powerful that it shineth
     forth as a new Light in the outward Life; and proveth itself to be
     the Child of God by its external Conduct and Actions.

     39. For if the Eye of the Soul be Light, then the whole Body is
     Light in all its Members. Now if any Man boast himself to be a Child
     of God, and yet suffereth his Body to burn in Sins, he is no true
     Child, nor capable of the Inheritance; but lieth bound by the Chains
     of the Devil in gross Darkness. And if he doth not find in himself
     an earnest and sincere Desire of Well-doing in Love, then his
     Pretence to the Childship is but an Invention of Reason proceeding
     from SELF. He cannot see God, unless he be born a-new, and show
     forth by his Power and Life, that he is His true Child. For there is
     no Fire but hath Light in it; and if the Divine Fire be in the Mind,
     it will shine forth, and the Mind will do that which God will have
     to be done.

     40. But perhaps thou wilt say, I have a Will indeed to do so; I
     would willingly do it, but I am so hindered that I cannot.

     41. Nay, thou vile Man, God draweth thee to be His Child, but thou
     wilt not; the soft Cushion in Evil is dearer to thee than to be so
     readily parted with. Thou preferrest the Joy of Wickedness to the
     Joy of God. Thou art wholly swallowed up in SELF still, and livest
     according to the Law of Sin, and that is what hindereth thee. Thou
     art unwilling to die from the Pleasure of the Flesh, and therefore
     thou art not in the Filiation (Sonship). God draweth thee to it, but
     thou thySELF wilt not yield.

     42. O how fine a Thing would Adam think it, if he might be taken
     into Heaven with this Will of the voluptuous Flesh about him, and
     have the Child of Wickedness, that is full of Deceit, set upon the
     Throne of God. Lucifer also would fain have had it so, but he was
     spewed out.

     43. It is a troublesome Thing to mortify the evil Will of SELF; none
     are willing to do it. We would all gladly be the Children of God, if
     we might be so with this rough Garment of fallen Nature about us.
     But that cannot be. This World passeth away, and the outward Life
     must die; what Good can the Adoption in the mortal Body of Flesh and
     Blood only do me?

     44. If we would inherit the Filiation, we must also put on the new
     Man which alone can inherit it, as being like the Deity. God will
     have no Sinners in Heaven, but only such as have been born a-new and
     become Children, and to have put on Heaven.

     45. Therefore it is not so easy a Matter to become a Child of God,
     as Men imagine. Indeed, it is not a troublesome Thing to him that
     hath put on the Filiation, whose Light shineth; for it is Joy to
     such a one. But to turn the Mind and destroy SELF, there is a strong
     and continued Earnestness requisite, and such a stout and steady
     Purpose, that if the Body and Soul should part asunder by it, yet
     the Will would persevere constantly, and not enter again into SELF.

     46. A Man must wrestle till the dark Center that is shut up tight,
     breaketh open, and the Spark lying hid therein kindleth and from
     thence the noble Lily-Branch sprouteth, as from the divine Grain of
     Mustard-Seed as Christ saith. A Man must pray earnestly, with great
     Humility, and for a while become a Fool in his own Reason, and see
     himself void of Understanding therein, until Christ be formed in
     this new Incarnation.

     47. And then when Christ is born, Herod is ready to kill the Child,
     which he seeketh to do outwardly by Persecutions, and inwardly by
     Temptations, to try whether this Lily-Branch will be strong enough
     to destroy the Kingdom of the Devil, which is manifested in the
     Flesh.

     48. Then this Destroyer of the Serpent is brought into the
     Wilderness, after he is baptized with the Holy Spirit, and tempted
     and tried whether or not he will continue in Resignation to the Will
     of God. In which Temptation he must stand so fast, that if Need
     require, he would leave all earthly Things, and even the outward
     Life, to be a Child of God.

     49. No temporal Honor must be preferred before Filiation. But he
     must with his Will leave and forsake it all, and not account it his
     OWN, but esteem himself as a Servant only in it, who is to obey his
     Master. He must leave all worldly Propriety. We do not mean that he
     may not have or possess any Thing; but his Heart must forsake it,
     and not bring his Will into it, nor count it his OWN. For if he
     setteth his Heart upon it, he hath no Power to serve them that stand
     in Need with it.

     50. SELF is but a Slave to its temporal Possessions, but Resignation
     ruleth over all that it hath. SELF must do what the Devil will have
     it do in fleshly Voluptuousness and Pride of Life; but Resignation
     treadth it all under with the Feet of the Mind. SELF despiseth that
     which is lowly and simple; but Resignation sitteth down with the
     lowly in the Dust. It saith, I will be simple in myself, and
     understand nothing, lest my Understanding should exalt itself and
     sin. I will lie down in the Courts of my God at His Feet, that I may
     serve my Lord in that which He commandeth me. I will know nothing of
     myself, that the Will and Power of my Lord may lead and guide me,
     and that I may only do what God doth through me, and will have done
     by me. I will sleep in myself until the Lord awaken me with His
     Spirit; and if He will not, then will I look up to Him in Silence,
     and wait for His Commands.

     51. Beloved Brethren: Men at this Time boast much of Faith; but
     where is it to be found? The modern Faith is but the History. Where
     is that Child which believeth that Jesus has been born within his
     own soul? If that Child were in Being, and did believe that Jesus is
     born, it would also draw near to the sweet Child Jesus, and receive
     Him and nurse Him.

     52. Alas! the Faith of this Day is but historical, a mere Assent to
     the matter of Fact that Jesus Christ was born, lived and died; that
     the Jews killed Him; that He left this World, and is not King on
     Earth in the outward Man; and the Faith of this Day allows that Men
     may do what they please, and need not die from Sin and their evil
     Lusts. All this the wicked Child SELF rejoiceth in, that it may
     fatten the Devil by living deliciously.

     53. This showeth plainly that true Faith was never weaker since
     Christ's Time, than it is now. When nevertheless the World cryeth
     aloud, and saith, We have got the true Faith; and contend about a
     Child, with a Contention which has never been worse since Men have
     been on Earth.

     54. If thou art truly Zion, and hast that new born Child which was
     lost and is found again, then let It be seen in Power and Virtue.
     Let us all openly see the sweet Child Jesus brought forth by thee,
     and that thou art His Nurse. If not, then the true Children in
     Christ will say, thou hast found nothing but the Cradle of the
     Child, that is, the History.

     55. Where hast thou the sweet Child Jesus, thou that art so exalted
     with the History, and with thy false and seeming Faith? O how will
     the Child Jesus visit thee one Day in the Father's Property, the
     Property of Anger, in thy own Turba which thou hast fatted! It
     calleth thee now in Love, but thou wilt not hear, for thine Ears are
     stopped with Covetousness and Voluptuousness. Therefore the Sound of
     the Trumpet shall one Day alarm thee with the hard Thunder-clap of
     thy Turba, and rouse thee up, if perhaps thou wilt then seek and
     find the sweet Child Jesus.

     56. Beloved Brethren, this is a Time of Seeking, of Seeking and
     Finding. It is a Time of Earnestness; whom it toucheth, it toucheth
     Home. He that watcheth shall hear and see it; but he that sleepeth
     in Sin, and saith in the fat Days of his Belly, All is peace and
     quiet; we hear no Sound from the Lord, shall be blind. But the Voice
     of the Lord hath sounded in all the Ends of the Earth, and a Smoke
     riseth, and in the Midst of the Smoke there is a great Brightness
     and Splendor. Hallelujah. Amen.

     Shout unto the Lord in Zion, for all Mountains and Hills are full of
     His Glory. He flourisheth like a green Branch, and who shall hinder
     It. Hallelujah.
     __________________________________________________________________

by Jacob Behmen (Jakob Boehme) 1575-1624,

The Teutonic Theosopher

TWO

DIALOGUES

BETWEEN

A DISCIPLE AND HIS MASTER,

CONCERNING

THE LIFE WHICH IS ABOVE SENSE.

SHOWING

How the Soul may attain to Divine HEARING and VISION - to a life above sense;
and What its Childship in the Natural and Supernatural Life is; and How it
passeth out of Nature into God, and out of God into Nature and Self
again;also What its Salvation and Perdition are and What is the Partition
Wall that separates the Soul from God and How the Breaking down of this
Partition is effected; of the two Wills and two Eyes within the Fallen Soul;
and What is the shortest WAY to the attainment of the Internal Kingdom of God
and Why so few Souls do find It.

Composed by a Soul that loveth all who are Children of JESUS CHRIST, under
the Cross.

   Brought forth in the 1600 s by a humble shoemaker; translated into
   English over 100 years later; suppressed and hidden away until recently
   in theological archives around the world... a worthy personal study not
   just for academics but for all those who are spiritually grounded in
   the WORD, who are learning to hear the Lord, and who hunger for more.

   These writings from out of the Past are in the Public Domain and may be
   freely shared, photocopied, reproduced, faxed or transmitted in any way
   by any means.

   Dear Reader

   1 Corinthians 2.7-15We speak the hidden mystical Wisdom of God, which
   God ordained before the World unto our Glory; Which none of the Princes
   of this World knew; For had they known it, they would not have
   crucified the Lord of Glory. But, as it is written, Eye hath not seen,
   nor Ear heard, neither hath it entered into the Heart of man to
   conceive the Things which God hath prepared for them that Love him. But
   God hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit: For the Spirit searcheth
   all Things, yea, the deep Things of God. For what Man knoweth the
   Things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man which is in him? Even so the
   Things of God knoweth no Man, but the Spirit of God. Now we have
   received, not the Spirit of this World, but the Spirit which is of God;
   that we might know the Things that are freely given us of God. Which
   Things also we speak, not in the Words which Man's Wisdom teacheth, but
   which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing Spiritual Things with
   Spiritual. But the natural Man receiveth not the Things of the Spirit
   of God: For they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them,
   because they are Spiritually discerned. But he that is Spiritual
   judgeth, or discerneth all Things.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Disciple said to his Master: Sir, How may I come to the Place that
   I may SEE with God, and may HEAR God speak - to a Life that is above my
   Senses and Feelings - to the Supersensual Life?

   The Master answered and said: Son, when thou canst throw thyself into
   THAT, where no Creature dwelleth, though it be but for a Moment, then
   thou HEAREST what God speaketh.

        Disciple:

          Is that Place where no Creature dwelleth near at Hand; or is it
          afar off?

        Master:

          It is IN THEE. And if thou canst, my Son, for a while but cease
          from all thy OWN Thinking and Willing, then thou shalt hear the
          unspeakable Words of God.

        Disciple:

          How is it that I can hear Him speak, when I stand still from
          Thinking and Willing?

        Master:

          When thou standest still from the Thinking of SELF, and the
          Willing of SELF; when both thy Intellect and Will are quiet and
          passive to the Impressions of the Eternal Word and Spirit; when
          thy Soul is winged up, and above that which is temporal with the
          outward Senses and the Imagination being locked up by Holy
          Abstraction; then the Eternal Hearing, Seeing, and Speaking will
          be revealed IN THEE; and so God heareth and seeth through thee,
          being now the Organ of His Spirit; and so God speaketh in thee,
          and whispereth to thy Spirit, and thy Spirit heareth his Voice.
          Blessed art thou therefore if that thou canst stand still from
          SELF-Thinking and SELF-Willing, and canst stop the Wheel of thy
          Imagination and Senses; for it is hereby that thou mayest arrive
          at Length to see the great Salvation of God, being made capable
          of all Manner of Divine Sensations and Heavenly Communications.
          Since it is nought indeed but thine OWN Hearing and Willing that
          do hinder thee, so that thou dost not see and hear God.

        Disciple:

          But wherewith shall I hear and see God, for as much as He is
          above Nature and Creature?

        Master:

          Son, when thou art quiet and silent, then art thou as God was
          before Nature and Creature; thou art that which God then was;
          thou art that whereof He made thy Nature and Creature: Then thou
          hearest and seest even with that wherewith God Himself saw and
          heard in thee, before ever thine OWN Willing or thine OWN Seeing
          began.

        Disciple:

          What now hinders or keeps me back, so that I cannot come to
          that, wherewith God is to be seen and heard?

        Master:

          Nothing truly but thine OWN Willing, Hearing, and Seeing do keep
          thee back from it, and do hinder thee from coming to this
          Supersensual State or the Life which is above Sense. And it is
          because thou strivest so against that, out of which thou thyself
          art descended and derived, that thou thus breakest thyself off,
          with thine OWN Willing, from God's Willing, and with thine OWN
          Seeing from God's Seeing. In as much as in thine OWN Seeing thou
          dost see in thine OWN Willing only, and with thine OWN
          Understanding thou dost understand but in and according to this
          thine OWN Willing, as the same stands divided from the Divine
          Will. This thy Willing moreover stops thy Hearing, and maketh
          thee deaf towards God, through thy OWN Thinking upon terrestrial
          Things, and thy Attending to that which is without thee; and so
          it brings thee into a Ground, where thou art laid hold on and
          captivated in Nature. And having brought thee hither, it
          overshadows thee with that which thou willest; it binds thee
          with thine own Chains, and it keeps thee in thine own dark
          Prison which thou makest for thyself; so that thou canst not go
          out thence, or come to that State which is above Nature and
          above Sense.

        Disciple:

          But being I am in Nature, and thus bound, as with my own Chains,
          and by my own natural Will; pray be so kind, Sir, as to tell me,
          how I may come through Nature into the Supersensual and
          Supernatural Ground, without the destroying of Nature?

        Master:

          Three Things are requisite in order to do this. The First is,
          Thou must resign up thy Will to God; and must sink thy SELF down
          to the Dust in His Mercy. The Second is, Thou must hate thy OWN
          Will, and forbear from doing that to which thy own Will doth
          drive thee. The Third is, Thou must bow thy Soul under the
          Cross, heartily submitting thySELF to It, that thou mayest be
          able to bear the Temptations of Nature and Creature. And if thou
          doest thus, know that God will speak into thee, and will bring
          thy resigned Will in to Himself, in the supernatural Ground; and
          then thou shalt hear, my Son, what the Lord speaketh in thee.

        Disciple:

          This is a hard Saying, Master; for I must forsake the World, and
          my Life too, if I should do thus.

        Master:

          Be not discouraged hereat. If thou forsakest the World, then
          thou comest into that out of which the World is made; and if
          thou losest thy Life, then thy Life is in that, for whose Sake
          thou forsakest it. Thy Life is in God, from whence it came into
          the Body; and as thou comest to have thine OWN Power faint and
          weak and dying, the Power of God will then work in thee and
          through thee.

        Disciple:

          Nevertheless as God hath created Man in and for the natural
          Life, to rule over all Creatures on Earth, and to be a Lord over
          all Things in this World, it seems not to be at all
          unreasonable, that Man should therefore possess this World, and
          the Things therein for his own.

        Master:

          If thou rulest over all Creatures but outwardly, there cannot be
          much in that. But if thou hast a Mind to possess all Things, and
          to be a Lord indeed over all Things in this World, there is
          quite another Method to be taken by thee.

        Disciple:

          Pray, how is that? And what Method must I take, whereby to
          arrive at this Sovereignty?

        Master:

          Thou must learn to distinguish well betwixt the Thing, and that
          which only is an Image thereof; betwixt that Sovereignty which
          is substantial, and in the inward Ground or Nature, and that
          which is imaginary, and in an outward Form, or Semblance;
          betwixt that which is properly Angelical, and that which is no
          more than bestial. If thou rulest now over the Creatures
          externally only, and not from the right internal Ground of thy
          renewed Nature; then thy Will and Ruling is verily in a bestial
          Kind or Manner, and thine at best is but a Sort of imaginary and
          transitory Government, being void of that which is substantial
          and permanent, the which only thou art to desire and press
          after. Thus by thy outwardly Lording it over the Creatures, it
          is most easy for thee to lose the Substance and the Reality,
          while thou hast nought remaining but the Image or Shadow only of
          thy first and original Lordship; wherein thou art made capable
          to be again invested, if thou wouldest be but wise, and takest
          thy Investiture from the Supreme Lord in the right Course and
          Manner. Whereas by thy willing and ruling thus after a bestial
          Manner, thou bringest also thy Desire into a bestial Essence, by
          which Means thou becomest infected and captivated therein, and
          gettest therewith a bestial Nature and Condition of Life. But if
          thou shalt have put off the bestial and ferine Nature, and if
          thou hast left the imaginary Life, and quitted the low imaged
          Condition of it; then art thou come into the
          Super-Imaginariness, and into the intellectual Life, which is a
          State of living above Images, Figures and Shadows. And so thou
          rulest over all Creatures, being reunited with thine Original,
          in that very Ground or Source, out of which they were and are
          created; and henceforth Nothing on Earth can hurt thee. For thou
          art like all Things and Nothing is unlike thee.

        Disciple:

          O loving Master, pray teach me how I may come the shortest Way
          to be like unto All Things.

        Master:

          With all my Heart. Do but think on the Words of our Lord Jesus
          Christ, when He said, "Except ye be converted, and become as
          little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven."
          There is no shorter Way than this; neither can there be a better
          Way found. Verily, Jesus saith unto thee, Unless thou turn and
          become as a Child, hanging upon Him for All Things, thou shalt
          not see the Kingdom of God. This do, and Nothing shall hurt
          thee; for thou shalt be at Friendship with all the Things that
          are, as thou dependest on the Author and Fountain of them, and
          becomest like Him, by such Dependence, and by the Union of thy
          Will with His Will. But mark what I have further to say; and be
          not thou startled at it, though it may seem hard for thee at
          first to conceive. If thou wilt be like All Things, thou must
          forsake All Things; thou must turn thy Desire away from them
          All, and not desire or hanker after any of them; thou must not
          extend thy Will to possess that for thy own, or as thine own,
          which is Something, whatsoever that Something be. For as soon as
          ever thou takest Something into thy Desire, and receivest it
          into thee for thine OWN, or in Propriety, then this very
          Something (of what Nature soever it is) is the same with
          thyself; and this worketh with thee in thy Will, and thou art
          thence bound to protect it, and to take Care of it even as of
          thy own Being. But if thou dost receive no Thing into thy
          Desire, then thou art free from All Things, and rulest over all
          Things at once, as a Prince of God. For thou hast received
          Nothing for thine own, and art Nothing to all Things; and all
          Things are as Nothing to thee. Thou art as a Child, which
          understands not what a Thing is, and though thou dost perhaps
          understand it, yet thou understandest it without mixing with it,
          and without its sensibly affecting or touching thy Perception,
          even in that Manner wherein God doth rule and see all Things; He
          comprehending All, and yet Nothing comprehending Him.

        Disciple:

          Ah! How shall I arrive at this Heavenly Understanding, at this
          Sight of All Things in God, at this pure and naked Knowledge
          which is abstracted from the Senses; at this Light above Nature
          and Creature; and at this Participation of the Divine Wisdom
          which oversees all Things, and governs through all intellectual
          Beings? For, alas, I am touched every Moment by the Things which
          are about me; and overshadowed by the Clouds and Fumes which
          rise up out of the Earth. I desire therefore to be taught, if
          possible, how I may attain such a State and Conditions as no
          Creature may be able to touch me to hurt me; and how my Mind,
          being purged from sensible Objects and Things, may be prepared
          for the Entrance and Habitation of the Divine Wisdom in me?

        Master:

          Thou desirest that I would teach thee how thou art to attain it;
          and I will direct thee to our Master, from Whom I have been
          taught it, that thou mayest learn it thyself from Him, Who alone
          teacheth the Heart. Hear thou Him. Wouldest thou arrive at this;
          wouldest thou remain untouched by Sensibles; wouldest thou
          behold Light in the very Light of God, and see all Things
          thereby; then consider the Words of Christ, Who is that Light;
          and Who is the Truth. O consider now His Words, Who said,
          "Without Me ye can do nothing" and defer not to apply thyself
          unto Him, Who is the Strength of thy Salvation, and the Power of
          thy Life; and with Whom thou canst do all Things, by the Faith
          which He worketh in thee. But unless thou wholly givest thySELF
          up to the Life of our Lord Jesus Christ, and resignest thy Will
          wholly to Him, and desirest Nothing and willest Nothing without
          Him, thou shalt never come to such a Rest as no Creature can
          disturb. Think what thou pleasest, and be never so much
          delighted in the Activity of thine OWN Reason, thou shalt find
          that in thine OWN Power, and without such a total Surrender to
          God, and to the Life of God, thou canst never arrive at such a
          Rest as this, or the true Quiet of the Soul, wherein no Creature
          can molest thee, or so much as touch thee. Which when thou
          shalt, by Grace, have attained to, then with thy Body thou art
          in the World, as in the Properties of outward Nature; and with
          thy Reason, under the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; but with
          thy Will thou walkest in Heaven, and art at the End from whence
          all Creatures are proceeded forth, and to which they return
          again. And then thou canst in this END, which is the same with
          the BEGINNING, behold all Things outwardly with Reason, and
          inwardly with the Mind; and so mayest thou rule in all Things
          and over all Things, with Christ; unto Whom all Power is given
          both in Heaven and on Earth.

        Disciple:

          O Master, the Creatures which live in me do withhold me, that I
          cannot so wholly yield and give up mySELF as I willingly would.
          What am I to do in this Case?

        Master:

          Let not this trouble thee. Doth thy Will go forth from the
          Creatures? Then the Creatures are forsaken in thee. They are in
          the World, and thy Body, which is in the World, is with the
          Creatures. But spiritually thou walkest with God, and conversest
          in Heaven, being in thy Mind redeemed from Earth, and separated
          from Creatures, to live the Life of God. And if thy Will thus
          leaveth the Creatures, and goeth forth from them, even as the
          Spirit goeth forth from the Body at Death; then are the
          Creatures dead in it, and do live only in the Body in the World.
          Since if thy Will doth not bring itself into them, they cannot
          bring themselves into it, neither can they by any Means touch
          the Soul. And hence St. Paul saith,"Our Conversation is in
          Heaven"; and also, "Ye are the Temple of God, and the Spirit of
          God dwelleth in you." So then True Christians are the very
          Temples of the Holy Ghost, Who dwelleth in them; that is, the
          Holy Ghost dwelleth in the Will, and the Creatures dwelleth in
          the Body.

        Disciple:

          If now the Holy Spirit doth dwell in the Will of the Mind, how
          ought I to keep myself so that He depart not from me again?

        Master:

          Mark, my Son, the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ; "If ye abide
          in My Words, then My Words abide in you." If thou abideth with
          thy Will, in the Words of Christ; then His Word and Spirit
          abideth in thee, and all shall be done for thee that thou canst
          ask of Him. But if thy Will goeth into the Creature, then thou
          hast broken off thereby thyself from Him. And then thou canst
          not any otherwise keep thyself but by abiding continually in the
          most resigned Humility, and by entering into a constant Course
          of Penitence, wherein thou wilt be always grieved at thine own
          Creatureliness and that Creatures do still live in thee, that
          is, in thy bodily Appetites. If thou doest thus, thou standest
          in a daily dying from the Creatures, and in a daily ascending
          into Heaven in thy Will; which Will is also the Will of thy
          Heavenly Father.

        Disciple:

          O my loving Master, pray teach me how I may come to such a
          constant Course of holy Penitence, and to such a daily Dying
          from all creaturely Objects; for how can I abide continually in
          Repentance?

        Master:

          When thou leavest that which loveth thee, and lovest that which
          hateth thee; then thou mayest abide continually in Repentance.

        Disciple:

          What is it that I must thus leave?

        Master:

          All Things that love and entertain thee, because thy Will loves
          and entertains them; all Things that please and feed thee,
          because thy Will feeds and cherishes them; all Creatures in
          Flesh and Blood; in a Word, all Visibles and Sensibles, by which
          either the Imagination or sensitive Appetite in Men are
          delighted and refreshed. These the Will of thy Mind, or thy
          supreme Part must leave and forsake; and must even account them
          all its Enemies. This is the Leaving of what loves thee. And the
          Loving of what hates thee, is the Embracing of the Reproach of
          the World. Thou must learn then to love the Cross of the Lord
          Jesus Christ, and for His Sake to be pleased with the Reproach
          of the World which hates and derides thee; and let this be thy
          daily Exercise of Penitence - to be crucified to the World, and
          the World to thee. And so thou shalt have continual Cause to
          hate thySELF in the Creature, and to seek the Eternal Rest which
          is in Christ. To which Rest thou having thus attained, thy Will
          may therein safely rest and repose itself, according as thy Lord
          Christ hath said: "In Me ye may have Rest, but in the World ye
          shall have Anxiety; In Me ye may have Peace, but in the World ye
          shall have Tribulation."

        Disciple:

          How shall I now be able to subsist in this Anxiety and
          Tribulation arising from the World, so as not to lose the
          Eternal Peace, or not enter into this Rest? And how may I
          recover myself in such a Temptation as this is, by not sinking
          under the World, but rising above it by a Life that is truly
          Heavenly or Supersensual?

        Master:

          If thou dost once every Hour throw thyself by Faith beyond all
          Creatures, beyond and above all sensual Perception and
          Apprehension, yea, above Discourse and Reasoning into the
          abyssal Mercy of God, into the Sufferings of our Lord, and into
          the Fellowship of His Interceding, and yieldeth thySELF fully
          and absolutely thereinto; then thou shalt receive Power from
          above to rule over Death and the Devil, and so subdue Hell and
          the World under thee: And then thou mayest subsist in all
          Temptations, and be the brighter for them.

        Disciple:

          Blessed is the Man that arriveth to such a State as this. But
          alas! Poor Man that I am, how is this possible as to me? And
          what, O my Master, would become of me, if I should ever attain
          with my Mind to that, where no Creature is? Must I not cry out,
          I am undone!

        Master:

          Son why art thou so dispirited? Be of good Heart still; for thou
          mayest certainly yet attain to it. Do but believe, and all
          Things are made possible to thee. If it were that thy Will, O
          thou of little Courage, could break off itself for one Hour, or
          even but for one half Hour, from all Creatures, and plunge
          itself into That where no Creature is, or can be; presently it
          would be penetrated and clothed upon with the supreme Splendor
          of the Divine Glory, would taste in itself the most sweet Love
          of Jesus, the Sweetness whereof no Tongue can express, and would
          find in itself the unspeakable Words of our Lord concerning His
          great Mercy. Thy Spirit would then feel in itself the Cross of
          our Lord Jesus Christ to be very pleasing to it; and would
          thereupon love the Cross more than the Honors and Goods of the
          World.

        Disciple:

          This for the Soul would be exceeding well indeed: But what would
          then become of the Body seeing that it must of Necessity live in
          the Creature?

        Master:

          The Body would by this Means be put into the Imitation of our
          Lord Christ, and of His Body: It would stand in the Communion of
          that most blessed Body, which was the true Temple of the Deity;
          and in the Participation of all its gracious Effects, Virtues
          and Influences. It would live in the Creature not of Choice, but
          only as it is made subject unto Vanity, and in the World, as it
          is placed therein by the Ordination of the Creator, for its
          Cultivation and the higher Advancement; and as groaning to be
          delivered out of it in God's Time and Manner, for its Perfection
          and Resuscitation in Eternal Liberty and Glory, like unto the
          Glorified Body of our Lord and His risen Saints.

        Disciple:

          But the Body being in its present Constitution, so made subject
          to Vanity, and living in a vain Image and creaturely Shadow,
          according to the Life of the undergraduated Creatures or Brutes,
          whose Breath goeth downwards to the Earth; I am still very much
          afraid thereof, lest it should continue to depress the Mind
          which is lifted up to God, by hanging as dead Weight thereto;
          and go on to amuse and perplex the Same, as formerly, with
          Dreams and Trifles, by letting in the Objects from without, in
          order to draw me down into the World and the Hurry thereof;
          where I would fain maintain my Conversation in Heaven, even
          while I am living in the World. What therefore must I do with
          this Body, that I may be able to keep up so desirable a
          Conversation; and not to be under any Subjection to it any
          longer?

        Master:

          There is no other Way for thee that I know, but to present the
          Body whereof thou complainest (which is the Beast to be
          sacrificed) "a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God":
          And this shall be thy "rational Service", whereby this thy Body
          will be put, as thou desirest, into the Imitation of Jesus
          Christ, who said, His Kingdom was not of this World. Be not thou
          then "conformed to it, but be transformed by the Renewing of thy
          Mind"; which renewed Mind is to have Dominion over the Body,
          that so thou mayest prove, both in Body and Mind, what is the
          perfect Will of God, and accordingly perform the same with and
          by his Grace operating IN THEE. Whereupon the Body, or the
          Animal Life would, being thus offered up, begin to die, both
          from without and from within. From without, that is, from the
          Vanity and evil Customs and Fashions of the World. It would be
          an utter Enemy to all the Pomp thereof, and to all the Gaudery,
          Pageantry, Pride, Ambition, and Haughtiness therein. From
          within, it would die as to all the Lusts and Appetites of the
          Flesh, and would get a Mind and Will wholly new, for its
          Government and Management; being now made subject to the Spirit,
          which would continually be directed to God, as would all that is
          subject to thy Body. And thus thy very Body is become the Temple
          of God and of His Spirit, in Imitation of thy Lord's Body.

        Disciple:

          But the World would hate it, and despise it for so doing; seeing
          it must hereby contradict the World, and must live and act quite
          otherwise than the World doth. This is most certain. And how can
          this then be taken?

        Master:

          It would not take that as any Harm done to it, but would rather
          rejoice that it is become worthy to be like unto the Image of
          our Lord Jesus Christ, being transformed from that of the World:
          And it would be most willing to bear that Cross after our Lord;
          merely that our Lord might bestow upon it the Influence of His
          sweet and precious Love.

        Disciple:

          I do not doubt but in some this may be even so. Nevertheless for
          my own Part, I am in a Straight betwixt two, not feeling yet
          enough of that blessed Influence upon me. O how willingly should
          my Body bear that, could this be safely depended upon by me,
          according to what is urged! Wherefore pardon me, loving Sir, in
          this one Thing, if my Impatience doth still further demand what
          would become of it, if the Anger of God from within, and the
          wicked World also from without, should at once assault it, as
          the same really happened to our Lord Christ?

        Master:

          Be that unto it, even as unto our Lord Christ, when He was
          reproached, reviled and crucified by the World; and when the
          Anger of God so fiercely assaulted Him for our Sake. Now what
          did He do under this most terrible Assault both from without and
          from within? Why, He commended his Soul into the Hands of his
          Father, and so departed from the Anguish of this World into the
          Eternal Joy. Do thou likewise; and His Death shall become thy
          Life.

        Disciple:

          Be it unto me as unto the Lord Christ; and unto my Body as unto
          His; which into His Hands I have commended, and for the Sake of
          His Name do offer up, according to His revealed Will.
          Nevertheless I am desirous to know what would become of my Body
          in its pressing forth from the Anguish of this miserable World
          into the Power of the Heavenly Kingdom?

        Master:

          It would get forth from the Reproach and Contradiction of the
          World, by a Conformity to the Passion of Jesus Christ; and from
          the Sorrows and Pains in the Flesh, which are only the Effects
          of some sensible Impression of Things without, by a quiet
          Introversion of the Spirit, and secret Communion with the Deity
          manifesting Itself for that End. It would penetrate into itself;
          it would sink into the great Love of God; it would be sustained
          and refreshed by the most sweet name JESUS; and it would see and
          find within itself a new World springing forth as through the
          Anger of God, into the Love and Joy Eternal. And then should a
          Man wrap his Soul in this, even in the great Love of God, and
          clothe himself Therewith as with a Garment; and should account
          thence all Things alike; because in the Creature he finds
          NoThing that can give him, without God, the least Satisfaction;
          and because also Nothing of Harm can touch him more, while he
          remains in this Love, which indeed is stronger that all Things,
          and makes a Man hence invulnerable both from within and without,
          by taking out the Sting and Poison of the Creatures, and
          destroying the Power of Death. And whether the Body be in Hell
          or on Earth, all is alike to him; for whether it be there or
          here, his Mind is still in the greatest Love of God; which is no
          less than to say, that he is in Heaven.

        Disciple:

          But how would a Man's Body be maintained in the World; or how
          would he be able to maintain those that are his, if he should by
          such a Conversation incur the Displeasure of all the World?

        Master:

          Such a Man gets greater Favors than the World is able to bestow
          upon him. He hath God for his Friend; he hath all His Angels for
          his Friends: In all Dangers and Necessities these protect and
          relieve him; so that he need fear no Manner of Evil; no Creature
          can hurt him. God is his Helper; and that is sufficient. Also
          God is his Blessing in every Thing; and though sometimes it may
          seem as if God would not bless him, yet is this but for a Trial
          to him, and for the Attraction of the Divine Love; to the End he
          may more fervently pray to God, and commit all his Ways unto
          Him.

        Disciple:

          He loses however by this all his good Friends; and there will be
          none to help him in his Necessity.

        Master:

          Nay, but he gets the Hearts of all his true Friends into his
          Possession, and loses none but his Enemies, who before loved his
          Vanity and Wickedness.

        Disciple:

          How it is that he can get his true Friends into his Possession?

        Master:

          He gets the very Hearts and Souls of all those that belong to
          our Lord Jesus to be his Brethren, and the Members of his own
          very Life. For all the Children of God are but One in Christ,
          which One is Christ in All; and therefore he gets them all to be
          his Fellow Members in the Body of Christ, whence they have all
          the same Heavenly Goods in common; and all live in one and the
          same Love of God, as the Branches of a Tree in one and the same
          Root, and spring all from one and the same Source of Life in
          them. So that he can have no Want of spiritual Friends and
          Relations, who are all rooted with him together in the Love
          which is from above; who are all of the same Blood and Kindred
          in Christ Jesus; and who are all nourished by the same
          quickening Sap and Spirit diffusing Itself through them
          universally from the one True Vine, which is the Tree of Life
          and Love. These are Friends worth having; and though Here they
          may be unknown to him, will abide his Friends beyond Death, to
          all Eternity. But neither can he want even outward natural
          Friends, as our Lord Christ when on Earth did not want such
          also. For though indeed the High-Priests and Potentates of the
          World could not have a Love for Him because they belonged not to
          Him, neither stood in any Kind of Relation to Him, since He was
          not of this World; yet those loved Him who were capable of His
          Love, and receptive of His Words. So in like Manner, those who
          love Truth and Righteousness will love that Man, and will
          associate themselves unto him, yea, though they may perhaps be
          outwardly at some Distance or seeming Disagreement, from the
          Situation of their worldly Affairs, or out of some certain
          Respects; yet in their Hearts they cannot but cleave to him. For
          though they be not yet actually incorporated into one Body with
          him, yet they cannot resist being of one Mind with him, and
          being united in Affection, for the great Regard they bear to the
          Truth, which shines forth in his Words and in his Life. By which
          they are made either his declared or his secret Friends; and he
          doth so get their Hearts, as they will be delighted above all
          Things in his Company, for the Sake thereof, and will court his
          Friendship, and will come unto him by Stealth, if openly they
          dare not, for the Benefit of his Conversation and Advice; even
          as Nicodemus did unto Christ, who came to Him by Night, and in
          his Heart loved Jesus for the Truth's Sake, though outwardly he
          feared the World. And thus thou shalt have many Friends that are
          not known to thee; and some known to thee, who may not appear so
          before the World.

        Disciple:

          Nevertheless it is very grievous to be generally despised of the
          World, and to be trampled upon by Men as the very Offscouring
          thereof.

        Master:

          That which now seems so hard and heavy to thee, thou wilt yet
          hereafter be most of all in Love with.

        Disciple:

          How can it be that I should ever love that which hates me?

        Master:

          Though thou lovest the earthly Wisdom now, yet when thou shalt
          be clothed upon with the Heavenly Wisdom, then thou wilt see
          that all the Wisdom of the World is Folly; and wilt see also
          that the World hates not so much thee, as it does thine Enemy,
          which is the Mortal Life. And when thou thyself shalt come to
          hate the Will thereof, by Means of a habitual Separation of thy
          Mind from the World, then thou also wilt begin to love that
          despising of the Mortal Life, and the Reproach of the World for
          Christ's Sake . And so shalt thou be able to stand under every
          Temptation, and to hold out to the End by the Means hereof in
          the Course of Life above the World, and above Sense. In this
          Course thou wilt hate thyself; and thou wilt also love thyself;
          I say love thyself, and that even more than ever thou didst yet.

        Disciple:

          But how can these two subsist together, that a Person should
          both love and hate himself?

        Master:

          In loving thyself, thou lovest not thySELF as thine OWN; but as
          given thee from the Love of God thou lovest the Divine Ground in
          thee; by which and in which thou lovest the Divine Wisdom, the
          Divine Goodness, the Divine Beauty; thou lovest also by it God's
          Works of Wonders; and in this Ground thou lovest likewise thy
          Brethren. But in hating thySELF, thou hatest only that which is
          thine OWN, and wherein the Evil sticks close to thee. And this
          thou dost, that so thou mayest wholly destroy that which thou
          callest thine; as when thou sayest I or MYSELF do this, or do
          that. All which is wrong, and a downright Mistake in thee; for
          nothing canst thou properly call thine but the Evil SELF,
          neither canst thou do any Thing of thyself that is to be
          accounted of. This SELF therefore thou must labor wholly to
          destroy IN THEE, that so thou mayest become a Ground wholly
          Divine. There is, there can be no SELFishness in Love; they are
          opposite to each other. Love, that is, Divine Love (of which
          only we are now discoursing) hates all Egoity, hates all that
          which we call I, or IHOOD; hates all such Restrictions and
          Confinements, yea even all that springs from a contracted
          Spirit, or this evil SELF-hood, because it is a hateful and
          deadly Thing. And it is impossible that these two should stand
          together, or subsist in one Person; the one driving out the
          other by a Necessity of Nature. For Love possesses Heaven, and
          dwells in Itself, which is dwelling in Heaven; but that which is
          called I, this vile SELF-hood possesses the World and worldly
          Things; and dwells also in itself, which is dwelling in Hell,
          because this is the very Root of Hell itself. And therefore as
          Heaven rules above the World and as Eternity rules above Time,
          even so ought Love to rule above the natural temporal Life; for
          no other Method is there, neither can there be of attaining to
          that Life which is Supernatural and Eternal, and which thou so
          much desirest to be led into.

        Disciple:

          Loving Master, I am well content that this Love should rule in
          me over the natural Life, so that I may attain to that which is
          Supernatural and Supersensual; but pray tell me now, why must
          Love and Hatred, Friend and Foe thus be together? Would not Love
          alone be better? Wherefore, I say, are Love and Trouble thus
          joined?

        Master:

          If Love dwelt not in Trouble, It could have Nothing to love; but
          when Its Substance which It loves, namely, the poor Soul, is in
          Trouble and Pain, Love hath thence Cause to love this, Its own
          Substance, and to deliver it from its Pain; that so the Soul,
          itself, may by the indwelling Love be again Beloved. Neither
          could any one know what Love is, if there were no Hatred; or
          what Friendship is, if there were no Foe to contend with. Or in
          one Word, for Love to be known It must have Something which It
          might Love, and where Its Virtue and Power may be manifested, by
          working out Deliverance to the Beloved from all Pain and
          Trouble.

        Disciple:

          Pray what is the Virtue, Power, the Height and the Greatness of
          Love?

        Master:

          The Virtue of Love is NOTHING and ALL, or that Nothing visible
          out of which All Things proceed; Its Power is through All
          Things; Its Height is as high as God; Its Greatness is as great
          as God. Its Virtue is the Principle of all Principles; Its Power
          supports the Heavens and upholds the Earth; Its Height is higher
          than the highest Heavens; and Its Greatness is even greater than
          the very Manifestation of the Godhead in the glorious Light of
          the Divine Essence, as being infinitely capable of greater and
          greater Manifestations in all Eternity. What can I say more?
          Love is higher than the Highest. Love is greater than the
          Greatest. Yea, It is in a certain Sense greater than God; while
          yet in the highest Sense of all, God is Love, and Love is God.
          Love being the highest Principle, is the Virtue of all Virtues;
          from whence they all flow forth. Love being the greatest
          Majesty, is the Power of all Powers, from whence they severally
          operate; and It is the Holy Magical Root, or Ghostly Power from
          whence all the Wonders of God have been wrought by the Hands of
          his elect Servants, in all their Generations successively.
          Whosoever finds It, finds Nothing and All Things.

        Disciple:

          Dear Master, pray tell me how to understand this.

        Master:

          First then, in that I said, Its Virtue is Nothing, or that
          NOTHING which is the BEGINNING of All Things, thou must
          understand It thus; when thou art gone forth wholly from the
          Creature, and from that which is visible, and art become Nothing
          to all that is Nature and Creature, then thou art in that
          Eternal One, which is God Himself. And then thou shalt perceive
          and feel in thy Interior, the highest Virtue of Love. But in
          that I said, Its Power is through All Things, this is that which
          thou perceivest and findest in thy own Soul and Body
          experimentally, whenever this great Love is enkindled within
          thee; seeing that It will burn more than the Fire can do, as It
          did in the Prophets of old, and afterwards in the Apostles, when
          God conversed with them bodily, and when His Spirit descended
          upon them in the Oratory of Zion. Thou shalt then see also in
          all the Works of God, how Love hath poured Itself into all
          Things, and penetrateth all Things, and is the most inward and
          most outward Ground in all Things - inwardly in the Virtue and
          Power of every Thing, and outwardly in the Figure and Form
          thereof. And in that I said, Its Height is as high as God; thou
          mayest understand this in thyself; forasmuch as It brings thee
          to be as high as God Himself is, by being united to God - as may
          be seen by our beloved Lord Christ in our Humanity. Which
          Humanity Love hath brought up into the highest Throne, above all
          Angelical Principalities and Powers, into the very Power of the
          Deity itself. But in that I also said, Its Greatness is as great
          as God, thou art hereby to understand, that there is a certain
          Greatness and Latitude of Heart in Love, which is inexpressible;
          for It enlarges the Soul as wide as the whole Creation of God.
          And this shall be truly experienced by thee, beyond all Words,
          when the Throne of Love shall be set up in thy Heart. Moreover
          in that I said, Its Virtue is the Principle of all Principles,
          hereby it is given thee to understand, that Love is the
          principiating Cause of all created Beings, both spiritual and
          corporeal, by Virtue whereof the second Causes do move and act
          occasionally according to certain Eternal Laws from the
          Beginning implanted in the very Life and Energy of all the
          Principles of Nature, superior and inferior -It reaches to all
          Worlds, and to all Manner of Beings in them contained, they
          being the Workmanship of Divine Love; and It is the first Mover,
          and first Moveable both in Heaven above and in the Earth
          beneath, and in the Water under the Earth. And hence there is
          given to It the Name of Lucid Aleph, or Alpha; by which is
          expressed the Beginning of the Alphabet of Nature, and of the
          Book of Creation and Providence, or the Divine Archetypal Book,
          in which is the Light of Wisdom, and the Source of all Lights
          and Forms. And in that I said, Its Power supports the Heavens;
          by this thou wilt come to understand, that as the Heavens,
          visible and invisible, are originated from this great Principle,
          so are they likewise necessarily sustained by It; and that
          therefore if This should be but never so little withdrawn, all
          the Lights, Glories, Beauties, and Forms of the heavenly Worlds,
          would presently sink into Darkness and Chaos. And whereas I
          further said, that It upholds the Earth; this will appear to
          thee no less evident than the former, and thou shalt perceive It
          in thyself by daily and hourly Experience; forasmuch as the
          Earth without It, even thy own Earth also, (that is, thy Body)
          would certainly be without Form and Void. By the Power thereof
          the Earth hath been thus long upheld, notwithstanding a foreign
          usurped Power introduced by the Folly of Sin. And should this
          but once fail or recede, there could no longer be either
          Vegetation or Animation upon it; yea, the very Pillars of it
          would be quite overthrown, and the Band of Union, which is that
          of Attraction or Magnetism, called the Centripetal Power, being
          broken and dissolved, all must thence run into the utmost
          Disorder, and falling away as into Shivers, would be dispersed
          as loose Dust before the Wind. But in that I said, Its Height is
          higher than the highest Heavens; this thou mayest also
          understand within thyself; so shouldest thou ascend in Spirit
          through all the Orders of Angels and heavenly Powers, yet the
          Power of Love still is undeniably superior to them all. And as
          the Throne of God, Who sits upon the Heaven of Heavens, is
          higher than the highest of them, even so must Love also be,
          which fills them all, and comprehends them all. And whereas I
          said of the Greatness of Love, that It is greater than the very
          Manifestation of the Godhead in the Light of the Divine Essence;
          that is also true. For Love enters even into that where the
          Godhead is not manifested in this glorious Light, and where God
          may be said not to dwell. And entering thereinto, Love begins to
          manifest to the Soul the Light of the Godhead; and thus is the
          Darkness broken through, and the Wonders of the new Creation
          successively manifested. Thus shalt thou be brought to
          understand really and fundamentally, what is the Virtue and
          Power of Love, and what the Height and Greatness thereof is; how
          that It is indeed the Virtue of all Virtues, though It be
          invisible, and as a Nothing in Appearance, inasmuch as It is the
          Worker of all Things, and a powerful vital Energy passing
          through all Virtues and Powers natural and supernatural; and the
          Power of all Powers, nothing being able to let or obstruct the
          Omnipotence of Love, or to resist Its invincible penetrating
          Might, which passes through the whole Creation of God,
          inspecting and governing all Things. And in that I said, It is
          higher than the Highest, and greater than the Greatest; thou
          mayest hereby perceive as in a Glimpse, the supreme Height and
          Greatness of Omnipotent Love, which infinitely transcends all
          that human Sense and Reason can reach to. The highest Archangels
          and the greatest Powers of Heaven are, in Comparison of it, but
          as Dwarfs. Nothing can be conceived higher and greater in God
          Himself, by the very Highest and Greatest of His Creatures.
          There is such an Infinity in It, as comprehends and surpasses
          all the Divine Attributes. But in that it was also said, Its
          Greatness is greater than God; that likewise is very true in the
          Sense wherein it was spoken; For Love, as I before observed, can
          there enter where God dwelleth not, since the most high God
          dwelleth not in Darkness, but in the Light - the hellish
          Darkness being put under His Feet. Thus for Instance, when our
          beloved Lord Christ was in Hell, Hell was not the Mansion of God
          or of Christ; Hell was not God, neither was it with God, nor
          could it be at all with Him; Hell stood in the Darkness and
          Anxiety of Nature, and no Light of the Divine Majesty did there
          enter. God was not there; for He is not in the Darkness or in
          the Anguish; but Love was there; and Love destroyed Death and
          conquered Hell. So also when thou art in Anguish or Trouble,
          which is Hell within, God is not the Anguish or Trouble; neither
          is He in the Anguish or Trouble; but His Love is there, and
          brings thee out of the Anguish and Trouble into God, leading
          thee into the Light and Joy of His Presence. When God hides
          Himself in thee, Love is still there, and makes Him manifest in
          thee. Such is the inconceivable Greatness and Largeness of Love;
          which will hence appear to thee as great as God above Nature,
          and greater than God in Nature, so as considered in his
          manifestative Glory. Lastly, whereas I also said, Whosoever
          finds It, finds Nothing and All Things; that is also certain and
          true. But how finds he Nothing? Why, I will tell thee how. He
          that findeth it, findeth a Supernatural Supersensual Abyss,
          which hath no Ground or Byss to stand on, and where there is no
          Place to dwell in; and he findeth also Nothing is like unto It,
          and therefore It may fitly be compared to Nothing; for It is
          deeper than any Thing, and is as NoThing with respect to All
          Things, forasmuch as It is not comprehensible by any of them.
          And because It is NoThing respectively, It is therefore free
          from All Things; and is that only Good, which a Man cannot
          express or utter what It is; there being Nothing to which It may
          be compared, to express It by. But in that I lastly said,
          Whosoever finds It, finds All Things; there is nothing can be
          more true than this Assertion. It hath been the BEGINNING of All
          Things; and It ruleth All Things. It is also the END of All
          Things; and will thence comprehend All Things within Its Circle.
          All Things are from It, and in It, and by It. If thou findest
          It, thou comest into that Ground from whence All Things are
          proceeded, and wherein they subsist; and thou art in It a KING
          over all the Works of God.

   Here the Disciple was exceedingly ravished with what his Master had so
   wonderfully and surprisingly declared, and returned his most humble and
   hearty Thanks for that Light, which his Master had been an Instrument
   of conveying to him. But being desirous to hear further concerning
   these high Matters, and to know Somewhat more particularly, he
   requested him that he would give him Leave to wait on him the next Day
   again; and that he would then be pleased to show him how and where he
   might find this which was so much beyond all Price and Value, and
   whereabout the Seat and Abode of it might be in human Nature; with the
   entire Process of the Discovery and bringing it forth to Light.

   The Master said to him: This then we will discourse about at our next
   Conference, as God shall reveal the same to us by his SPIRIT, which is
   the Searcher of All Things. And if thou dost remember well what I
   answered thee in the Beginning, thou shalt soon come thereby to
   understand that hidden mystical Wisdom of God, which none of the Wise
   Men of the World know; and where the MIND thereof is to be found in
   thee, shall be given thee from above to discern. Be silent therefore in
   thy Spirit, and watch unto Prayer; that when we meet again Tomorrow in
   the Love of Christ, thy Mind may be disposed for finding that noble
   PEARL, which to the World appears Nothing, but which to the Children of
   Wisdom is All Things.
     __________________________________________________________________

    ARGUMENT

     Herein is described and set forth the Manner of passing the Gulf
     which divides betwixt the two Principles or States of Heaven and
     Hell: And it is particularly shown how this Transaction is carried
     on in the Soul; what the Partition Wall therein is, which separates
     from God.

     What the breaking down of this Partition Wall, and how effected;
     what the Center of Light is, and the pressing into that Center is;
     What the Light of God, and Light of Nature are; how they are
     operative in their several Spheres, and how to be kept from
     interfering with each other; with some Account of the two Wills and
     their Contraposition in the Fallen State; of the Magical Wheel of
     the Will, and how the Motion thereof may be regulated; of the Eye in
     the Midst thereof, what the Right Eye is to the Soul, and what the
     Left is, but especially what the Single Eye is, and in what Manner
     it is to be obtained; of the Purification from the Contagion of
     Matter; of the Destruction of Evil, and of the very Annihilation of
     it, by the Subsidence of the Will from its own Something into
     Nothing; of the Naked and Magical Faith, and the Attraction thereby
     of a certain Divine Substantiality and Vestment; how all consists in
     the Will, and proceeds but from one Point; where that Point is
     placed, and how it may be found out; and which is both the safest
     and nearest Way to attain to the high supersensual State, and the
     internal Kingdom of Christ, according to the true Heavenly Magia or
     Wisdom.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Disciple being very earnest to be more fully instructed how he
   might arrive at the Supersensual Life; and how, having found All
   Things, he might come to be a King over all God's Works; came again to
   his Master the next Morning, having watched the Night in Prayer, that
   he might be disposed to receive and apprehend the Instructions that
   should be given him by a Divine Irradiation upon his Mind. And the
   Disciple after a little Space of Silence, bowed himself, and thus brake
   forth:

        Disciple:

          O my Master! my Master! I have now endeavoured to recollect my
          Soul in the Presence of God, and to cast myself into that Deep
          where no Creature doth nor can dwell; that I might hear the
          Voice of my Lord speaking in me; and be initiated into that high
          Life, whereof I heard Yesterday such great and amazing Things
          pronounced. But alas! I neither hear nor see as I should; there
          is still such a Partition Wall in me which beats back the
          Heavenly Sounds in their Passage, and obstructs the Entrance of
          that Light by which alone Divine Objects are discoverable, as
          till this be broken down, I can have but small Hopes, yea, even
          none at all, of arriving at those glorious Attainments which you
          pressed me to, or of entering into that where no Creature
          dwells, and which you call Nothing and All Things. Wherefore be
          so kind as to inform me what is required on my Part, that this
          Partition which hinders may be broken or removed.

        Master:

          This Partition is the Creaturely Will in thee; and this can be
          broken by nothing but by the Grace of SELF-DENIAL, which is the
          Entrance into the True Following of Christ, and totally removed
          by Nothing but a perfect Conformity with the Divine Will.

        Disciple:

          But how shall I be able to break this Creaturely Will which is
          at Enmity with the Divine Will? Or, what shall I do to follow
          Christ in so difficult a Path, and not to faint in a continual
          Course of SELF-DENIAL and RESIGNATION to the Will of God?

        Master:

          This is not to be done by thyself; but by the Light and Grace of
          God received into thy Soul, which will, if thou gainsay not,
          break the Darkness that is in thee, and melt down thine OWN
          Will, which worketh in the Darkness and Corruption of Nature,
          and bring it into the Obedience of Christ, whereby the Partition
          of the Creaturely SELF is removed from betwixt God and thee.

        Disciple:

          I know that I cannot do it of myself. But I would fain learn,
          how I must receive this Divine Light and Grace into me, Which is
          to do it for me, if I hinder It not my own SELF. What is then
          required of me in order to admit this Breaker of the Partition
          and to promote the Attainment of the Ends of such Admission?

        Master:

          There is Nothing more required of thee at first, than not to
          resist this Grace, Which is manifested in thee; and Nothing in
          the whole Process of thy Work, but to be obedient and passive to
          the Light of God shining through the Darkness of thy Creaturely
          Being, which reaching no higher than the Light of Nature,
          comprehendeth It not.

        Disciple:

          But is it not for me to attain, if I can, both the Light of God,
          and the Light of the outward Nature too; and to make use of them
          both for the ordering of my Life wisely and prudently?

        Master:

          It is right, I confess, so to do. And it is indeed a Treasure
          above all earthly Treasures, to be possessed of the Light of God
          and Nature, operating in their Spheres; and to have both the Eye
          of Time and Eternity at once open together, and yet not to
          interfere with each other.

        Disciple:

          This is a great Satisfaction to me to hear; having been very
          uneasy about it for some Time. But how this can be without
          interfering with each other, there is the Difficulty. Wherefore,
          fain would I know, if it were lawful, the Boundaries of the one
          and the other; and how both the Divine and the Natural Light may
          in their several Spheres respectively act and operate, for the
          Manifestation of the Mysteries of God and Nature, and for the
          Conduct of my outward and inward Life?

        Master:

          That each of these may be preserved distinct in their several
          Spheres, without confounding Things Heavenly and Things Earthly,
          or breaking the golden Chain of Wisdom, it will be necessary, my
          Child, in the first Place to wait for and attend the
          Supernatural and Divine Light, as that superior Light appointed
          to govern the Day, rising in the true East, which is the Center
          of Paradise; and in great Might breaking forth as out of the
          Darkness within thee, through a Pillar of Fire and
          Thunder-Clouds, and thereby also reflecting upon the inferior
          Light of Nature a Sort of Image of Itself, whereby only it can
          be kept in its due Subordination; that which is below being made
          subservient to that which is above; and that which is without to
          that which is within. Thus there will be no Danger of
          interfering; but all will go right, and every Thing abide in its
          proper Sphere.

        Disciple:

          Therefore without Reason or the Light of Nature be sanctified in
          my Soul, and illuminated by this superior Light, as from the
          central East of the holy Light-World, by the Eternal and
          Intellectual Sun; I perceive there will always be some
          Confusion, and I shall never be able to manage aright either
          what concerneth Time or Eternity; but I must always be at a
          Loss, or break the Links of Wisdom's Chain.

        Master:

          It is even so as thou hast said. All is Confusion, if thou hast
          no more but the dim Light of Nature, or unsanctified and
          unregenerated Reason to guide thee by; and if only the Eye of
          Time be opened in thee, which cannot pierce beyond its own
          Limit. Wherefore seek the Fountain of Light, waiting in the deep
          Ground of thy Soul for the rising there of the Sun of
          Righteousness, whereby the Light of Nature in thee, with the
          Properties thereof, will be made to shine seven Times brighter
          than ordinary. For it shall receive the Stamp, Image, and
          Impression of the Supersensual and Supernatural; so that the
          sensual and rational Life will hence be brought into the most
          perfect Order and Harmony.

        Disciple:

          But how am I to wait for the Rising of this glorious Sun, and
          how am I to seek in the Center, this Fountain of Light, which
          may enlighten me throughout, and bring all my Properties into
          perfect Harmony? I am in Nature, as I said before; and which Way
          shall I pass through Nature, and the Light thereof, so that I
          may come into that Supernatural and Supersensual Ground, from
          whence this true Light, which is the Light of Minds, doth arise;
          and this, without the Destruction of my Nature, or quenching the
          Light of it, which is my - Reason?

        Master:

          Cease but from thine own Activity, steadfastly fixing thine Eye
          upon one Point, and with a strong Purpose relying upon the
          promised Grace of God in Christ, to bring thee out of thy
          Darkness into His Marvelous Light. For this End gather in all
          thy Thoughts, and by Faith press into the Center, laying hold
          upon the Word of God, which is infallible, and which hath called
          thee. Be thou then obedient to this Call; and be silent before
          the Lord, sitting alone with Him in thy inmost and most hidden
          Cell, thy Mind being centrally united in itself, and attending
          His Will in the Patience of Hope. So shall thy Light break forth
          as the Morning; and after the Redness thereof is passed, the Son
          Himself, which thou waitest for, shall arise unto thee, and
          under His most healing Wings thou shalt greatly rejoice;
          ascending and descending in His bright and salutiferous Beams.
          Behold this is the true Supersensual Ground of Life.

        Disciple:

          I believe it indeed to be even so. But will not this destroy
          Nature? Will not the Light of Nature in me be extinguished by
          this greater Light? Or must not the outward Life hence perish,
          with the earthly Body which I carry?

        Master:

          By no Means at all. It is true, the evil Nature will be
          destroyed by It; but by the Destruction thereof you can be no
          Loser, but very much the Gainer. The Eternal Band of Nature is
          the same afterward as before; and the Properties are the same.
          So that Nature hereby is only advanced and meliorated; and the
          Light thereof, or human Reason, by being kept within its due
          Bounds, and regulated by a superior Light is only made useful.

        Disciple:

          Pray therefore let me know how this inferior Light ought to be
          used by me; how it is to be kept within its due Bounds; and
          after what Manner the superior Light doth regulate and ennoble
          it.

        Master:

          Know then, my beloved Son, that if thou wilt keep the Light of
          Nature within its own proper Bounds, and make use thereof in
          just Subordination to the Light of God; thou must consider that
          there are in thy Soul two Wills, an inferiour Will, which is for
          driving thee to Things without and below; and a superiour Will,
          which is for drawing to Things within and above. These two Wills
          are now set together, as it were, Back to Back, and in a direct
          Contrariety to each other; but in the Beginning, it was not so.
          For this Contraposition of the Soul in these two is no more than
          the Effect of the Fallen State; since before that they were
          placed one under the other, that is, the superiour Will Above,
          as the Lord, and the inferiour Below, as the Subject. And thus
          it ought to have continued. Thou must also further consider,
          that answering to these two Wills there are likewise two Eyes in
          the Soul, whereby they are severally directed; forasmuch as
          these Eyes are not united in one single View, but look quite
          contrary Ways at once. They are in a like Manner set one against
          the other, without a common Medium to join them. And hence, so
          long as this Double-sightedness doth remain, it is impossible
          there should be any Agreement in the Determination of this or
          that Will. This is very plain; and it showeth the Necessity that
          this Malady, arising from the Dis-union of the Rays of Vision,
          be some Way remedied and redressed, in order to a true
          Discernment in the Mind. Both these Eyes therefore must be made
          to unite by a Concentration of Rays; there being nothing more
          dangerous than for the Mind to abide thus in the Duplicity, and
          not to seek to arrive at the Unity of Vision. Thou perceivest, I
          know, that thou hast two Wills in thee, one set against the
          other, the Superior and the Inferior; and that thou hast also
          two Eyes within, one against another; whereof the one Eye may be
          called the Right Eye, and the other the Left Eye. Thou
          perceivest too, doubtless, that it is according to the Right Eye
          that the Wheel of the superiour Will is moved; and that it is
          according to the Left Eye, that the contrary Wheel in the lower
          is turned about.

        Disciple:

          I perceive this, Sir, to be very true; and this it is which
          causeth a continual Combat in me, and createth to me greater
          Anxiety than I am able to express. Nor am I unacquainted with
          the Disease of my own Soul, which you have so clearly declared.
          Alas! I feel such irregular and convulsive Motions drawing me on
          this Side and that Side. The Spirit seeth not as the Flesh
          seeth; neither doth, or can the Flesh seeth as the Spirit seeth.
          Hence the Spirit willeth against the Flesh; and the Flesh
          willeth against the Spirit in me. This hath been my hard Case.
          And how shall it be remedied? O how may I arrive at the Unity of
          Will, and how come into the Unity of Vision?

        Master:

          Mark now what I say: The Right Eye looketh forward in thee into
          Eternity. The Left Eye looketh backward in thee into Time. If
          now thou sufferest thyself to be always looking into Nature, and
          the Things of Time, and to be leading the Will, and to be
          seeking Somewhat for thyself in the Desire, it will be
          impossible for thee ever to arrive at the Unity, which thou
          wishest for. Remember this; and always be upon thy Watch. Give
          not thy Mind leave to enter into, nor to fill itself with, that
          which is without thee; neither look thou backward upon thySELF;
          but quit thySELF, and look forward upon Christ. Let not thy Left
          Eye deceive thee, by making continually one Representation after
          another, and stirring up thereby an earnest Longing in the
          SELF-Propriety; but let thy Right Eye command back this Left,
          and attract it to thee, so that it may not gad Abroad into the
          Wonders and Delights of Nature. Yea, it is better to pluck it
          quite out, and to cast it from thee, than to suffer it to
          proceed forth without Restraint into Nature, and to follow its
          own Lusts. However there is for this no Necessity, since both
          Eyes may become very useful, if ordered aright; and both the
          Divine and natural Light may in the Soul subsist together, and
          be of mutual Service to each other. But never shalt thou arrive
          at the Unity of Vision or Uniformity of Will, but by entering
          fully into the Will of our Saviour Christ, and therein bringing
          the Eye of Time into the Eye of Eternity; and then descending by
          Means of this united through the Light of God into the Light of
          Nature.

        Disciple:

          So then if I can but enter into the Will of my LORD, and abide
          therein, I am safe, and may both attain to the Light of God in
          the Spirit of my Soul, and see with the Eye of God, that is, the
          Eye of Eternity in the Eternal Ground of my Will; and may also
          at the same Time enjoy the Light of this World nevertheless; not
          degrading but adorning the Light of Nature; and beholding as
          with the Eye of Eternity Things Eternal, so with the Eye of
          Nature Things Natural, and both contemplating therein the
          Wonders of God, and sustaining also thereby the Life of my
          outward Vehicle or Body.

        Master:

          It is very right. Thou hast well understood; and thou desirest
          now to enter into the Will of God, and to abide therein as in
          the Supersensual Ground of Light and Life, where thou mayest in
          His Light behold both Time and Eternity, and bring all the
          Wonders created of God for the exterior into the interior Life,
          and so eternally rejoice in them to the Glory of Christ; the
          Partition of thy Creaturely Will being broken down, and the Eye
          of thy Spirit simplified in and through the Eye of God
          manifesting Itself in the Center of thy Life. Let this be so
          now, for it is God's Will.

        Disciple:

          But it is very hard to be always looking forwards into Eternity;
          and consequently to attain to this single Eye, and Simplicity of
          Divine Vision. The Entrance of a Soul naked into the Will of
          God, shutting out all Imaginations and Desires, and breaking
          down the strong Partition which you mention, is indeed somewhat
          very terrible and shocking to human Nature in its present State.
          O what shall I do, that I may reach this which I so much long
          for?

        Master:

          My Son, let not the Eye of Nature with the Will of the Wonders
          depart from that Eye which is introverted into the Divine
          Liberty, and into the Eternal Light of the holy Majesty; but let
          it draw to thee those Wonders by Union with that heavenly
          internal Eye, which are externally wrought out and manifested in
          visible Nature. For while thou art in the World, and hast an
          honest Employment, thou art certainly by the Order of Providence
          obliged to labor in it, and to finish the Work given thee,
          according to thy best Ability, without Repining or Complaining
          in the least and to seek out and manifest for God's Glory, the
          Wonders of Nature and Art. Since let the Nature be what it will,
          it is all the Work and Art of God; and let the Art also be what
          it will, it is still God's Work, and His Art, rather than any
          Art or Cunning of Man. And all both in Art and Nature serveth
          but abundantly to manifest the wonderful Works of God; that He
          for all, and in all may be glorified. Yea, all serveth but to
          recollect thee more inward if thou knowest rightly how to use
          them, and to draw thy Spirit into that majestic Light, wherein
          the original Patterns and Forms of Things visible are to be
          seen. Keep therefore in the Center, and stir not out from the
          Presence of God revealed within thy Soul; let the World and the
          Devil make never so great a Noise and Bustle to draw thee out,
          mind them not; they cannot hurt thee. It is permitted to the Eye
          of thy Reason to seek Food, and to thy Hands, by their Labor, to
          get Food for the terrestrial Body. But then this Eye ought not
          with its Desire to enter into the Food prepared, which would be
          Covetousness; but must in Resignation simply bring it before the
          Eye of God in thy Spirit, and then thou must seek to place it
          close to this very Eye, without letting it go. Mark this Lesson
          well. Let the Hands or the Head be at Labor, thy Heart ought
          nevertheless to rest in God. God is a Spirit; dwell in the
          Spirit, work in the Spirit, pray in the Spirit, and do every
          Thing in the Spirit; for remember thou also art a Spirit, and
          thereby created in the Image of God. Therefore see that thy
          Desire attract not Matter unto thee, but as much as possible
          abstract thyself from all Matter whatever; and so, standing in
          the Center, present thyself as a vacant, naked Spirit before
          God, in Simplicity and Purity; and be sure thy Spirit draw in
          nothing but Spirit. Thou wilt yet be greatly enticed to draw
          Matter, and to gather that which the World calls Substance,
          thereby to have somewhat visible to trust to. But by no Means
          consent to the Tempter, nor yield to the Lusting of thy Flesh
          against the Spirit. For in so doing thou wilt infallibly obscure
          the Divine Light in thee; thy Spirit will stick in the dark
          covetous Root, and from the fiery Source of thy Soul will it
          blaze out in Pride and Anger; thy Will shall be chained in
          Earthliness, and shall sink through the Anguish into Darkness
          and materiality; and never shalt thou be able to reach the still
          Liberty, or to stand before the Majesty of God. Since this is
          opening a Door for him who reigneth in the Corruption of Matter,
          possibly the Devil may roar at thee for this Refusal; because
          nothing can vex him worse than such a silent Abstraction of the
          Soul, and Controversion thereof to the Point of Rest from all
          that is worldly and circumferential. But regard him not; neither
          admit into thee the least Dust of Matter which he may pretend
          any Claim to. It will be all Darkness to thee, as much Matter as
          is drawn in by the Desire of thy Will. It will darken God's
          Majesty to thee; and will close the seeing Eye, by hiding from
          thee the Light of His beloved Countenance. This the Serpent
          longeth to do; but in vain, except thou permittest thy
          Imagination upon his Suggestion, to receive in the alluring
          Matter; else he can never get in. Behold then, if thou desirest
          to see God's Light in thy Soul, and be divinely illuminated and
          conducted, this is the short Way that thou art to take; not to
          let the Eye of thy Spirit enter into Matter, or fill itself with
          any Thing whatever, either in Heaven or Earth; but to let it
          enter by naked Faith into the Light of the Majesty; and so
          receive by pure Love the Light of God, and attract the Divine
          Power into itself, putting on the Divine Body, and growing up in
          it to the full Maturity of the Humanity of Christ.

        Disciple:

          As I said before, so I say again, this is very hard. I conceive
          indeed well enough that my Spirit ought to be free from the
          Contagion of Matter, and wholly empty, so that it may admit into
          it the Spirit of God. Also, that this Spirit will not enter, but
          where the Will entereth into Nothing, and resigneth itself up in
          the Nakedness of Faith, and in the Purity of Love, to Its
          Conduct; feeding magically upon the Word of God, and clothing
          itself thereby with a Divine Substantiality. But alas, how hard
          it is for the Will to sink into Nothing, to attract Nothing, to
          imagine Nothing!

        Master:

          Let it be granted that it is so. Is it not surely worth thy Time
          and Effort, and all that thou canst ever do?

        Disciple:

          It is so, I must needs confess.

        Master:

          But perhaps it may not be so hard as at first it appeareth to
          be; make but the Trial, and be in earnest. What is there
          required of thee, but to stand still, and see the Salvation of
          thy God? And couldst thou desire any Thing less? Where is the
          Hardship in this? Thou hast Nothing to care for, Nothing to
          desire in this Life, Nothing to imagine or attract. Thou needest
          only cast thy Care upon God, who careth for thee, and leave Him
          to dispose of thee according to His Good Will and Pleasure, even
          as if thou hadst no Will at all in thee. For He knoweth what is
          best; and if thou canst but trust Him, He will most certainly do
          better for thee, than if thou were left to thine own Choice.

        Disciple:

          This I most firmly believe.

        Master:

          If thou believest, then go and do accordingly. All is in the
          Will, as I have shown thee. When the Will imagineth after
          Somewhat, then entereth it into that Somewhat, then presently
          that same Somewhat taketh the Will into itself, and overcloudeth
          it, so that it can have no Light, but must dwell in Darkness,
          unless it return back out of that Somewhat into Nothing. For
          when the Will imagineth or lusteth after Nothing, then it
          entereth into Nothing, where it receiveth the Will of God into
          itself, and so dwelleth in Light, and worketh all its Works in
          that Light.

        Disciple:

          I am now satisfied that the Main Cause of any one's Spiritual
          Blindness is his letting his Will into Somewhat, or into that
          which he hath wrought, of what Nature soever it be, Good or
          Evil, and his setting his Heart and Affections upon the Work of
          his own Hands or Brain; and that when the earthly Body
          perisheth, then the Soul must be imprisoned in that very Thing
          which it shall have received and let in; and if the Light of God
          be not in it, being deprived of the Light of this World, it
          cannot but be found in a dark Prison.

        Master:

          This is a very precious Gate of Knowledge; I am glad thou takest
          it into such Consideration. The understanding of the whole
          Scripture is contained in it; and all that hath been written
          from the Beginning of the World to this Day, may be found
          herein, by him that having entered with his Will into Nothing,
          hath there found All Things by finding God; from Whom, and to
          Whom, and in Whom are All Things. By this Means thou shalt come
          to hear and see God; and after this earthly Life is ended, to
          see with the Eye of Eternity all the Wonders of God and of
          Nature, and more particularly those which shall have been
          wrought by thee in the Flesh, or all that the Spirit of God
          shall have given thee to labor out for thyself and thy Neighbor,
          or all that the Eye of Reason enlightened from above, may at any
          Time have manifested to thee. Delay not therefore to enter in by
          this Gate, which if thou seest in the Spirit, as some highly
          favored Souls have seen it, thou seest in the Supersensual
          Ground, all that God is, and can do; thou seest also therewith,
          as one hath said who was taken thereinto, through Heaven, Hell,
          and Earth, and through the Essence of all Essences. Whosoever
          findeth It, hath found All that he can possibly desire. Here is
          the Virtue and Power of the Love of God displayed. Here is the
          Height and Depth; here is the Breadth and Length thereof
          manifested, as ever the Capacity of thy Soul can contain. By
          this thou shalt come into that Ground out of which all Things
          are originated, and in which they subsist; and in It thou shalt
          reign over all God's Works, as a Prince of God.

        Disciple:

          Pray tell me, dear Master, where dwelleth It in Man?

        Master:

          Where Man dwelleth not, there It hath Its Seat in Man.

        Disciple:

          Where is that in a Man, where Man dwelleth not in himself?

        Master:

          It is the resigned Ground of a Soul, to which NoThing cleaveth.

        Disciple:

          Where is the Ground in any Soul, to which there will NoThing
          stick? Or, where is that which abideth and dwelleth not in
          SomeThing?

        Master:

          It is the Center of Rest and Motion in the resigned Will of a
          truly contrite Spirit, which is crucified to the World. This
          Center of the Will is impenetrable consequently to the World,
          the Devil, and Hell; Nothing in all the World can enter into it,
          or adhere to it, though never so many Devils should be in the
          Confederacy against it; because the Will is dead with Christ
          unto this World, but quickened with Him in the Center thereof,
          after His Blessed Image. Here it is where Man dwelleth not; and
          where no SELF abideth, or can abide.

        Disciple:

          O where is this naked Ground of the Soul void of all SELF? And
          how shall I come at the hidden Center where God dwelleth, and
          not Man? Tell me plainly, loving Sir, where it is, and how it is
          to be found by me, and entered into?

        Master:

          There where the Soul hath slain its OWN Will, and willeth no
          more any Thing as from itSELF, but only as God willeth, and as
          His Spirit moveth upon the Soul, shall this appear. Where the
          Love of SELF is banished, there dwelleth the Love of God. For so
          much of the Soul's OWN Will as is dead unto itSELF, even so much
          Room hath the Will of God, which is His Love, taken up in that
          Soul. The Reason whereof is this; Where its OWN Will did before
          sit, there is now Nothing; and where Nothing is, there alone is
          it that the Love of God worketh.

        Disciple:

          But how shall I comprehend It?

        Master:

          If thou goest about to comprehend It, then It will fly away from
          thee; but if thou dost surrender thyself wholly up to It, then
          It will abide with thee, and become the Life of thy Life, and be
          natural to thee.

        Disciple:

          And how can this be without dying, or the whole Destruction of
          my Will?

        Master:

          Upon this entire Surrender and Yielding up of thy Will, the Love
          of God IN THEE becometh the Life of thy Nature; It killeth thee
          not, but quickeneth thee, who art now dead to thySELF in thine
          own Will, according to Its proper Life, even the Life of God.
          And then thou livest, yet not to thy own Will; but thou livest
          to Its Will, forasmuch as thy Will is henceforth become Its
          Will. So then it is no longer thy Will, but the Will of God; no
          longer the Love of thySELF, but the Love of God, which moveth
          and operateth in thee; and then, being thus comprehended in It,
          thou art dead indeed as to thySELF, but art alive unto God. So
          being dead thou livest, or rather God liveth IN THEE by His
          Spirit; and His Love is made to thee Life from the Dead. Never
          couldst thou with all thy seeking, have apprehended It; but It
          hath apprehended thee. Much less couldst thou have comprehended
          It. But now It hath comprehended thee; and so the Treasure of
          Treasures is found.

        Disciple:

          How is it that so few Souls do find It, when yet all would be
          glad enough to have It?

        Master:

          They all seek It in Somewhat, and so they find It not. For where
          there is Somewhat for the Soul to adhere to, there the Soul
          findeth but that Somewhat only, and taketh up its Rest therein,
          until she seeth that It is to be found in Nothing, and goeth
          again out of the Somewhat into Nothing, even into that Nothing
          out of which all Things may be made. The Soul here saith, " I
          have Nothing, for I am utterly empty and stripped of every
          Thing; I can do Nothing, for I have no Manner of Power, but am
          as Water poured out; I am Nothing, for all that I am is no more
          than an Image of Being, and only God is to me I AM; and so
          sitting down in my own Nothingness, I give Glory to the Eternal
          Being, and will Nothing of mySELF, that so God may will All in
          me, being unto me my God and All Things." Herein now that it is
          that so very few find this most precious Treasure in the Soul,
          though every one would so fain have It; and might also have It
          were it not for this or that Somewhat into which every one
          letteth.

        Disciple:

          But if the Love should proffer Itself to a Soul, could not that
          Soul find It, nor lay hold on It, without going for It into
          Nothing?

        Master:

          No verily. Men seek and find not, because they seek It not in
          the naked Ground where It lieth; but in SomeThing or Other where
          It never will be, neither can be. They seek It in their OWN
          Will, and they find It not. They seek It in their Self-Desire,
          and they meet not with It. They look for It in an Image, or in
          an Opinion, or in an Affection, or a natural Devotion and
          Fervour, and they lose the Substance by thus hunting after a
          Shadow. They search for It in Something sensible or imaginary,
          in Somewhat which they may have a more peculiar natural
          Inclination for, and Adhesion to; and so they miss of what they
          seek, for Want of diving into the Supersensual and Supernatural
          Ground where the Treasure is hid. Now should the Love graciously
          condescend to proffer Itself to such as these, and even to
          present Itself evidently before the Eye of their Spirit, yet
          would It find no Place in them at all, neither could It be held
          by them, or remain with them.

        Disciple:

          Why not, if the Love should be willing and ready to offer
          Itself, and to stay with them?

        Master:

          Because the Imaginariness which is in their own Will hath set up
          itself in the Place thereof; and so this Imaginariness would
          have the Love in it; but the Love fleeth away, for it is Its
          Prison. The Love may offer Itself; but It cannot abide where the
          Self-Desire attracteth or imagineth. That Will which attracteth
          Nothing, and to which Nothing adhereth, is the only Will capable
          of receiving It, for It dwelleth only in Nothing as I said, and
          therefore they find It not.

        Disciple:

          If It dwell only in Nothing, what is now the Office of It in
          Nothing?

        Master:

          The Office of the Love here is to penetrate incessantly into
          Something; and if It penetrate into, and find a Place in
          Something which is standing still and at Rest, then Its Business
          is to take Possession thereof. And when It hath there taken
          Possession, then It rejoiceth therein with Its flaming
          Love-Fire, even as the Sun doth in the visible World. And then
          the Office of it, is without Intermission to enkindle a Fire in
          this Something, which shall burn it up; and then with the Flames
          thereof exceedingly to enflame Itself and raise the Heat of the
          Love-Fire by It, even seven Degrees higher.

        Disciple:

          O loving Master, how shall I understand this?

        Master:

          If It but once kindle a Fire within thee, my Son, thou shalt
          then certainly feel how It consumeth all that which It toucheth;
          thou shalt feel It in the burning up of thy SELF, and swiftly
          devouring all Egoity, or that which thou callest I and Me, as
          standing in a separate Root, and divided from the Deity, the
          Fountain of thy Being. And when this Enkindling is made in thee,
          then the Love doth so exceedingly rejoice in thy Fire, as thou
          wouldst not for all the World be out of It; yea, wouldst rather
          suffer thyself to be killed, than to enter into thy Something
          again. This Fire now must grow hotter and hotter, till It shall
          have perfected Its Office with respect to thee, and therefore
          wilt not give over, till It come to the seventh Degree. Its
          Flame hence also will be so very great, that It will never leave
          thee, though It should even cost thee thy temporal Life; but It
          would go with thee in Its sweet loving Fire into Death; and if
          thou wentest also into Hell, It would break Hell in Pieces also
          for thy Sake. Nothing is more certain than this; for It is
          stronger than Death and Hell.

        Disciple:

          Enough, my dearest Master, I can no longer endure that any Thing
          should divert me from It. But how shall I find the nearest Way
          to It?

        Master:

          Where the Way is hardest, there go thou; and what the World
          casteth away, that take thou up. What the World doth, that do
          thou not; but in all Things walk thou contrary to the World. So
          thou comest the nearest Way to that which thou art seeking.

        Disciple:

          If I should in all Things walk contrary to other People, I must
          need be in a very unquiet and sad State; and the World would not
          fail to account me for a Madman.

        Master:

          I bid thee not, Child, to do Harm to any one, thereby to create
          to thyself any Misery or Unquietness. This is not what I mean by
          walking contrary in every Thing to the World. But because the
          World, as the World, loveth only Deceit and Vanity, and walketh
          in false and treacherous Ways; thence, if thou hast a Mind to
          act a clean contrary Part to the Ways thereof, without any
          Exception or Reserve whatsoever, walk thou only in the right
          Way, which is called the Way of Light, as that of the World is
          properly called the Way of Darkness. For the right Way, even the
          Path of Light, is contrary to all the Ways of the World. But
          whereas thou art afraid of creating to thyself hereby Trouble
          and Inquietude, that indeed, will be so according to the Flesh.
          In the World thou must have Trouble, and thy Flesh will not fail
          to be unquiet, and to give thee Occasion for continual
          Repentance. Nevertheless in this very Anxiety of Soul, arising
          either from the World or the Flesh, the LOVE doth most willingly
          enkindle Itself, and Its cheering and conquering Fire is but
          made to blaze forth with greater Strength for the Destruction of
          that Evil. And whereas thou dost also say, that the World will
          for this esteem thee mad, it is true the World will be apt
          enough to censure thee for a Madman in Walking contrary to it.
          And thou art not to be surprised if the Children thereof laugh
          at thee, calling thee silly Fool. For the Way to the Love of God
          is Folly to the World, but is Wisdom to the Children of God.
          Hence, whenever the World perceiveth this holy Fire of Love in
          God's Children, it concludeth immediately that they are turned
          Fools, and are beside themselves. But to the Children of God,
          that which is despised of the World is the greatest Treasure;
          yea, so great a Treasure It is, as no Life can express, no
          Tongue so much as name what this inflaming, all-conquering Love
          of God is. It is brighter than the Sun; It is sweeter than any
          Thing that is called sweet; It is stronger than all Strength; It
          is more nutrimental than Food; more cheering to the Heart than
          Wine, and more pleasant than all the Joy and Pleasantness of
          this World. Whosoever obtaineth It, is richer than any Monarch
          on Earth; and he who getteth It, is nobler than any Emperor can
          be, and more potent and absolute than all Earthly Power and
          Authority.

     "Behold, I stand at the Door and knock: if any man HEAR My voice,
     and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and
     he with Me." "He that is of God HEARETH God's Words; ye therefore
     HEAR them not, because ye are not of God." "My Sheep HEAR My Voice;
     and I know them, and they follow Me... And a Stranger will they not
     follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the Voice of
     Strangers." "He that has Ears to HEAR, let him HEAR."
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Matthew

   [1]16:24   [2]16:26   [3]19:27

   Mark

   [4]8:34   [5]10:28

   Luke

   [6]9:23   [7]18:28

   John

   [8]3:3-8

   1 Corinthians

   [9]2:7-15

   Revelation

   [10]6   [11]18:4   [12]21
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#iii_2-p3.1
   2. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=26#i-p3.1
   3. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=27#iii_2-p4.1
   4. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii_2-p3.2
   5. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iii_2-p4.2
   6. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=23#iii_2-p3.3
   7. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=28#iii_2-p4.3
   8. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#i-p2.1
   9. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv_2-p7.1
  10. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=0#x-p4.2
  11. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=4#ii_1-p1.1
  12. file:///ccel/b/boehme/waytochrist/cache/waytochrist.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=0#x-p4.2
