     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Work of Christ
      Creator(s): Forsyth, P.T. (1848-1921)
   CCEL Subjects: All; Theology;
      LC Call no: BT265
     LC Subjects:

                  Doctrinal theology

                  Christology
     __________________________________________________________________

                               The Work of Christ

    By

Peter Taylor Forsyth, D.D.
     __________________________________________________________________

Preface

   These chapters need to have it said that they were given as extempore
   lectures from rough notes to a gathering, largely of young ministers,
   in connection with Rev. Dr. Campbell Morgan's annual conference at
   Mundesley, Norfolk. They were taken down in shorthand and then
   carefully revised. They took place in July, 1909, immediately after the
   delivery of my Congregational Lecture on the Person and Place of
   Christ, which they supplement - especially when taken with my
   Cruciality of the Cross a few months before. It will be seen from the
   conditions that the book cannot pretend to be more than a higher kind
   of popularisation, though this is less true of the two last chapters,
   which have been more worked over. The style approaches in parts a
   conversational familiarity which would have been out of place in
   addressing theological experts. And as some of the ideas are unfamiliar
   I have not been too careful to avoid repetition. My hope is to be of
   some use to those ministers who are still at a stage when they are
   seeking more footing on such matters than they have been provided with
   in mere Biblical or Historical Theology. There is no region where
   religion becomes so quickly theology as in dealing with the work of
   Christ. No doctrine takes us so straight to the heart of things, or so
   forces on us a discussion of the merits of the case, the dogmatic of
   it, as distinct from its scriptural or its ecclesiastical career. No
   doctrine draws so directly on the personal religion of sinful men, and
   none, therefore, is open to so much change in the course of the
   Church's thought upon its growing faith and life. Thus when we consider
   that here we are at once where the form may change most in time and yet
   the feet be most firmly set for eternity, we realize how difficult and
   delicate our task must be. And we are made to feel as if the due book
   on such a theme could only be written from behind the veil with the
   most precious blood that ever flowed in human veins.
   We are in a time when a spirituality without positive content seems
   attractive to many minds. And the numbers may grow of those favouring
   an undogmatic Christianity which is without apostolic or evangelical
   substance, but cultivates a certain emulsion of sympathetic mysticism,
   intuitional belief, and benevolent action. Among lay minds of a devout
   and social but impatiently practical habit, this is not unlikely to
   spread; and particularly among those whose public interests get the
   upper hand of ethical and historical insight and denude their religion
   of most of the reflection it demands.
   Upon undogmatic, undenominational religion no Church can live. With
   mere spirituality the Church has not much directly to do; it is but a
   subjective thing; and its favour with many may be but another phase of
   the uncomprehending popular reverence (not to say superstition) for the
   recluse religionist, the mysterious ecstatic, and the ascetic pietist.
   What Christian faith and the Christian Church have to do with is holy
   spirituality - the spirituality of the Holy Spirit of our Redemption.
   The Christian revelation is not "God is a spirit," nor is it "God is
   love." Each of these great words is now much used to discredit the more
   positive faith from whose midst John wrote them down. Herein is love,
   not in affection but in propitiation (1 John 4:10). Would Paul ever
   have written 1 Cor. 13 if it had been revealed to him that it was going
   to be turned against Rom 3:25? And what would his language have been to
   those who abused that chapter so? Christian faith is neither
   spirituality nor charity. Its revelation is the holiness in judgment of
   the spiritual and loving God. Love if only divine as it is holy; and
   spirituality is Christian only as it meets the conditions of Holy Love
   in the way the Cross did, as the crisis of holy judgment and holy
   grace. If the Cross is not simply a manner of religion but the object
   of our religion and the site of revelation, then it stands there above
   all to effect God's holiness, and not to concentrate man's
   self-sacrifice. And except in the Cross we have no guarantee for the
   supreme thing, the divine thing, in God, which is the changeless
   reality and irresistible sovereignty of His Holy Love.
   It is upon such faith alone, given by the Cross alone, that a Church
   can live - upon the faith that founded it - upon a positive New
   Testament Gospel. Of that Gospel the Church is the trustee. And the
   Church betrays its trust and throws its life and its Lord away when it
   says, "Be beautifully spiritual and believe as you like," or "Do
   blessed good and think as you please."
   There is timely saying of that searching Christian genius Kierkegaard -
   the great and melancholy Dane in whom Hamlet was mastered by Christ:
   "For long the tactics have been: use every means to move as many as you
   can - to move everybody if possible - to enter Christianity. Do not be
   too curious whether what they enter is Christianity. My tactics have
   been, with God's help, to use every means to make it clear what the
   demand of Christianity really is - if not one entered it."
   The statement is extreme; but that way lies the Church's salvation - in
   its anti-Nicene relation to the world, its pre-Constantinian,
   non-established, relation to the world, and devotion to the Word.
   Society is hopeless except for the Church. And the Church has nothing
   to live on but the Cross that faces and overcomes the world. It cannot
   live on a cross which is on easy terms with the world as the apotheosis
   of all its aesthetic religion, or the classic of all its ethical
   intuition. The work of Christ, rightly understood, is the final
   spiritual condition of all the work we may aspire to do in converting
   society to the kingdom of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

I. The Difference Between God's Sacrifice and Man's

   What I am going to say is not directly unto edification, but indirectly
   it is so must certainly. Directly it is rather for that instruction
   which is a need in our Christian life as essential as edification. We
   cannot do without either. On the one hand instruction with no idea of
   edification at all becomes mere academical discourse. It may begin
   anywhere and it may end anywhere. On the other hand, edification
   without instruction very soon becomes a feeble and ineffective thing. I
   think a great many of us would be agreed that part of the poverty and
   weakness of the Church at the present moment is due to the fact that
   edification has been pursued to the neglect of instruction. We have
   been a little too prone to dwell upon the simple side of the gospel.
   All our capital is in small circulation. We have not put by a reserve,
   as it were. And therefore the simplicity itself has become unsettled
   and ineffectual, confused and confusing.
   I ask your attention to certain aspects of our Christian faith which
   perhaps do not lie immediately upon the surface, but which are yet the
   condition of the Church's continued energy and success in the world. I
   suppose there is nobody here who does not believe in the Church. At any
   rate, what I propose to say will be said entirely from that standpoint.
   We believe in the Holy Catholic Church. My contention would be that,
   apart from such a position as I desire to bring to your notice - some
   real apostolic belief in the real work of Jesus Christ - apart from
   that no Church can continue to exist. That is the point of view which I
   take at the outset. The Church is precious, not in itself, but because
   of God's purpose with it. It is there because of what God has done for
   it. It is there, more particularly, because of what Christ has done,
   and done in history. It is there solely to serve the Gospel.
   It is impossible not to observe at the present day that the Church is
   under a cloud. You cannot take any division of it, in any country of
   the world, without feeling that that is so. Therefore I will begin by
   making quite a bold statement; and I should be quite prepared, given
   time and opportunity, to devote a whole week to making it good. The
   statement is that the Church of Christ is the greatest and finest
   product of human history. It is the greatest thing in the universe.
   That is in complete defiance of the general view and tendency of
   society at the present moment. I say the Church is the greatest and
   finest product of human history; because it is not really a product of
   human history, but the product of the Holy Spirit within history. It
   stands for the new creation, the New Humanity, and it has that in
   trust. The man who has a slight acquaintance with history is ready to
   bridle at a statement like that. He says: "Consider what the Roman
   Church has done; consider how obscurantist many sections of the
   Protestant Church are; consider the ineffectual position of the Church
   in modern civilization - and what nonsense to talk about the Church as
   the greatest and finest product of human history!" True enough, the
   authority of the Church is failing in many quarters. And that does not
   mean only the external authority of what you might call a statutory
   Church, a great institutional Church, a great organized Church like
   Rome, for example. It means much more than that. It means that the
   authority of the whole Church is weakened in respect of the inward and
   spiritual matter which it contains and preaches, and which makes it
   what it is. The Church is there as the vehicle of the power of the Holy
   Ghost and of the authority of the saving God - a God, that is, who is
   saving not groups here and there, but the whole of human society. But a
   spiritual authority for man altogether is at a discount. Perhaps we
   have brought that in some measure upon ourselves. Perhaps, too, it was
   historically necessary. But, necessary or not, it is a matter of fact
   that our Protestantism has developed often into a masterless
   individualism which is as deadly to Christian life as an over-organized
   institution like Rome. Many spiritual people today find it difficult to
   make their choice between the two extremes. Without going into the
   historic causes of the situation, let us recognize the situation.
   Spiritual authority, especially that of the Church, is for the time
   being at a great discount.
   The Church is valuable as the organ of Christian grace, and truth, and
   power. But what do we find offered us in place of the Church? Those who
   attack the Church most seriously, and disbelieve in it most thoroughly,
   are not proposing simply to level the Church to the ground in the sense
   of destroying any religious society. What they want to do is to put
   some other kind of society in the place of the Church. For they say, as
   we all say, that it is impossible for religion, certainly impossible
   for Christianity, to exist without a social body in which it is
   cultivated and has its effect. Therefore, those who are opposed to the
   Church most bitterly are yet not prepared to make a total desert. But
   they put all kinds of organizations, fancy organizations and fancy
   religions, in its place. Take the great movement in the direction of
   Socialism. Take the Socialist programs that you find so plentifully
   everywhere. What do these various organizations mean? What do all these
   organizations mean which profess to embody human brotherhood, and are
   represented by Trades Unions, Co-operation, Fraternities, Guilds,
   Socialism? What is it they all confess? That some social vehicle there
   must be. You cannot promote Anarchy itself without associations for the
   purpose. So that the very existence of these rival organizations is a
   confession of the one fundamental principle of the Church, namely, that
   the human ideal, that religion in the true sense of the word, cannot do
   without a social habitation. They put in their own way what we put in
   our way (and we think a better way), that there must be a Church
   builded together for a habitation of God in the Spirit. Our
   individualisms have been troubling and weakening us so much that
   everybody is looking away to some form of human life which shall have
   the advantages of individualism without its perils. The pietistic form
   of individualism did in its day great service. But it is out of date.
   Rationalistic individualism, again, taking shape in political
   radicalism, has done good work in its day. That also seems going out of
   date. The value of the new movement is its - shall I say - solidarity;
   which is a confession of that social, fraternal principle which finds
   its consummation really, and its power only, in the Church of Christ.
   When we look at these rival organizations (and they are many, and some
   will occur to you which I have not named), we can, I think, gather most
   of them under one head. In contrast with the Church the various social
   forms that are offered to us today would build society upon a natural
   basis, the basis of natural brotherhood, natural humanity, natural
   goodness - on human nature. And the issue between the Church and the
   chief rivals of the Church is an issue between society upon this
   natural basis, and society upon a supernatural basis. Our Christian
   belief is based upon the work of Christ; and we hold that human society
   can only continue to exist in final unity upon that same supernatural
   basis. It is an issue, therefore, between human nature deified and
   human nature saved; between mere sympathy and faith - faith taken in a
   quite positive and definite sense. We think that a brotherhood of mere
   sympathy, however warm it can be at a particular moment, has no stay in
   it, no eternal promise. The eternal promise is with supernatural faith.
   Do you ever believe otherwise? I hope you have been so tempted; because
   having got over it you will be very much better for having gone through
   it. I wish much more of our belief had gone through troubled scenes and
   come to its rest; we should make far greater impression upon men if we
   gave them to feel we had fought our way to the peace and power we have.
   Well, were you ever tempted to believe that Christianity is just human
   nature at its best? That is the most powerful and dangerous plea that
   is put forward just now in challenge of our Christian position and
   Church. Is the Kingdom of God just our natural spirituality and
   altruism developed? Is it just the spirit of religion or
   self-sacrifice, which you often find in human nature, developed to its
   highest? Is that the Kingdom of God? I trust you believe not - that
   human nature is not capable, by all the finest sacrifices it might
   develop, of saving, or ensuring itself, and setting up the Kingdom of
   God. Take the best side of human nature, that side which moves men to
   unselfishness and sacrifice, the side that comes out in many a heroic
   battle, in the silent battles of our civilization, where the victims
   get no applause and no reputation for their heroism whatever. Take the
   best side of human nature, illustrated in every coalpit accident and
   every such thing, in countless quiet homes of poverty, where lives are
   being worked down to the bone and ground to death toiling and slaving
   for others. Take the vast mass of fatherhood and motherhood living for
   the children only. Take that best side of human nature, make the most
   of it, and then put this question: "How does man's noblest work differ
   from Christ's great work?" That is the question to which I desire to
   attract your attention today. How does man's best work differ from
   Christ's great work?
   Let me begin with a story which was reported in the Belgian papers some
   years ago. Two passenger trains were coming in opposite directions at
   full speed. As they approached the station, it was found the levers
   would not work, owing to the frost, and the points could not be set to
   clear the trains of each other. A catastrophe seemed to be inevitable;
   when a signalman threw himself flat between the rails, and with his
   hands held the tie-rod in such a way that the points were properly set
   and kept; and he remained thus while the train thundered over him, in
   great danger of having his head carried away by the low-hung gear of
   the Westinghouse brake. When the train had passed, he quietly rose and
   returned to his work.
   I offer you some reflections on this incident. It is the kind of
   incident that may be multiplied indefinitely. I offer you certain
   reflections, first, on some of its analogies with Christ's work, and
   secondly, on some of its differences.
   1. This man, in a very true sense, died and rose again. His soul went
   through what he would have gone through if he had never risen from the
   track. He gave himself; and that is all a man can give at last. His
   deed had the moral value which it would have had if he had lost his
   life. He laid it down, but it did not please God to take it. Like
   Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac, it was complete and acceptable, even
   though not accepted. The man's rising from the ground - was it not
   really a resurrection from the dead? It was not simply a return to his
   post. He went back another man. He went back a heavenlier man. He had
   died and risen, just as if he had been called, and had gone, to God's
   presence - could he but remain there. This is a death and rising again
   possible to us all. If the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ do
   not end in producing that kind of thing amongst us, then it is not the
   power of God unto salvation. These moral deaths and resurrections are
   what make men of us. "In deaths oft." That is the first point.
   2. The second point is this. Not one of the passengers in either of
   those trains knew until they read it what had been done for them, nor
   to whom they owed their lives. It is so with the whole world. Today it
   owes its existence, in a way it but poorly understands, to the death
   and resurrection of Jesus Christ. That is the permanent element in
   Christianity -the Cross and resurrection of Jesus Christ. And yet it is
   nothing to all them that pass by. Under the feet of those travelers in
   Belgium there had taken place one of those deeds that are the very soul
   and glory of life, and they had no idea of it. Perhaps some of them
   were at the very moment grumbling at the staff of the railway for some
   small grievance or other. It is useful to remember, when we are
   inclined to grumble thus, what an amount of devotion to duty goes to
   make it possible for us to travel as safely as we do - far more than
   can be acknowledged by the payment of a wage. These people were
   ploughing along in safety over one of the railway staff lying in a
   living grave. I say it is so with the whole civilized world. Its
   progress is like that of the train; it seldom stops to think that its
   safety is owing to a divine death and resurrection, much more than
   heroic. The safety of that train was not due to the mechanism. The
   mechanism had gone wrong. It was not due to organization, or to work
   done from fear of punishment. Heroic duty raised to martyrdom saved the
   whole train. And the world's progress is saved today because of a death
   and resurrection of which it knows little and mostly cares to know
   less. "Propter Jesum non quoerimus Jesum." The success of Christ hides
   Him. It is the death of Christ that is the chief condition of modern
   progress. It is not civilization that keeps civilization safe and
   progressive. It is that power which was in Jesus Christ and culminated
   in His death and resurrection. When people read the Bible, and get
   behind the Bible, and that principle comes home to them, it may
   sometimes be like the shock that those travelers would receive when
   they read in the newspaper of their risk and deliverance.
   3. Another point. And I am now coming on to the difference. This man
   died for people who would thrill with the sense of what they owed him
   as soon as they read about it. His act appeals to the instinct which is
   ready to spring to life in almost every breast. You felt the response
   at once when I told you the story. Some of you may have even felt it
   keenly. Do you ever feel as keenly about the devoted death of Christ?
   Perhaps you never have. You have believed it, of course, but it never
   came home to you and gripped you as the stories of the kind I instance
   do You see the difference between Christ's death and every case of
   human heroism. I am moving to answer that question I put a moment ago
   as to whether the development of the best in human nature would ever
   give us the work of Christ and the Kingdom of God. I have been
   illustrating one of the finest things in human nature, and I am asking
   whether, if that were multiplied indefinitely, we should yet have the
   effect which is produced by the death of Christ, or which is still to
   be produced by it in God's purpose. No, there is a difference between
   Christ's death and every case of heroism. Christ's was a death on
   behalf of people within whom the power of responding had to be created.
   Everybody thrills to that story I told you, and to every similar story.
   The power of response is lying there in the human heart ready - it only
   needs to be touched. There is in human nature a battery charged with
   admiration for such things; you have only to put your knuckle to it and
   out comes the spark. But when we are dealing with the death of Christ
   we are in another position. Christ's was a death on behalf of people in
   whom the power of responding had to be created. We are all afraid of
   death, and rise to the man who delivers us from it. But we are not
   afraid of that worse thing than death from which Christ came to deliver
   us. Christ's death was not a case of heroism simply, it was a case of
   redemption. It acted upon dull and dead hearts. It was a death which
   had to evoke a feeling not only latent but paralyzed, not only asleep
   but dead. What does Paul say? "While we were yet without strength,
   Christ died for us" - without power, without feeling, as the full
   meaning is.
   Let me illustrate. Take a poet like Wordsworth. When he began to
   publish his poetry he was received, just as Browning was received
   later, with ridicule and contempt. The greatest critic of the time
   began an article in the leading critical organ of the day by saying,
   "This will never do." But it has done; and it has done for Jeffrey's
   critical reputation. Lord Jeffrey wrote himself down as one who was
   incapable of gauging the future, however much he might be capable of
   understanding the literature of the past. Some of you may remember - I
   remember perfectly well - the same kind of thing in the penny papers
   about Browning when he was fighting for recognition. I remember, when I
   was a student, reading articles in luminaries like The Standard which
   sneered and jeered at Browning, just as smaller men today would sneer
   at men of like originality. But Wordsworth and Browning have conquered.
   I take another case. Turner was assailed with even more ridicule when
   he exposed his works to the British public. What would have happened to
   Turner if Ruskin had not arisen to be his prophet I do not know. His
   pictures might not even have been moldering in the cellars of the
   National Gallery. They might have been selling at little second-hand
   shops in back streets for ten shillings to any one who had eyes in his
   head. Wordsworth, Browning, and Turner were all people of such original
   and unprecedented genius that there was no taste and interest for them
   when they appeared; they had to create the very power of understanding
   themselves. A poet of less original genius, a great genius but less of
   a genius, like Tennyson, comes along, and he writes about the "May
   Queen" and "The Northern Farmer," and all those simple, elementary
   things which immediately fetch the handkerchiefs out. Now no doubt to
   do that properly takes a certain amount of genius. But it taps the
   prompt and fluent emotions; and the misfortune is that kind of work is
   easily counterfeited and abused by those who wish to exploit our
   feelings rather than exalt them. It is a more easy kind of thing than
   was done by those great geniuses I first named. Original poets like
   Wordsworth and Browning had to create the taste for their work.
   Now in like manner Christ had to make the soul which should respond to
   Him and understand Him. He had to create the very capacity for
   response. And that is where we are compelled to recognize the doctrine
   of the Holy Spirit as well as the doctrine of the Savour. We are always
   told that faith is the gift of God and the work of the Holy Spirit. The
   reason why we are told that, and must be told it, lies in the direction
   I have indicated. The death of Christ had not simply to touch like
   heroism, but it had to redeem us into power of feeling its own worth.
   Christ had to save us from what we were too far gone to feel. Just as
   the man choked with damp in a mine, or a man going to sleep in arctic
   cold, does not realize his danger, and the sense of danger has to be
   created within him, so the violent action of the Spirit takes men by
   force. The death of Christ must call up more than a responsive feeling.
   It is not satisfied with affecting our heart. That is mere
   impressionism. It is very easy to impress an audience. Every preacher
   knows that there is nothing more simple than to produce tears. You have
   only to tell a certain number of stories about dying children,
   lifeboats, fire escapes, and so on, and you can make people thrill. But
   the thrill is neither here nor there. What is the thrill going to end
   in? What is the meaning of the thrill for life? If it is not ending as
   it should, and not ending for life, it is doing harm, not good, because
   it is sealing the springs of feeling and searing the power of the
   spiritual life.
   What the work of Christ requires is the tribute not of our admiration
   or even gratitude, not of our impressions or our thrills, but of
   ourselves and our shame. Now we are coming to the crux of the matter -
   the tribute of our shame. That death had to make new men of us. It had
   to turn us not from potential friends to actual, but from enemies into
   friends. It had not merely to touch a spring of slumbering friendship.
   There was a new creation. The love of God - I quote Paul, who did
   understand something of these things - the love of God is not merely
   evoked within us, it is "shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit
   which is given to us." That is a very different thing from simply
   having the reservoir of natural feeling tapped. The death of Christ had
   to do with our sin and not with our sluggishness. It had to deal with
   our active hostility, and not simply with the passive dullness of our
   hearts. Our hostility - that is what the easy-going people cannot be
   brought to recognize. That is what the shallow optimists, who think we
   can now dispense with emphasis on the death of Christ, feel themselves
   able to do - to ignore the fact that the human heart is enmity against
   God, against a God who makes demands upon it; who goes so far as to
   make demands for the whole, the absolute obedience of self. Human
   nature puts its back up against that. That is what Paul means when he
   speaks about human nature, the natural man - the carnal man is a bad
   translation - being enmity against God. Man will cling to the last rag
   of his self-respect. He does not part with that when he thrills,
   admires, sympathizes; but he does when he has to give up his whole self
   in the obedience of faith. How much self-respect do you think Paul had
   left in him when he went into Damascus? Christ, with the demand for
   saving obedience, arouses antagonism in the human heart. And so will
   the Church that is faithful to Him. You hear people of the type I have
   been speaking about saying, If only the Church had been true to
   Christ's message it would have done wonders for the world. If only
   Christ were preached and practiced in all His simplicity to the world,
   how fast Christianity would spread. Would it? Do you really find that
   the deeper you get into Christ and the meaning of His demands
   Christianity spreads faster in your heart? Is it not very much the
   other way? When it comes to close quarters you have actually to be got
   down and broken, that the old man may be pulverized and the new man
   created from the dust. Therefore when we hear people abusing the Church
   and its history the first thing we have to say is, Yes, there is a
   great deal too much truth in what you say, but there is also a greater
   truth which you are not allowing for, and it is this. One reason why
   the Church has been so slow in its progress in mankind and its effect
   on human history is because it has been so faithful to Christ, so
   faithful to His Cross. You have to subdue the most intractable,
   difficult, and slow thing in the world - man's self-will. You cannot
   expect rapid successes if you truly preach the Cross whereon Christ
   died, and which He surmounted not simply by leaving it behind but by
   rising again, and converting the very Cross into a power and glory.
   Christ arouses antagonism in the human heart and heroism does not.
   Everybody welcomes a hero. The minority welcome Christ. We do resent
   His absolute command. We do resent parting completely with ourselves.
   We do resent Christ.
   4. I go back to the word I spoke about the tribute of our shame. The
   demand is unsparing, remorseless. It is not simply that you are called
   on by God for a certain due, a change, an amendment, but for the
   tribute of yourself and your shame. When you heard about that heroism
   of my story, when you thrilled to it, I wonder did you pat yourself on
   the back a little for being capable of thrilling to things so high, so
   fine? When you thrilled to that story you felt a certain satisfaction
   with yourself because there was as much of the God in you as allowed
   you to be capable of thrilling to such heroisms. You felt, If I am
   capable of thrilling to such things, I cannot be such a bad sort. But
   when you felt the meaning of Christ's death for you, did you ever pat
   yourself on the back? The nearer the Cross came to you, the deeper it
   entered into you, were you the more disposed to admire yourself? There
   is no harm in your feeling pleased with yourself because you were able
   to thrill to these human heroisms; but if the impression Christ makes
   upon you is to leave you more satisfied with yourself, more proud of
   yourself for being able to respond, He has to get a great deal nearer
   to you yet. You need to be - I will use a Scottish phrase which old
   ministers used to apply to a young minister when he had preached a
   "thoughtful and interesting discourse" - you need to be well shaken
   over the mouth of the pit. The great deep classic cases of Christian
   experience bear testimony to that. Christ and His Cross come nearer and
   nearer, and we do not realize what we owe Him until we realize that He
   has plucked us from the fearful pit, and the miry clay, and set us upon
   a rock of God's own founding. The meaning of Christ's death rouses our
   shame, self-contempt, and repentance. And we resent being made to feel
   ashamed of ourselves, we resent being made to feel ashamed of
   ourselves, we resent being made to repent. A great many people are
   afraid to come too near to anything that does that for them. That is a
   frequent reason for not going to church.
   5. Again, continuing. You would have gone a long way to see this
   Belgian man. You would have gazed upon him with something of reverence,
   certainly with admiration. You would have regarded him as one received
   back from the dead. You think, If all men were like that, the world
   would be heaven. Well, there are a great many more like that than we
   think, who daily imperil their life for their duty. But supposing every
   man and woman in the world were up to that pitch, and supposing you
   added them all together and took the total value of their moral heroism
   (if moral quantities were capable of being summed like that), would you
   then have the equivalent of the deed and death of Christ? No, indeed!
   If you took all the world, and made heroes of them all, and kept them
   heroic all their lives, instead of only in one act, still you would not
   get the value, the equivalent, of Christ's sacrifice. It is not the sum
   of all heroisms. It would be more true to say it is the source of all
   heroisms, the foundation of them all. It is the underground something
   that makes heroisms, not something that heroisms make up. When Christ
   did what He did, it was not human nature doing it, it was God doing it.
   That is the great, absolutely unique and glorious thing. It is God in
   Christ reconciling. It was not human nature offering its very best to
   God. It was God offering His very best to man. That is the grand
   difference between the Church and civilization, even when civilization
   is religious. We must attend more to those great issues between our
   faith and our world. Our religion has been too much a thing done in a
   corner. We must adjust our religion to the great currents and movements
   of the world's history. And the great issue of the hour is the issue
   between the Church and civilization. Their essential difference is
   this. Civilization at its best represents the most man can do with the
   world and with human nature; but the Church, centered upon Christ, His
   Cross, and His work, represents the best that God can do upon them. The
   sacrifice of the Cross was not man in Christ pleasing God; it was God
   in Christ reconciling man, and in a certain sense, reconciling Himself.
   My point at this moment is that the Cross of Christ was Christ
   reconciling man. It was not heroic man dying for a beloved and honored
   God; it was God in some form dying for man. God dying for man. I am
   afraid of that phrase; I cannot do without it. God dying for man; and
   for such men -hostile, malignantly hostile men. That is a puzzling
   phrase where we read in a gospel: "Greater love hath no man that this,
   that a man lay down his life for his friends." There is more love in
   the phrase of the epistle, that a man should lay down his life for his
   bitter enemies. It is not so heroic, so very divine, to die for our
   friends. Kindness between the nice people is not so very divine - fine
   and precious as it is. To die for enemies - that is the divine thing.
   Christ's was grace that died for such for malignant enemies. There is
   more in God than love. There is all that we mean by His holy grace.
   Truly, "God is love." Yes, but the kind of love which you must
   interpret by the whole of the New Testament. When John said that, did
   he mean that God was simply the consummation of human affection? He
   knew that he was dealing with a holy, gracious God, a God who loved His
   enemies and redeemed them. Read with extreme care 1 John 4:10.
   6. Let me gather up the points of difference which I have been
   indication.
   First, that Belgian hero did not act from love so much as from duty.
   Secondly, he died only in one act, not in his whole life, dying daily.
   There have been men capable of acts of sacrifice like this hero;
   loose-living men who, after a heroism, were quite capable of returning
   to their looseness of life - heroes of the Bret Harte type. There have
   been many valiant, fearless things done on the battlefield by men who
   in the face of bullets never flinched, never turned a hair; and when
   they came home they could not stand against a breath of ridicule, they
   could not stand against a little temptation, and were soon wallowing in
   the mire. One act of sacrifice is not the same thing as a life gathered
   into one consummate sacrifice, whose value is that it has the whole
   personality put into it for ever.
   Third, this man could not take the full measure of all that he was
   doing, and Christ could. Christ did not go to His death with His eyes
   shut. He died because He willed to die, having counted the cost with
   the greatest, deepest moral vision in the world.
   Fourthly, the hero in the story had nothing to do with the moral
   condition of those whom he saved. The scoundrel and the saint in that
   train were both alike to him.
   Again, he had no quarrel with those whom he saved. He had nothing to
   complain of. He had nothing from them to try his heroism. They were not
   his bitter enemies. His valour was not the heroism of forgiveness,
   where lies the wondrous majesty of God. His act was not an act of
   grace, which is the grand glory of the love of Christ. Christ died for
   people who not only did not know Him, but who hated and despised Him.
   He died, not for a trainful of people, but for the whole organic world
   of people. It was an infinite death, that of His, in its range and in
   its power. It was death for enemies more bitter than anything that man
   can feel against man, for such haters as only holiness can produce.
   Here is the singular thing: the greater the favour that is done to us,
   the more fiercely we resent it if it does not break us down and make us
   grateful. The greater the favour, if we do not respond in its own
   spirit, so much the more resentful and antagonistic it makes us. I have
   already said that we speak too often as though the effect of Christ's
   death upon human nature must be gratitude as soon as it is understood.
   It is not always gratitude. Unless it is received in the Holy Ghost,
   the effect may just be the other way. It is judgment. It is a death
   unto death.
   I conclude by saying what I have often said, and what often needs
   saying, that it is not possible to hear the gospel and to go away just
   as you came. I wish that were more realized. We should not have so many
   sermon-hunters. If people felt that every time they heard the gospel
   they were either better or worse for it, they would be more careful
   about hearing. They would not go so often, possibly; better they should
   not perhaps. I am not speaking about hearing of sermons. That is
   neither here nor there. A man may hear sermons and be neither the
   better nor the worse. But a man cannot hear the gospel without being
   either better or worse, whether he knows it or not. When you come to
   face the last issues, it is either unto salvation or unto condemnation.
   The great central, decisive thing, the last judgment of the world, is
   the Cross of Christ. The reason why so many sermons are found
   uninteresting is not always due to the dullness of the preacher. God
   knows how often that is the case, but it is not always. It is because
   the sermons so often turn, or ought to turn, upon the miracle of the
   grace of God, which is so great a miracle that it is strange, remote,
   and alien to our natural ways of thinking and feeling. It seems foreign
   to us. It is like reading a guide-book if you have never been in the
   country. I take down my Baedeker in the winter and read it with the
   greatest delight, because I know the country. If I had not been there I
   should find it the dreariest reading. Why do not people read the Bible
   more? Because they have not been in that country. There is no
   experience for it to stir and develop. The Cross of Christ, the
   infinite wonder of it - we have got to learn that. We have got to learn
   the deep meaning of that by having been there, by the evangelical
   experience whose lack is the cause of all the religious vagrancy of the
   hour. We have got to learn that it was not simply magnificent heroism,
   but that it was God in Christ reconciling the world. It was God that
   did that work in Christ. And Christ was the living God working upon
   man, and working out the Kingdom of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

II. The Great Sacrificial Work Is To Reconcile

        2 Corinthians 5:14-6:2; Romans 5:1-11; Colossians 1:10-29;
   Ephesians 2:16

   The great need of the religious world today is a return to the Bible.
   That is necessary for two reasons, negative and positive. Negatively,
   because the most serious feature of the hour in the life of the Church
   is the neglect of the Bible for personal use and study by religious
   people. Positively, because we have today enormous advantages in
   connection with that return to the Bible. Modern scholarship has made
   of the Bible a new Book. It has in a certain sense rediscovered it. You
   might say that the soul of the Reformation was the rediscovery of the
   Bible; and in a wider sense that is true today also. We have, through
   the labors of more than a century of the finest scholarship in all the
   world, come to understand the Bible, in its original sense, as it was
   never understood before. These instructed scribes draw forth from their
   treasury things as new as old. It is the old Book, and it is a new
   Book. It is the old Book, and the precious Book, because of its power
   of unceasing self-renovation. The spirit that lives within the Bible is
   a spirit of constant self-preservation. One way of describing the
   Reformation is to say that, since the early Gnostic centuries, it was
   the greatest effort that ever took place in the Church for the
   self-preservation of Christianity. Remember, the Church was not
   reformed from the outside, but from the inside. It was the Church
   reforming the Church. It was the Church's faith that arose, under the
   Holy Spirit, and reformed the Church. So it is with the Bible. Whatever
   renovation we find in connection with the Bible - I do not here man
   renovation of ourselves, but renovation of our way of understanding the
   Book - arises out of the Bible itself. This remains true today, as it
   was true in the Reformation time, although it is now true in a somewhat
   different application. The Bible is still the best commentary upon
   itself. I have always done much in my ministry in the way of expounding
   the Bible, and I would say to the younger ministers particularly who
   are here, Do not be afraid of that manner of preaching. I have known
   young ministers who were over-scrupulous I have known them say, "If I
   take a long text people will think it is because I am lazy and do not
   want the labour of getting a sermon out of a small one." Never mind
   such foolish people. Do not be afraid of long texts, long passages.
   Preach less from verses and more from paragraphs. If I had my time over
   again I would do a great deal more in that way than I have done. Read
   but one lesson, and read it with elucidatory comments. Of course some
   people can do that better than others. There is always the danger that
   if a person try it who has no sort of knack in that direction, the
   people will feel they have been let in for two sermons instead of one;
   and, excellent as these might be, people do not like to feel they have
   been got to church upon false pretenses. It might even given an excuse
   to certain people for omitting one of the services altogether, on the
   plea they had put in the requisite amount of attention at one service.
   I would also admit that if you do this it will not reduce your labour.
   It will really add what might amount to another sermon to your weekly
   work. It is no use doing it if you do it on the spur of the moment. If
   you just say things that occur to your mind while you are reading, you
   may say some banal, or some nonsensical and fantastic things. It means
   careful preparation. The lesson should be prepared as truly as the
   prayer should be prepared, and as the sermon should be prepared. You
   have to work your way through the chapter with the aid of the best
   commentary that you can get; and you have to exercise continual
   judgment in doing so lest you be dragged away into little matters of
   detail instead of keeping to the larger lines of thought in the passage
   in hand. Then, if you do as I say, there is this other advantage, that
   you can take a particular verse out of the long passage for your
   sermon; and thus you come to the sermon with an audience which you
   yourself have prepared to listen to you. You have created your own
   atmosphere, and you have done it on a Bible basis.
   Now I will confess against myself that sometimes, as I preach about
   here and there, and have done as I have been recommending you to do,
   people have come to me afterwards and said, as nicely as they could,
   that the sermon was all very well, but in respect of the reading of the
   Scripture, they never heard it after that fashion; they had never
   realized how vivid Scripture could become. That simply results from
   paying attention to the chapter with the best help. You will find, I am
   sure, that your congregation will welcome it.
   Supposing, then, we return to the Bible. Supposing that the Church did
   - as I think it must do if it is not going to collapse; certainly the
   Free Churches must - supposing we return to the Bible, there are three
   ways of reading the Bible. The first way asks, What did the Bible say?
   The second way asks, What can I make the Bible say? The third way asks,
   What does God say in the Bible?
   The first way is, with the aid of these magnificent scholars, to
   discover the true historic sense of the Bible. There is no more signal
   illustration of success here than in the case of the Prophets. During
   the time when theology dominated everything and was considered to be
   the Church's one grand concern, about one hundred years after the
   Reformation, when its great prophets had passed away, and the Church
   had fallen into different hands, the whole of the Old Testament - the
   Prophets amongst the rest - was read for proof passages of theological
   doctrines. Now for books like the Prophets that is absolutely fatal -
   fatal to the books and to the Church; and fatal in the long run to
   Christian truth. There is no greater service that has been done to the
   Bible than what has been done by the scholars I speak of, in making the
   Prophets live again, putting them in their true historical setting and
   position. Dr. George Adam Smith, for example, has done inestimable
   service in this way. And what has been done for the Prophets has also
   been done for the New Testament. Immense steps onward have been taken;
   and we are coming to know with much exactness what the writer actually
   had in his mind at the moment of writing, and what he was understood to
   have had in his mind by those to whom he first wrote. In this way we
   get rid, for example, of the idea that Paul was thinking about us who
   live two thousand years after him. He was not thinking of us at all. He
   did not expect the world to last a century. It is quite another
   question what the Holy Spirit was thinking about. Paul was thinking in
   a natural way about his age and his Churches, about their actual
   situation and needs. That is another illustration of the principle that
   if you want to work for immortality you must work in the most relevant
   and faithful way amid the circumstances round about you. The present
   duty is the path to immortality. And so also I might illustrate in
   respect to the Gospels.
   The second way of reading the Bible is reading it unto edification.
   That is to say, we read a passage, and we allow ourselves to receive
   any suggestion that may come to us from it, and we do not stop to ask
   whether that was in the writer's mind, or whether it was in the mind of
   the people to whom he wrote. That is immaterial. We allow the Spirit of
   God to suggest to us whatever lessons or ideas He thinks fit out of the
   words that are under our eyes. We read the Bible not for correct or
   historic knowledge, but for religious and spiritual purposes, for our
   own private and personal needs. That is, or course, a perfectly
   legitimate thing - indeed, it is quite necessary. It is the way of
   reading the Bible which the large mass of the Church must always
   practice. But it has its dangers. You need the other ways to correct
   it. All the three must cooperate for the true use and understanding of
   the Bible by the Church at large. But I am speaking now about its use
   by individuals, and the danger I mean is that the suggestiveness may
   sometimes become fantastic. Some preachers fail at times in that way.
   They get to taking what are called fancy texts, texts which impress the
   audience much more with the ingenuity of the preacher than with his
   inspiration. For instance, a preacher in the North, now dead, was
   preaching against the Higher Criticism and its slicing up of the Bible,
   and he took his text from Nehemiah, "He cut it with a penknife"! That
   is all very well, perhaps, for a motto, but for a text it is rather a
   liberty. It is not fair to the Bible to indulge in much of that at
   least. If I remember rightly, Dr. Parker had a great gift in this way,
   and more than sometimes it ran way with him. It is a temptation of
   every witty man, and every ingenious-minded man. But there is a peril
   in it, the abuse of a right principle. We are bound, or course, to
   vindicate for ourselves and for others the right to use the Bible in
   the suggestive way, if we are not to make a present of it to the
   scholars. And that would be just as bad as making a present of it to a
   race of priests. But when we read too much in that way it is apt to
   become a minister to our spiritual egotism, or, what is equally bad,
   our fanciful subjectivity.
   Now the grand value of the bible is just the other thing - its
   objectivity. The first thing is not how I feel, but it is, How does God
   feel, and what has God said or done for my soul? When we get to real
   close quarters with that our feeling and response will look after
   itself. Do not tell people how they ought to feel towards Christ. That
   is useless. It is just what they ought that they cannot do. Preach a
   Christ that will make them feel as they ought. That is objective
   preaching. The tendency and fashion of the present moment is all in the
   direction of subjectivity. People welcome sermons of a more or less
   psychological kind, which go into the analysis of the soul or of
   society. They will listen gladly to sermons on character-building, for
   instance; and in the result they will get to think of nothing else but
   their own character. They will be the builders of their own character;
   which is a fatal thing. Learn to commit your soul and the building of
   it to One who can keep it and build it as you never can. Attend then to
   Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Kingdom, and the Cause, and He will look
   after your soul. A consequence of this passion for subjective and
   psychological analysis, for sentimental experience and
   problem-preaching a real, objective, New Testament gospel he has raised
   against him what is not the most fatal accusation - even within the
   Christian Church it has come to be very fatal - he is accused of being
   a theologian. That is a very fatal charge to make now against any
   preacher. It ought to be actionable in the way of libel. We have come
   to this - that if you penetrate into the interior of the New Testament
   you will be accused of being a theologian; and then it is all over with
   your welcome. But that state of things has to be turned upside down,
   else the Church dries into the sand. There is no message in it.
   The third way of reading the Bible is reading it to discover the
   purpose and thought of God, whether it immediately edify us or whether
   it do not. If we did actually become aware of the will and thought of
   God it would edify us as nothing else could. No inner process, no
   discipline to which we might subject ourselves, no way of cultivating
   subjective holiness would do so much for us as if we could lose
   ourselves, and in some godly sort forget ourselves, because we are so
   preoccupied with the mind of Christ. If you want psychological
   analysis, analyze the will, work, and purpose of Christ our Lord. I
   read a fine sentence the other day which puts in a condensed form what
   I have often preached about as the symptom of the present age: "Instead
   of placing themselves at the service of God most people want a God who
   is at their service." These two tendencies represent in the end two
   different religions. The man who is exploiting God for the purposes of
   his own soul or for the race, has in the long run a different religion
   from the man who is putting his own soul and race absolutely at the
   disposal of the will of God in Jesus Christ.
   All this is by way of preface to an attempt to approach the New
   Testament and endeavour to find what is really the will of God
   concerning Christ and what Christ did. Doctrine and life are really two
   sides of one Christianity; and they are equally indispensable, because
   Christianity is living truth. It is not merely truth; it is not simply
   life. It is living truth. The modern man says that doctrine which does
   not pass into life is dead; and then the mistake he makes is that he
   wants to turn it into life directly, and to politicize it, perhaps;
   whereas it works in-directly. The experience of many centuries, on the
   other hand, says that Christian life which does not grow out of
   Christian doctrine becomes a failure. If not in individuals, it does in
   the Church. You cannot keep Christian piety alive except upon Christian
   truth. You can never get a Catholic Church except by Catholic truth. I
   think perhaps we all here agree about that. It is of immense importance
   that we do not think entirely about our individual souls, and that we
   think more about the Church, the divine will, the divine Word, and the
   divine Kingdom in the world. It is of supreme importance that we should
   know what the Christian doctrine is on the great matters.
   Now in connection with the work of Christ the great expositor in the
   Bible is St. Paul. And Paul has a word of his own to describe Christ's
   work - the word "reconciliation." But he thinks of reconciliation not
   as a doctrine but as an act of God - because he was not a theologian
   but an experience preacher. To view it so produces an immense change in
   your whole way of thinking. It secures for you all that is worth having
   in theology, and it delivers you from the danger of obsession by
   theology in a one-sided way. Remember, then, that the truth we are
   dealing with is precious not as a mere truth but as the means of
   expressing the eternal act of God. The most important thing in all the
   world, in the Bible or out of it, is something that God has done - for
   ever finally done. And it is this reconciliation; which is only
   secondarily a doctrine; it is only secondarily even a manner of life.
   Primarily it is an act of God. That is to say, it is a salvation before
   it is a religion. For Christianity as a religion stands upon salvation.
   Religion which does not grow out of salvation is not Christian
   religion; it may be spiritual, poetic, mystic; but the essence of
   Christianity is not just to be spiritual; it is to answer God's manner
   of spirituality, which you find in Jesus Christ and in Him crucified.
   Reconciliation is salvation before it is religion. And it is religion
   before it is theology. All our theology in this matter rests upon the
   certain experience of the fact of God's salvation. It is salvation upon
   divine principles It is salvation by a holy God. It is bound of course,
   to be theological in its very nature its statement is a theology. The
   moment you begin to talk about the holiness of God you are theologians.
   And you cannot talk about Christ and His death in any thorough way
   without talking about the holiness of God.
   Christ and Him crucified, that is the historic fact. But what do I mean
   when I say Christ and Him crucified? Does it mean that a certain
   personality lived who was recognized in history as Jesus Christ, and
   that He came by His end by crucifixion? That in itself is worthless for
   religious purposes. It is useful enough if you are writing history; but
   for religion historical fact must have interpretation, and the whole of
   Christianity depends upon the interpretation that is put upon such
   facts. You will find people sometimes who say, "Let us have the simple
   historic facts, the Cross and Christ." That is not Christianity.
   Christianity is a certain interpretation of those facts. How and why
   did the New Testament come into being? Was it simply to convince
   posterity that those facts had taken place? Was it simply to convince
   the world that Christ had risen from the dead? If that were the grand
   object of the New Testament we should have a very different Bible in
   our hands, one addressed to the world and not to the Church, to
   critical science and not to faith; and there would not be so much
   argument amongst scholars as there is. The Bible did not come into
   being in order to provide future historians with a valuable document.
   It came for the purposes of interpretation. Here is a sentence I came
   across once: "The fact without the word is dumb; the word without the
   fact is empty." It is useful to turn it over and over in your mind.
   Paul was almost the creator and the great representative of that
   interpretation. It was continued on his lines by Augustine, Anselm,
   Luther, and many another. But what is it that we hear about so much
   today? We hear a great deal about an undogmatic Christianity. And there
   is a certain plausibility in it. If you have no theological training,
   no training in the understanding of the Scripture in a serious way,
   that is, if you do not know your business as ministers of the Word, it
   seems natural that undogmatic Christianity should be just the thing you
   want. Leave the dogma of it, you will say, to those who devote their
   lives to dogma - just as though theologians were irrepressible people
   who take up theology as a hobby and become the bores of the Church! It
   was not a hobby to the apostles. Why, there are actually people of a
   similar stamp who look upon missions as a hobby of the Church, instead
   of their belonging to the very being and fidelity of the Church. So
   some people think theology is a hobby, and that theologians are persons
   with an uncomfortable preponderance of intellect, who are trying to
   destroy the privileges secured by our national lack of education and to
   sacrifice Christianity to mind. People say we do not want so much
   intellect in preaching; we want sympathy and unction. Now, I am always
   looking afield, and looking forward, and thinking about the prospects
   of the Church in the great world. And unction dissociated from
   Christian truth and Christian intelligence has at last the sentence of
   the Church's death within itself. You may cherish an undogmatic
   Christianity with a sort of magnetic casing, a purely human, mystical,
   subjective kind of Christ for yourself or an audience, but you could
   not continue to preach that in a Church for the ages. The Church could
   not live on that and do its preaching in such a world. You could not
   spread a gospel like that. Subjective religion is valuable in its
   place, but its place is limited. The only Cross you can preach to the
   whole world is a theological one. It is not the fact of the Cross, it
   is the interpretation of the Cross, the prime theology of the Cross,
   what God meant by the Cross, that is everything. That is what the New
   Testament came to give. That is the only kind of Cross that can make or
   keep a Church.
   You will say, perhaps, "Cannot I go out and preach my impressions of
   the Cross?" By all means. You will only discover the sooner that you
   cannot preach a Cross to any purpose if you preach it only as an
   experience. If you only preach it so you would not be an apostle; and
   you could not do the work of an apostle for the Church The apostles
   were particular about this, and one expressed it quite pointedly: "We
   preach not ourselves [not our experiences] but Christ crucified." "We
   do not preach religion," said Paul, "but God's revelation. We do not
   preach the impression the Cross made upon us, but the message that God
   by His Spirit sent through a Christ we experience." And so with
   ourselves. We do not preach our impressions, or even our experience.
   These make but the vehicle, as it were. What we preach is something
   much more solid, more objective, with more stay in it; something that
   can suffice when our experience has ebbed until it seems to be as low
   as Christ's was in the great desertion and victory on the Cross. We
   want something that will stand by us when we cannot feel any more; we
   want a Cross we can cling to, not simply a subjective Cross. That is,
   to put the thing in another way, what we want today is an insight into
   the Cross. You see I am making a distinction between impression and
   insight. It is a useful part of the Church's work, for instance, that
   it should act by means of revival services, where perhaps the dominant
   element may be temporary impression. But unless that is taken up and
   turned to account by something more, we all know how evanescent a thing
   it is apt to be. We need, not simply to be impressed by Christ, but to
   see into Christ and into His Cross. We need to deepen the impression
   until it become new life by seeing into Christ. There are certain
   circumstances in which we may be entitled to declare that we do not
   want so many people who glibly say they love Jesus; we want more people
   who can really see into Christ. We do, of course, want more people who
   love Jesus; but we want a multitude of more people who are not
   satisfied with that, but whose love fills them with holy curiosity and
   compels them habitually to cultivate in the Spirit the power of seeing
   into Christ and into His Cross. More than impression, do we need a
   spirit of divination. Insight is what we want for power - less of mere
   interest and more of real insight. There are some people who talk as
   though, when we speak of the Cross and the meaning of the Cross, we
   were spinning something out of the Cross. Paul was not spinning
   anything out of the Cross. He was gazing into the Cross, seeing what
   was really there with eyes that had been unsealed and purged by the
   Holy Ghost.
   The doctrine of Christ's reconciliation, or His Atonement, is not a
   piece of mediaeval dogma like transubstantiation, not a piece of
   ecclesiastical dogma or Aristotelian subtlety which it might be the
   Bible's business to destroy. If you look at the Gospels you will see
   that from the Transfiguration onward this matter of the Cross is the
   great center of concern; it is where the center of gravity lies. I met
   a man the other day who had come under some poor and mischievous pulpit
   influence, and he said, "It is time we got rid of hearing so much about
   the Cross of Christ; there should be preached to the world a
   humanitarian Christ, the kind of Christ that occupies the Gospels."
   There was nothing for it but to tell that man he was the victim of
   smatterers, and that he must go back to his Gospels and read and study
   for a year or two. It is the flimsiest religiosity, and the most
   superficial reading of the Gospel, that could talk like that. What does
   it mean that an enormous proportion of the Gospel story is occupied
   with the passion of Christ? The center of gravity, even in the Gospels,
   falls upon the Cross of Christ and what was done there, and not simply
   upon a humanitarian Christ. You cannot set the Gospels against Paul.
   Why, the first three Gospels were much later than Paul's Epistles. They
   were written for Churches that were made by the apostolic preaching.
   But how, then, do the first three Gospels seem so different from the
   Epistles? If course, there is a superficial difference. Christ was a
   very living and real character for the people of His own time, and His
   grand business was to rouse his audiences' faith in His Person and in
   His mission. But in His Person and in His mission the Cross lay latent
   all the time. It emerged only in the fullness of time - that valuable
   phrase - just when the historic crisis, the organic situation, produced
   it. Jesus was not a professor of theology. He did not lecture the
   people. He did not come with a theology of the Cross. He did not come
   to force events to comply with that theology. He did not force His own
   people to work out a theological scheme. He did force an issue, but it
   was not to illustrate a theology. It was to establish the Kingdom of
   God, which could be established in no other wise than as He established
   it - upon the Cross. And He could only teach the Cross when it had
   happened - which He did through the Evangelists with the space they
   gave it, and through the Apostles and the exposition they gave it.
   To come back to this work of Christ described by Paul as
   reconciliation. On this interpretation of the work of Christ the whole
   Church rests. If you move faith from that enter you have driven the
   nail into the Church's coffin. The Church is then doomed to death, and
   is only a matter of time when she shall expire. The Apostle, I say,
   described the work of Christ as above all things reconciliation. And
   Paul was the founder of the Church, historically speaking. I do not
   like to speak of Christ as the Founder of the Church. It seems remote,
   detached, journalistic. It would be far more true to say that He is the
   foundation of the Church. "The Church's one foundation is Jesus Christ
   her Lord." The founder of the Church, historically speaking, was Paul.
   It was founded by and through him on this reconciling principle - may,
   I go deeper than that, on this mighty act of God's reconciliation. For
   this great act the interpretation was given to Paul by the Holy Spirit.
   In this connection read that great word in 1 Corinthians 2; that is the
   most valuable word in the New Testament about the nature of apostolic
   inspiration.
   What, then, did Paul mean by this reconciliation which is the backbone
   of the Church? He meant the total result of Christ's life-work in
   permanently changing the relation between collective man and God. By
   reconciliation Paul meant the total result of Christ's life-work in the
   fundamental, permanent, final changing of the relation between man and
   God, altering it from a relation of hostility to one of confidence and
   peace. Remember, I am speaking as Paul spoke, about man, and not about
   individual men or groups of men.
   There are two principal Greek words connected with the idea of
   reconciliation, one of them being always translated by it, the other
   sometimes. They are katallassein, and hilaskesthai - reconciliation and
   atonement. Atonement is an Old Testament phrase, where the idea is that
   of the covering of sin from God's sight. But by whom? Who was that
   great benefactor of the human race that succeeded in covering up our
   sin from God's sight? Who was skillful enough to hoodwink the Almighty?
   Who covered the sin? The all-seeing God alone. There can therefore be
   no talk of hoodwinking. Atonement means the covering of sin by
   something which God Himself had provided, and therefore the covering of
   sin by God Himself. It was of course not the blinding of Himself to it,
   but something very different. How could the Judge of all the earth make
   His judgment blind? It was the covering of sin by something which makes
   it lose the power of deranging the covenant relation between God and
   man and founds the new Humanity. That is the meaning of it.
   If you think I am talking theology, you must blame the New Testament. I
   am simply expounding to you the New Testament. Of course, you need not
   take it unless you please. It is quite open to you to throw the New
   Testament overboard (so long as you are frank about it), and start what
   you may loosely call Christianity on the floating lines. But if you
   take the New Testament you are bound to try to understand the New
   Testament. If you understand the New Testament you are bound to
   recognize that this is what the New Testament says. It is a subsequent
   question whether the New Testament is right in saying so. Let us first
   find out what the Bible really says, and then discuss whether the Bible
   is right or wrong.
   The idea of atonement is the covering of sin by something which God
   provided, and by the use of which sin looses its accusing power, and
   its power to derange that grand covenant and relationship between man
   and God which founds the New Humanity. The word katallassein
   (reconcile) is peculiar to Paul. He uses both words; but the other
   word, "atonement," you also find in other New Testament writings.
   Reconciliation is Paul's great characteristic word and thought. The
   great passages are those I have mentioned at the head of this lecture.
   I cannot take time to expound them here. That would mean a long course.
   Read those passages carefully and check me in anything I say -
   particularly, for instance, 2 Corinthians 5:15 - 6:2. Out of it we
   gather this whole result. First, Christ's work is something described
   as reconciliation. And second, reconciliation rests upon atonement as
   its ground. Do not stop at "God was in Christ reconciling the world."
   You can easily water that down. You may begin the process by saying
   that God was in Christ just in the same way in which He was in the old
   prophets. That is the first dilution. Then you go on with the
   homeopathic treatment, and you say, "Oh yes, all He did by Christ was
   to affect the world, and impress it by showing it how much He loved
   it." Now would that reconcile anybody really in need of it? When your
   child has flown into a violent temper with you, and still worse, a
   sulky temper, and glooms for a whole day, is it any use your sending to
   that child and saying, "Really, this cannot go on. Come back. I love
   you very much. Say you are sorry." Not a bit of use. For God simply to
   have told or shown the evil world how much He loved it would have been
   a most ineffectual thing. Something had to be done - judging or saving.
   Revelation alone is inadequate. Reconciliation must rest on atonement.
   For, as I say, you must not stop at "God was in Christ reconciling the
   world unto Himself," but go on "not reckoning unto them their
   trespasses." "He made Christ to be sin for us, who knew no sin." that
   involves atonement. You cannot blot out that phrase. And the third
   thing involved in the idea is that this reconciliation, this atonement,
   means change of relation between God and man - man, mind you, not two
   or three men, not several groups of men, but man, the human race as one
   whole. And it is a change of relation from alienation to communion -
   not simply to our peace and confidence, but to reciprocal communion.
   The grand end of reconciliation is communion. I am pressing that hard.
   I am pressing it hard here by saying that it is not enough that we
   should worship God. It is not enough that we should worship a personal
   God. It is not enough that we should worship and pay our homage to a
   loving God. That does not satisfy the love of God. Nothing short of
   living, loving, holy habitual communion between His holy soul and ours
   can realize at last the end which God achieved in Jesus Christ.
   In this connection let me offer you two cautions. First, take care that
   the direct fact of reconciliation is not hidden up by the indispensable
   means - namely, atonement. There have been ages in the Church when the
   attention has been so exclusively centered upon atonement that
   reconciliation was lost sight of. You found theologians flying at each
   other's throats in the interest of particular theories of atonement.
   That is to say, atonement had obscured reconciliation. In the same way,
   after the Reformation period, they dwelt upon justification until they
   lost sight of sanctification altogether. Then the great pietistic
   movement had to arise in order to redress the balance. Take care that
   the end, reconciliation, is not hidden up by the means, atonement.
   Justification, sanctification, reconciliation and atonement are all
   equally inseparable from the one central and compendious work of
   Christ. Various ages need various aspects of it turned outward. Let us
   give them all their true value and perspective. If we do not we shall
   make that fatal severance which orthodoxy has so often made between
   doctrine and life.
   The second caution is this. Beware of reading atonement out of
   reconciliation altogether. Beware of cultivating a reconciliation which
   is not based upon justification. The apostle's phrases are often
   treated like that. They are emptied of the specific Christian meaning.
   There are a great many Christian people, spiritual people of a sort,
   today, who are perpetrating that injustice upon the New Testament. They
   are taking mighty old words and giving them only a subjective,
   arbitrary meaning, emptying out of them the essential, objective,
   positive content. They are preoccupied with what takes place within
   their own experience, or imagination, or thought; and they are
   oblivious of that which is declared to have taken place within the
   experience of God and of Christ. They are oblivious and negligent of
   the essential things that Christ did, and God in Christ. That is not
   fair treatment of New Testament terms - to empty them of positive
   Christian meaning and water them down to make something that might suit
   a philosophic or mystic or subjective or individualist spirituality.
   There is a whole system of philosophy that has attempted this dilution
   at the present day. It is associated with a name that has now become
   very well known, the name of the greatest philosopher the world ever
   saw, Hegel. I am not now going to expound Hegelianism. But I have to
   allude to one aspect of it. If you are paying any attention to what is
   going on around you in the thinking world, you are bound to come face
   to face with some phase of it or other. But I see my time is at an end
   for today.
   Tomorrow I begin where I now leave off and shall say something about
   this version of St. Paul's idea of reconciliation, which is so
   attractive philosophically. I remember the appeal it had for me when I
   came into contact with it first. I did feel that it seemed to give a
   largeness to certain New Testament terms, which I finally found was a
   largeness of latitude only. If it did seem to give breadth it did not
   give depth. And I close here by reminding you of this - that while
   Christ and Christianity did come to make us broad men, it did not come
   to do that in the first instance. It came to make us deep men. The
   living interest of Christ and of the Holy Spirit is not breadth, but it
   is depth. Christ said little that was wide compared with what He said
   piercing and searching. I illustrate by referring you to an interest
   that is very prominent amongst you - the interest of missions. How did
   modern missions arise? I mean the last hundred years of them. Modern
   Protestant missions are only one hundred years old. Where did they
   begin? Who began them? They began at the close of the eighteenth
   century, the century whose close was dominated by philosophers, by
   scientists, by a reasonable, moderate interpretation of religion, by
   broad humanitarian religion. Of course, you might expect it was amongst
   those broad people that missions arose. We know better. We know that
   the Christian movement which has spread around the world did not arise
   out of the liberal thinkers, the humanitarian philosophers of the day,
   who were its worst enemies, but with a few men - Carey, Marshman, Ward,
   and the like - whose Calvinistic theology we should now consider very
   narrow. But they did have the root of the universal matter in them. A
   gospel deep enough has all the breadth of the world in its heart. If we
   are only deep enough the breadth will take care of itself. I would ten
   times rather have one man who was burning deep, even though he wanted
   to burn me for my modern theology, than I would have a broad,
   hospitable, and thin theologian who was willing to take me in and a
   nondescript crowd of others in a sheet let down from heaven, but who
   had no depth, no fire, no skill to search, and no power to break. For
   the deep Christianity is that which not only searches us, but breaks
   us. and a Christianity which would exclude none has no power to include
   the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

III. Reconciliation: Philosophic and Christian

   I place on the board before you five points as to Christ's reconciling
   work which I think vital:

     1. It is between person and person. 2. Therefore it affects both
     sides. 3. It rest on atonement. 4. It is a reconciliation of the
     world as one whole. 5. It is final in its nature and effect.

   I was saying yesterday that two cautions ought to be observed in
   connection with this matter of reconciliation. First, we should not
   hide up the idea of reconciliation by the idea of atonement; we should
   not obscure the end, or the effect, by the great and indispensable
   means to it. Second, at the other extreme we are to beware of emptying
   reconciliation of atonement altogether. Two very great thinkers arose
   last century in Germany - where most of the thinking on this subject
   has for the last hundred years been done. Much of our work has been to
   steal. That does not matter if it is done wisely and gratefully. When a
   man gives out a great thought, get it, work it; it is common property.
   It belongs to the whole world, to be claimed and assimilated by whoever
   shall find. Well, there were two very powerful men in Germany much
   opposed to each other, yet at a certain point at one - Hegel and
   Ritschl. While they preached the doctrine of reconciliation in
   different senses, they both united to obscure the idea of atonement or
   expiation. Now we are to beware of emptying the reconciliation idea of
   the idea of atonement, whether we do it philosophically with Hegel or
   theologically with Ritschl. I mention these men because their thought
   has very profoundly affected English thinking, whether philosophical or
   theological. I protested yesterday against the practice, so common, of
   taking New Testament words, and words consecrated to Christian
   experience, emptying them of their essential content, and keeping them
   in a vapid use. That is done for various reasons. It is sometimes done
   because the words are too valuable to be parted with; sometimes because
   a philosophic interpretation seems to rescue them from the narrowness
   of an outworn theology; and it is sometimes done for lower motives in
   order to produce a fictitious impression upon people that they are
   still substantially hearing the substance of the old truths when really
   they are not.
   Especially I began yesterday to call attention to the view which is
   associated with the philosophical position of Hegel. Being a
   philosopher he was great upon the idea. The whole world, he said, was a
   movement or process of the grand, divine idea; but it was a process.
   Now please to put down and make much use of this fundamental
   distinction between a process and an act. A process had nothing moral
   in it. We are simply carried along on the crest of a wave. An act, on
   the other hand, can only be done by a moral personality. The act
   involves the notion of will and responsibility, and, indeed, the whole
   existence of a moral world. The process destroys that notion. Now the
   general tendency of philosophy is to devote itself to the idea and to
   the process. Science, for example, which is the ground floor, not to
   say the basement, of philosophy - science knows nothing about acts, it
   only knows about processes. The chemist knows only about processes. The
   biologist knows only about processes. The psychologist treats even acts
   as processes. But the theologian, and, indeed, religion altogether,
   stands or falls with the idea of an act. For him an infinite process is
   at bottom an eternal act. The philosophical thinker says the world is
   the process of an evolving idea, which may be treated as personal or
   may not. But for Christianity the world is the action of the eternal,
   divine act, a moral act, an act of will and of conscience.
   Let us see how this applies to our thoughts about reconciliation. I
   have already indicated to you that the grand goal of the divine
   reconciliation is communion with God, not simply that we should be in
   tune with the Infinite, as an attractive but thin book has it. The
   object of the divine atonement is something much more than bringing us
   into time with God. It is more than raising our pitch and defining our
   note. It means that we are brought into actual, reciprocal communion
   with God out of guilt. We have personal intercourse with the Holy, we
   exchange thoughts and feelings. But this Christian idea of
   reconciliation, the idea of communion with the living and holy God, is
   replaced in philosophic theology by another idea, that, namely, of
   adjustment to rational Godhead, our adjustment to that mighty idea,
   that mighty rational process, which is moving on throughout the world.
   Sometimes the Godhead is conceived as personal, sometimes as
   impersonal; but in any case reconciliation would be rather a resigned
   adjustment to this great and overwhelming idea, which, having issued
   everything, is perpetually recalling, or exalting, everything into
   fusion with itself. But fusion, however organic and concrete, is one
   thing, communion is another thing. An individual might be lost in the
   great sum of being as a drop of water is lost in the ocean. That is
   fusion. Or it might be taken up as a cell in the body's organic
   process. That is a certain kind of reconciliation or absorption. But
   moral, spiritual reconciliation, where we have personal beings to deal
   with, is much more than fusion; more than absorption; it is communion.
   It is more than placing us in our niche. When we think in the
   philosophic way it practically means that reconciliation is understood
   almost entirely from man's side, without realizing the divine
   initiative as an act. But such divine initiative is everything. It is
   in the mercy of our God that all our hopes begin. Nothing that confuses
   that gets at the root of our Christian reconciliation. Or, sometimes,
   those philosophic ideas are carried so far that God's concern for the
   individual is ignored. These great processes work according to general
   laws; and general laws, like Acts of Parliament, are bound to do some
   injustice to individuals. You cannot possibly get complete justice by
   Act of Parliament. It is bound to hit somebody very hard. And it has
   often been doubted by exponents of philosophical theology such as I
   describe whether the individual as an individual was really present to
   God's mind and affection at all. And they think prayer is unreasonable
   except for its reflex effect on us. Thus the whole stress comes to be
   put upon our attitude to God, and not upon a reciprocal relationship.
   That is to say, religion becomes, as I described yesterday, a
   subjectivity, a resignation. In others it becomes a sense of
   dependence. People are invited to become preoccupied with their own
   attitude, their own relation, their own feelings toward the
   unchangeable, but absorbing, and even unfeeling God. Attention is
   directed upon the human side instead of insight cultivated into the
   divine side. The result of that practically is that religion comes to
   consist far too much in working up a certain frame of feeling instead
   of dwelling upon the objective reality of the act of God. Resignation
   is, then, my act; but it is not resignation to a sympathetic act of
   approach in God, but only to His onward movement. But, as I have said
   before, if we are to produce the real Christian faith we must dwell
   upon, we must preach and press, that objective act and gift of God
   which in itself produces that faith. We cannot produce it. Many try.
   There are some people who actually work at holiness. It is a dangerous
   thing to do, to work at your own holiness. The way to cultivate the
   holiness of the New Testament is to cultivate the New Testament Christ,
   the interpretation of Christ in His Cross, by His Spirit, which cannot
   but produce holiness, and holiness of a far profounder order than
   anything we may make by taking ourselves to pieces and putting
   ourselves together in the best way we can, or by adjusting ourselves
   with huge effort to a universal process. Religious subjectivity is
   truly a most valuable phase; and at some periods in the Church's
   history it is urgently called for. In the seventeenth century it was so
   called for because Protestantism had degenerated into a mere
   theological orthodoxy, a very hard-shell kind of Christianity. It was
   necessary that the great Pietistic movement should arise and correct
   it. But this is itself a danger in turn; and we have to rise up in the
   name of the gospel, of the New Testament, and demand a more objective
   religion; and we have to declare that if ever divine holiness is to be
   produced in man it can only be produced by God's act through Christ in
   the Holy Spirit.
   The philosophic kind of theology (which is rather theosophy) often
   ends, you perceive, in turning real reconciliation into something quite
   different. It becomes turned into the mere forced adjustment of man to
   his fate; and naturally this often ends in a resentful pessimism.
   Supposing the whole universe to be a vast rational process unfolding
   itself like an infinite cosmic flower, you cannot have communion or any
   hearty understanding between a living, loving soul and that
   evolutionary process. All you can do is to adjust yourself to that
   process, settle down to it and make the best of it, square yourself to
   it in the way that seems best for you, and that will cause you and
   others least discomfort. But reconciliation becomes debased indeed when
   it turns to mere resignation. Of course, we have to practice
   resignation. But Christianity is not the practice of resignation. At
   least, that is not the meaning of reconciliation. When two friends fall
   out and are reconciled, it does not simply mean that one adjusts
   himself to the other. That is a very one-sided arrangement. There must
   be a mutuality. Theology of the kind I have been describing has a great
   deal to say about men changing their way of looking at things or
   feeling about them. If I were preaching a theology like that I should
   say: "This mighty process, of which you are all parts, is unfolding
   itself to a grand closing result. It is going to be a grand thing for
   everybody in the long run (provided, that is, that they continue to
   exist as individuals and are capable of feeling anything, whether grand
   or mean). It is all going to work out to a grand consummation. You do
   not see that, but you must make an effort and accept it as the genius
   and drift of things; and that is faith. You must accept the idea that
   the whole world is working out, through much suffering and by many
   round-about ways, to a grand final consummation which will be a
   blessing for everybody, even though it might mean their individual
   extinction. What you have to do in these circumstances is, by a great
   act of faith, to believe that this is so and to immolate yourself, if
   need be, for the benefit of this grand whole; at any rate, accommodate
   yourself to its evolving movement."
   The gospel of Christ speaks otherwise. It speaks of a God to whom we
   are to be reconciled in a mutual act which He begins; and not of an
   order or process with which we are to be adjusted by our lonely act, or
   to which we are to be resigned. If we have an idea of such a Godhead as
   I have been describing, how does it affect our thought of Christ?
   Christ then becomes but one of its grandest prophets, or one of the
   greatest instances and illustrations of that adjustment to the mighty
   order. He first realized, and He first declared, this great change in
   the way of reading the situation. What you have to do if you accept Him
   is to change your way of reading the situation, to accept His
   interpretation of life, and accept it as rationally, spiritually, and
   resignedly as you best can. Accept His principle. Die to live. But what
   a poor use of Christ - to accept His interpretation of life, as if He
   were a mere spiritual Goethe! That is a very attenuated Christ compared
   with the Christ that is offered to us in the New Testament. That is not
   the eternal Son of God in whom God was reconciling the world unto
   Himself. That is another Christ - from some hasty points of view indeed
   a larger Christ; for the philosophers have a larger Christ, apparently,
   one more cosmic. But it is a diluted Christ, and one that cannot
   penetrate to the center and depth of our human need or our human
   personality, cannot reach our guilt and hell, and therefore cannot be
   the final Christ of God.
   Whether from the side of the philosophers, as I have been showing, or
   from the side of certain theologians like Ritschl, who was so much
   opposed to Hegel, you will often hear this said: that only man needed
   to be reconciled, that God did not need any reconciliation. Now, I have
   been asking you to observe that we are dealing with persons. That is
   the first point I put upon the board. Our reconciliation is between
   person and person. It is not between an order or a process on the one
   hand and a person on the other. Therefore a real and deep change of the
   relation between the two means a change on both sides. That is surely
   clear if we are dealing with living persons. God is an eternal person;
   I am a finite person; yet we are persons both. There is that parity.
   Any reconciliation which only means change on one side is not a real
   reconciliation at all. A real, deep change of relation affects both
   sides when we are dealing with persons. That is not the case when we
   are dealing on the one side with ideas, or one vast idea or process,
   and on the other side a person only.
   When Christianity is being watered down in the way I have described, we
   have to concentrate our attention upon the core of it. All round us
   Christianity is being diluted either by thought or by blague; we must
   press to the core of the matter. It is true the theology of the
   Christian Church on this head needs a certain amount of modification
   and correction at the present day. That will appear presently. But I
   want to make it clear that the view of the Church upon the whole,
   especially the great view associated with the Reformation, preserves
   the core of the matter, which we are in danger of losing either on one
   side or the other.
   Let me call your attention, then, to these five points, which you will
   find immanent in what I have subsequently to say.
   First, you will note that the reconciliation is between two persons who
   have fallen out, and not between a failing person on the one hand and a
   perfect, imperturbable process on the other.
   The second thing is a corollary from the first, and is that the
   reconciliation affects and alters both parties and not only one party.
   There was reconciliation on both sides.
   Thirdly, it is a reconciliation which rests upon atonement and
   redemption.
   Fourthly, it is a reconciliation of the world as a cosmic whole. The
   world as one whole; not a person here and another there, snatched as
   brands from the burning; not a group here and a group there; but the
   reconciliation of the whole world.
   Fifthly, it is a reconciliation final in Jesus Christ and His Cross,
   done once for all; really effected in the spiritual world in such a way
   that in history the great victory is not still to be won; it has been
   won in reality, and has only to be followed up and secured in
   actuality. In the spiritual place, in Christ Jesus, in the divine
   nature, the victory has been won. That is what I mean by using the word
   "Final" at the close of the list.
   I will expound these heads as I go along. Let me begin almost at the
   foundation and say this. Reconciliation has no moral meaning as between
   finite and infinite - none apart from the sense of guilt. The finished
   reconciliation, the setting up of the New Covenant by Christ, meant
   that human guilt was once for all robbed of its power to prevent the
   consummation of the Kingdom of God. It is the sense of guilt that we
   have to get back today for the soul's sake and the kingdom's; not
   simply the sense of sin. There are many who recognize the power of sin,
   the misfortune of it; what they do not recognize is the thing that
   makes it most sinful, which makes it what it is before God, namely,
   guilt; which introduces something noxious and not merely deranged,
   malignant and not merely hostile; the fact that it is transgression
   against not simply God, not simply against a loving God, but against a
   holy God. Everything begins and ends in our Christian theology with the
   holiness of God. That is the idea we have to get back into our current
   religious thinking. We have been living for the last two or three
   generations, our most progressive side has been living, upon the love
   of God, God's love to us. And it was very necessary that it should be
   appreciated. Justice had not been done to it. But we have now to take a
   step further, and we have to saturate our people in the years that are
   to come as thoroughly with the idea of God's holiness as they have been
   saturated with the idea of God's love. I have sometimes thought when
   preaching that I saw a perceptible change come over my audience when I
   turned from speaking about the love of God to speak about the holiness
   of God. There was a certain indescribable relaxing of interest, as
   though their faces should say, "What, have we not had enough of these
   incorrigible and obtrusive theologians who will not let us rest with
   the love of God but must go on talking about things that are so remote
   and professional as His holiness!" All that has to be changed. We have
   to stir the interest of our congregations as much with the holiness of
   God as the Church was stirred - first with the justice and then
   latterly with the love of God. It is the holiness of God which makes
   sin guilt. It is the holiness of God that necessitates the work of
   Christ, that calls for it, and that provides it. What is the great
   problem? The great problem in connection with atonement is not simply
   to show how it was necessary to the fatherly love, but how it was
   necessary to a holy love, how a holy love not only must have it but
   must make it. The problem is how Christ can be a revelation not of
   God's love simply, but of God's holy love. Without a holy God there
   would be not problem of atonement. It is the holiness of God's love
   that necessitates the atoning Cross.
   I say, then, that the reconciliation has no meaning apart from guilt
   which must stir the anger of a holy God and produce separation from
   Him. That is, the reconciliation rests upon a justification, upon an
   atonement. Those were the great Pauline ideas which were rediscovered
   in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and became the backbone of the
   Reformation. They were practically rediscovered. Look at the movement
   in the history of the Church's thought in this respect. You have three
   great points: you might name them - the first from Augustine, the
   second from Luther; for the third, our modern time, we have as yet no
   such outstanding name. The first great movement towards the rediscovery
   of Paul was by Augustine. Do you know that Paul went under after the
   first century? He went under for historic reasons I cannot stay to
   explain. It is a remarkable thing how he was kept in the canon of
   Scripture. Paul went under, and for centuries remained under, and he
   had to be rediscovered. That was done by Augustine. Again he went
   under, and Luther rediscovered him. And he is being rediscovered again
   today. Augustine's rediscovery was this, justification by grace alone;
   Luther's side of the rediscovery was justification by faith alone -
   faith in the Cross, that is to say, faith in grace. What is our modern
   point of emphasis? Justification by holiness and for it alone. That is
   to say, as I have already pointed out, reconciliation is something that
   comes from the whole holy God, and it covers the whole of life, and it
   is not exhausted by the idea of atonement only or redemption only. It
   is the new-created race being brought to permanent, vital, life-deep
   communion with the holy God. Only holiness can be in communion with the
   holy God. We have to be saved - not indeed from morality, because we
   can only be saved by the moral; that is the grand sheet-anchor of our
   modern theories. However we be saved, we can only be saved in a way
   consistent with God's morality - that is to say, with holiness. The
   rescue is not from morality; but it is from mere moralism, from a
   religion three parts conduct. We are saved through the Spirit of a new
   life, an indiscerptible life in Jesus Christ. That is the grand new
   thing in Christianity (2 Corinthians 3:6)
   Reconciliation, then, has no meaning apart from a sense of guilt, that
   guilt which is involved in our justification. I am going to try to
   expound that before I am done. I want to note here that it means not so
   much that God is reconciled, but that God is the Reconciler. It is the
   neglect of that truth which has produced so much skepticism in the
   matter of the atonement. So much of our orthodox religion has come to
   talk as though God were reconciled by a third party. We lose sight of
   this great central verse, "God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
   Himself." As we are both living persons, that means that there was
   reconciliation on God's side as well as ours; but wherever it was, it
   was effected by God Himself in Himself. In what sense was God
   reconciled within Himself? We come to that surely as we see that the
   first charge upon reconciling grace is to put away guilt, reconciling
   by not imputing trespasses. Return to our cardinal verse, 2 Corinthians
   5:19. In reconciliation the ground for God's wrath or God's judgment
   was put away. Guilt rests on God's charging up sin; reconciliation
   rests upon God's non-imputation of sin; God's non-imputation of sin
   rests upon Christ being made sin for us. You have thus three stages in
   this magnificent verse. God's reconciliation rested upon this, that on
   His Eternal Son, who knew no sin in His experience, (although He knew
   more about sin than any man who has ever lived), sin's judgment fell.
   Him who knew no sin by experience, God made sin. That is to say, God by
   Christ's own consent identified Him with sin in treatment though not in
   feeling. God did not judge Him, but judged sin upon His head. He never
   once counted Him sinful; He was always well pleased with Him; it was
   part, indeed, of His own holy self-complacency. Christ was made sin for
   us, as He could never have been if He had been made a sinner. It was
   sin that had to be judged, more even than the sinner, in a
   world-salvation; and God made Christ sin in this sense, that God as it
   were took Him in the place of sin, rather than of the sinner, and
   judged the sin upon Him; and in putting Him there He really put Himself
   there in our place (Christ being what He was); so that the divine
   judgment of sin was real and effectual. That is, it fell where it was
   perfectly understood, owned, and praised, and had the sanctifying
   effect of judgment, the effect of giving holiness at last its own. God
   made Him to be sin in treatment though not in feeling, so that holiness
   might be perfected in judgment, and we might become the righteousness
   of God in Him; so that we might have in God's sight righteousness by
   our living union with Christ, righteousness which did not belong to us
   actually, naturally, and finally. Our righteousness is as little ours
   individually as the sin on Christ was His. The thief on the cross, for
   instance - I do not suppose he would have turned what we call a saint
   if he had survived; though saved, he would not have become sinless all
   at once. And the great saint, Paul, had sin working in him long after
   his conversion. Yet by union with Christ they were made God's
   righteousness, they were integrated into the New Goodness; God made
   them partakers of His eternal love to the ever-holy Christ. That is a
   most wonderful thing. Men like Paul, and far worse men than Paul, by
   the grace of God, and by a living faith, become partakers of that same
   eternal love which God from everlasting and to everlasting bestowed
   upon His only-begotten Son. It is beyond words.
   It was not a case of wiping a slate. Sin is graven in. You cannot wipe
   off sin. It goes into the tissue of the spiritual being. And it alters
   things for both parties. Guilt affected both God and man. It was not a
   case of destroying an unfortunate prejudice we had against God. It was
   not a case of putting right a misunderstanding we had of God. "You are
   afraid of God," you hear easy people say; "it is a great mistake to be
   afraid of God. There is nothing to be afraid of. God is love." But
   there is everything in the love of God to be afraid of. Love is not
   holy without judgment. It is the love of holy God that is the consuming
   fire. It was not simply a case of changing our method, or thought, our
   prejudices, or the moral direction of our soul. It was not a case of
   giving us courage when we were cast down, showing us how groundless our
   depression was. It was not that. If that were all it would be a
   comparatively light matter.
   If that were all, Paul could only have spoken about the reconciliation
   of single souls, not about the reconciliation of the whole world as a
   unity. He could not have spoken about a finished reconciliation to
   which every age of the future was to look back as its glorious and
   fontal past. In the words of that verse which I am constantly pressing,
   "God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself." Observe, first,
   "the world" is the unity which corresponds to the reconciled unity of
   "Himself"; and second, that He was not trying, not taking steps to
   provide means of reconciliation, not opening doors of reconciliation if
   we would only walk in at them, not laboring toward reconciliation, not
   (according to the unhappy phrase) waiting to be gracious, but "God was
   in Christ reconciling," actually reconciling, finishing the work. It
   was not a tentative, preliminary affair (Romans 11:15). Reconciliation
   was finished in Christ's death. Paul did not preach a gradual
   reconciliation. He preached what the old divines used to call the
   finished work. He did not preach a gradual reconciliation which was to
   become the reconciliation to the world only piecemeal, as men were
   induced to accept it, or were affected by the gospel. He preached
   something done once for all - reconciliation which is the base of every
   soul's reconcilement, not an invitation only. What the Church has to do
   is to appropriate the thing that has been finally and universally done.
   We have to enter upon the reconciled position, on the new creation.
   Individual men have to enter upon that reconciled position, that new
   covenant, that new relation, which already, in virtue of Christ's
   Cross, belonged to the race as a whole. I will even use for
   convenience' sake the word totality. (People turn up their noses at a
   word like that they say it smells of philosophy. Well, philosophy has
   not a bad smell! You cannot have a proper theology unless you have a
   philosophy. You cannot accurately express the things that theology
   handles most deeply. The misfortune of our ministry is that it comes to
   theology without the proper preliminary culture - with a pious or
   literary culture only.) I am going to use this word totality, and say
   that the first bearing of Christ's work was upon the race as a
   totality. The first thing reconciliation does is to change man's
   corporate relation to God. Then when it is taken home individually it
   changes our present attitude. Christ, as it were, put us into the
   eternal Church; the Holy Spirit teaches us how to behave properly in
   the Church.
   I go on to show that reconciliation has its effect not upon man only,
   but upon God also. That is a difficulty to many people. And, indeed, we
   require to be somewhat discriminating here. If you say bluntly that
   Christ reconciled God, it is more false than true. I do not say it is
   untrue. It is the people who want plain black and white, false or true,
   that do so much mischief in these matters. It is the thin, commonsense
   rationalists, orthodox or heterodox. It is the people who put a pistol
   to your head and say, "I am a plain man and I want a plain yes or no,"
   that cause so much difficulty. Christ always refused to answer with a
   pistol to His head. It was the whole manner of His ministry to refuse
   to give a plain answer when asked a blunt question. We see that in
   Peter's discovery and confession, "Thou art the Christ," and in
   Christ's joyful answer, "Blessed Simon." Peter in his confession had
   crowned what Christ had labored to live in upon them, but what He had
   never said plainly in so many words - "I am the Christ." He lived it
   into them and made them discover it. Repeatedly He was asked, "Give us
   signs," "Give us yes or no," and He always refused. That would be
   sight, not faith. A plain yes or no is sight. But faith is insight into
   Christ. In this region a plain yes or no is somewhat out of place. So,
   therefore, while it is not false to say that Christ reconciled God, it
   is more false than true as it is mostly put. You do not get it in the
   Bible. It would be a useful exercise to go through the Bible and see
   what proofs you can get of Christ reconciling God. If we talk about
   Christ reconciling God in the way some do, we suggest that there was
   some third party coming between us and God, reconciling God on the one
   hand and us on the other, like a daysman. That is one great mischief
   that is done by the popular theories of atonement. God can never be
   regarded as the object of some third party's intervention in
   reconciling. If it were so, what would happen? There would be no grace.
   It would be a bought thing, a procured thing, the work of a
   pardon-broker; and the one essential thing about grace is that it is
   unbought and unpurchasable. It is the freest thing in heaven or earth.
   It would not be free if procured by some third party. The "daysman"
   metaphor has been much abused. It is a Scriptural figure, but we get it
   in the Old Testament, in Job, the idea being that of one who, in the
   case of a dispute, puts one hand on one head and the other on another
   and brings two persons together. That is a crude version of the
   Christian idea of reconciliation. The grace of God would not then be
   the prime and moving cause. It would not be spontaneous and creative,
   it would be negotiated grace; and that is a contradiction in terms.
   Mediation can never mean that. In paganism the gods were mollified.
   God, our God, could never be mollified. There is no mollification of
   God, no placation of God. Atonement was not the placating of God's
   anger. Even in the old economy we are told, "I have given you the blood
   to make atonement." Given! Did you ever see the force of it? "I have
   given you the blood to make atonement. This is an institution which I
   set up for you to comply with, set it up for purposes of My own, on
   principles of My own, but it is My gift." The Lord Himself provided the
   lamb for the burnt offering. Atonement in the Old Testament was not the
   placating of God's anger, but the sacrament of God's grace. It was the
   expression of God's anger on the one hand and the expressing and
   putting in action of God's grace on the other hand. The effect of
   atonement was to cover sin from God's eyes, so that it should no longer
   make a visible breach between God and His people. The actual ordinance
   was established, they held, by God Himself. He covered the sin.
   Sacrifices were not desperate efforts and surrenders made by terrified
   people in the hope of propitiating an angry deity. The sacrifices were
   in themselves prime acts of obedience to God's means of grace and His
   expressed will. If you want to follow that out further, perhaps I may
   be forgiven if I were to allude to the last chapter in my book, "The
   Cruciality of the Cross" (1909), in which there is a fuller discussion
   of the particular point, and especially of what is morally meant by the
   blood of Christ.
   But some one immediately asks, Is there then no objective atonement? It
   is a question worth deep attention. A great many people say
   Christianity wrecks chiefly on the idea of objective atonement. How
   cheap the objection is in many cases, how easy and common it is! If you
   find somebody who is making it his mission in life to pull to pieces
   the venerable theology of the Catholic Church, and show how poor a
   thing it is in the light of the thirty years in which he has lived, you
   will hear it put likely enough in such terms as these: that objective
   atonement is sheer paganism. The Christian idea of atonement is
   identified offhand with the pagan idea of atonement, as a Hyde Park
   lecturer might. And when you have done that at the outset, it is the
   simplest thing to show how false and absurd and pagan such theology is.
   It is said further, that the whole Church has become paganized in this
   way, and has spoken as though God could be mollified by something
   offered to Him. The criticism is sometimes ignorant, sometimes
   ungenerous, sometimes culpable. If such language has ever been held, it
   has only been by sections of the Church, sections that have gone wrong
   in the direction of unqualified extremes. You have extravagances,
   remember, even in rational heresy. Has the Church on the whole ever
   really forgotten that it is in the mercy of God that all our hopes
   begin and end? And even if the Church had gone further wrong than it
   has done about this, we do not live upon the Church, but upon the
   gospel and upon the Bible. We live in and through the Church. We cannot
   do without it. We must get back a great deal more respect for it. But
   we do not live on the Church; we live on the word of the gospel which
   is in the Bible.
   What is the real objective element in the Bible's gospel? What is the
   real objective element in atonement? We are tempted, I say, to declare
   that it was the offering of a sacrifice to God outside of Him and us,
   the offering of a sacrifice to God by somebody not God yet more than a
   single man. That is the natural, the pagan notion of objective
   atonement. But the real meaning of an objective atonement is that God
   Himself made the complete sacrifice. The real objectivity of the
   atonement is not that it was made to God, but by God. It was atonement
   made by God, not by man. When I use the word objective, I do not mean
   objective to you or to me. You are objective to me, and I to you. That
   is not the idea. Let us learn to thing on the scale of the whole race.
   What is objective to that? The deadly kind of subjectivity is the kind
   that is engrossed with individuals, or with humanity, and does not
   allow for God. It is the egotism of the race. And the real objectivity
   is that which is objective to the whole human race, over against it,
   and not merely facing you or me within it. The real objective element
   in the atonement, therefore, is that God made it and gave it finished
   to man, not that it was made to God by man. Any atonement made by man
   would be subjective, however much it might be made for man by his
   brother, or by a representative of entire Humanity.
   But we have a certain farther difficulty to face here. If it was God
   that made the atonement - which it certainly was in Christianity - then
   was it not made to man? Can God reconcile Himself? And can the
   atonement mean anything more than the attuning of man to God - that is
   to say, of individual men in their subjective experience? God then says
   to each soul, "Be reconciled. See, I have put My anger away." Can such
   attuning of Himself by God have for its results anything more than
   individual conversion? Now, conversion means much, but it does not mean
   the whole of Christianity. Reconciliation means the life-communion of
   the race. But, if God made the atonement, it might seem that the result
   and effect of this atonement could only be reached gradually by the
   attuning of individual men to God. It would seem to destroy the
   totality of the race, or (to employ another word even more useful) the
   solidarity of the race. That would seem to be the effect; and it is
   such a serious effect, for this reason: that it affects the
   universality of Christ's work. Whatever affects the universality of
   Christ's work cuts the ground from under aggressive Christianity, from
   under missions, whether at home or abroad. They cannot thrive except
   upon a faith which means the universality of Christ's work, which means
   again the solidarity, the organic unity, of the whole human race. And
   the conversion of a race is a work that exceeds conversion and is
   redemption. About that the Old Testament and the New Testament are at
   one.
   But, you say, you do not have the solidarity of the human race in the
   Old Testament. Well, you do, and you do not. What you have fact to face
   with God in the Old Testament is a collective nation, Israel. We shall
   never read the Old Testament with true understanding until we realize
   that. That is one of the great things modern scholarship has brought
   home to us - that the vis-a-vis of God in the Old Testament is Israel
   and not the individual Jew. Gradually, as the Old Testament develops in
   spiritual intimacy, you have this changing and becoming intensely
   individual, as in the later Psalms. In Jeremiah it became so
   especially. The greatest prefiguration of Christ's individual solitude
   in the Old Testament is Jeremiah. But both of them were representative
   or collective individuals. They condensed the people. The object that
   faced God in the God in the Old Testament in the main was not primarily
   the individual soul, it was the soul of the nation of Israel, even
   though it was sometimes reduced to a remnant. What took place when
   Israel made the great refusal of Christ? There was set up another
   collective unity, the Church, the new Israel, the spiritual Israel, the
   landless, homeless Israel, whose home was in Him, the universal Israel,
   the new Humanity of the new covenant. The Church became the prophecy
   and prefiguration of the unity of Humanity. It is through the Church
   alone that the unity of Humanity can be consummated, because it is
   possible only through the gospel. And the preacher of this gospel in
   the world is the collective Church.
   We must, therefore, avoid every idea of atonement which seems to reduce
   it to God's dealing with a mass of individuals instead of with the race
   as a whole - instead of a racial, a social, a collective salvation, in
   which alone each individual has his place and part. Our Protestant
   theology has been too individualist, too little collectivist. And that
   has had serious social consequences as well as theological. The basis
   of a social salvation is the final redemption in one act of the total
   race. And that act was the Cross of Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

IV. Reconciliation, Atonement, and Judgment

   The point at which I broke off yesterday was this. I was pointing out
   that objective atonement is absolutely necessary. Of course, it is
   quite necessary also that we should know what is meant by an objective
   atonement. The real objective element in atonement is not that
   something was offered to God, but that God made the offering. And in
   this connection I hinted that my remarks today and tomorrow would have
   to follow the idea also, that God's atonement initially was made on
   behalf of the race, and on behalf of individuals in so far as they were
   members of the race. The first charge upon Christ and His Cross was the
   reconciliation of the race, and of its individuals by implication.
   We start today, then, from the position that God made the atonement.
   This (we saw) suggests a number of questions, not to say difficulties.
   If God made the atonement, but reconciliation meant no more than simply
   the moving and attuning of individual men in their subjective
   experience, it might seem as though it destroyed the solidarity of
   mankind and made it granular. And the peril there is that whatever
   destroys that, destroys the universality of Christ's work. But that
   atomism is not the Gospel. To reduce the reconciliation merely to the
   aggregate of individual conversions would be a total misrepresentation
   of New Testament reconciliation, which is both solidary and final.
   Then there is another difficulty. If we say that the one object of the
   atonement was not the reconciliation of God, but the reconciliation of
   man to God, then it looks as though the work of Christ became only the
   grand heliograph from divine heights, the chief word in what I might
   call a language of signs; as though it were only the leading expression
   of God's will towards men, instead of something actually done, and not
   merely said or shown, by God, something really done from the depth of
   God Who is the action of the world, something eternally changing the
   whole situation, and destiny, and responsibility of our race. If God in
   Christ simply said the most powerful word about His goodwill, His
   placability, and His permanence of Christ - the depth of His work, and
   the height of His place. Thus God would be saying more than He did; and
   we have a natural and proper difficulty in thoroughly trusting people
   who say more than they do. If Christ were simply an expression of God's
   love, then His Cross would simply be what is called an object-lesson of
   God's love; or it would simply be a witness to the serious way in which
   God takes man's sin; or it might even be nor more than the expression
   of the strong conviction of Jesus about it. We are exposed to the
   danger there always is when we make revelation a word rather than a
   deed, something said instead of something done, when we make it
   manifestation only and redemption. The work of Christ would be only
   something educational, or at most impressive. And what happens then? If
   the work of Christ is only impressively educational, if the need and
   value of it ceases when we have recognized its meaning, when we have
   taken God's word for it in Christ that He does really love us, what
   happens then? Why, as soon as the lesson had been learnt, the work of
   Christ might be left behind. There are a great many people today who
   are Christian in a way, but have very loose ideas as to what is
   involved centrally in their Christianity. Many of them are in this
   position I describe - they think they can ignore Christ and the work of
   Christ since they have assimilated the lesson these taught. If the
   Cross is a kind of practical parable which God set forth of His love
   and His willingness to save, then when the parable has done its work it
   can be forgotten. When the lesson has been taught, the example can be
   put away into the school store-room until we want it again. It is
   exhausted for the time being, until somebody else comes who needs the
   same lesson. In that case the work of Christ simply sinks to the level
   of other valuable events in the history of religion. It is not fontal
   but episodic. It represents the transition from Judaism to a religion
   of Humanity. It represents a great movement in the history of religion,
   when religion ceased to be national and particularist, and became
   universal, when it ceased to be ritual and became spiritual. The death
   of Christ would thus be a great monument in the past, which fades out
   of sight as we surmount it and leave it behind; and it does not retain
   a permanent meaning and function at the center of our faith.
   I said that the work of Christ meant not only an action on man, it
   meant an action on God. Yet I pointed out that it was more false than
   true to say that Christ and His death reconciled God to man. I said
   that we must in some way construe the matter as God reconciling
   Himself. It was out of the question to think of any reconciliation
   effected upon God by a third party standing between God and man. God
   could not be reconciled by man nor by one neither God nor man. The only
   alternative, therefore, is that God should reconcile Himself. But then
   is there not something in that which seems a little forced and
   unnatural? Did God have to compel Himself to change His feeling about
   us? Did He force Himself to be gracious? There is something wrong here
   surely, something that needs adjustment, explanation, restatement in
   some way.
   Are we obliged to suppose that if God did reconcile Himself it was in
   the sense of changing His own heart and affection towards us? I have
   pointed out that the heart of God towards us, His gracious disposition
   towards us, was from His own holy eternity; that grace is of the
   unchangeable. God in that respect had not to be changed. Was He changed
   at all then? If His heart was not changed, what remained in Him to be
   changed, what was changed in connection with the work of Christ?
   There was a change. And I am going to ask you to recognize here another
   of those valuable distinction of which the man without the evangelical
   experience and its theological discipline is so impatient. As I work my
   way through the difficulties and questions that present themselves,
   over and over again I perceive that many of the difficulties that seem
   so serious to some turn entirely upon some valuable distinction that
   has been ignored, often for lack of deep religion or due professional
   education. Of course the man in the street says, as soon as he is asked
   to distinguish, that that is getting into the region of subtleties.
   Never mind the man in the street. The distinguished person for him is
   the person with the least distinction from himself, the person who
   gives him most satisfaction with least trouble, the person who works in
   black and white with no shades. Besides, the man in the street is not
   devoted to his Bible, nor to getting into the interior of the Bible, as
   you preachers are. We must take our way, God's way, and follow the
   subtle and searching Holy Spirit as He leads and speaks in and through
   the questions that arise to our earnest thought concerning Christ's
   death. And the man in the street must be left to the grace which has
   taken us in from the street.
   The distinction I ask you to observe is between a change of feeling and
   a change of treatment, between affection and discipline, between
   friendly feeling and friendly relations. God's feeling toward us never
   needed to be changed. But God's treatment of us, God's practical
   relation to us - that had to change. I have pointed out that the
   relation between God and man in reconciliation is a personal one, and
   that, where you have real personal relation and personal communion, if
   there is change on one side there must be change on the other. The
   question is as to the nature of the change. We have barred out the
   possibility of its being a change of affection, of hatred into grace.
   God never ceased to love us even when He was most angry and severe with
   us. It will not do to abolish the reality of God's anger towards us.
   True love is quite capable of being angry, and must be angry and even
   sharp with its beloved children. Let us fix our attention more closely
   upon this distinction of mood and manner.
   Take the parable of the prodigal for illustration. There are those who
   say you have the whole of the gospel really in the parable of the
   prodigal son, that that was the culmination of Christ's grand
   revelation of God. Well, if that were so the wonder to me is, first,
   that the apostles never seem to have used it; and, second, that having
   delivered this parable Christ did not at once consider His mission
   discharged and return to heaven. Or, on the other hand, why did He not
   continue to live to a ripe and useful age, reiterating in various forms
   and in different settings this waiting (but inert) love and grace of
   God? We are moved sometimes to think He might have done well had He not
   provoked death so early, had He remained, like John, to seventy or
   ninety years of age continually publishing, applying, and spreading the
   message which He gave His disciples. But you have not the whole gospel
   in the parable of the prodigal son. What is the function of a parable?
   It is one of the great discoveries and lessons taught us by modern
   scholarship, that parables are not allegories, because they exist for
   the sake of one central idea. While we may allow ourselves, under the
   suggestion of the Holy Spirit to receive hints of edifying truth from
   this or the other phase or detail of the parable, we have chiefly to
   ask, What was it in the mind of Christ for the sake of which He uttered
   this parable? Each parable puts in an ample ambit one central idea. Now
   the one ruling idea in the parable of the prodigal son is the idea of
   the centrality, the completeness, the unreservedness, the freeness,
   fullness, whole-heartedness of God's grace - the absolute fullness of
   it, rather that the method of its action. But however a parable might
   preach that fullness, it took the Cross and all its train to give it
   effect, to put it into action, life, and history, to charge it with the
   Spirit. Those who tell us that the whole gospel is embodied in the
   parable say, You observe nothing is suggested in the parable about the
   Cross and the Atonement; therefore the Cross and the Atonement are
   subsequent and gratuitous additions, confusing the gospel of grace. But
   that turns Christ into a mere preacher, instead of the center of the
   world's history. Bear in mind also that this parable was spoken by the
   Christ who had the Cross in the very structure of His personality as
   its vocation, and at the root, therefore, of all His words. That Cross
   was deep embedded in the very structure of Christ's Person, because
   nowadays you cannot separate His Person from His vocation, from the
   work He came to do, and the words He came to speak. The Cross was not
   simply a fate awaiting Christ in the future; it pervaded subliminally
   His holy Person. He was born for the Cross. It was His genius, His
   destiny. If was quite inevitable that, in a world like this, One holy
   as Jesus was holy should come to the Cross. The parable was spoken by
   One in whom the Cross and all it stands for were latent in His idea of
   God; and it became patent, came to the surface, became actual, and
   practical, and powerful in the stress of man's crisis and the fullness
   of God's time. That is an important phrase. Christ Himself came in a
   fullness of time. The Cross which consummated and crowned Christ came
   in its fullness of time. The time was not full during Christ's life for
   preaching an atonement that life could never make. Hence as to the
   method of God's free and flowing grace the parable has nothing to say.
   It does not even say that the father was seeking the prodigal. The
   seeking grace of God we find there as little as the redeeming grace.
   And so also you have not the mode of grace's action on a world. But,
   speaking of what you do have in the parable, the father knows no change
   of feeling towards the prodigal; yet could he go on making no
   difference? Could he go on treating the prodigal as though he never had
   become a prodigal? He did not certainly when he returned; and as little
   could he before. His heart followed the prodigal, but his relations,
   his confidence, his intercourse were with his brother. So long as the
   son is prodigal he cannot be treated as though he were otherwise. Even
   repentance needs some guarantee of permanence. The father's heart is
   the same, but his treatment must be different. Cases have been known
   where the father had to expel the black sheep from the family for the
   sake of the others. Loving the poor creature all the same, he yet found
   it quite impossible, in the interests of the whole family, to treat him
   as though he were like the rest. So God needed no placation, but He
   could not exercise His kindness to the prodigal world, He certainly
   could not restore communion with its individuals, without doing some
   act which permanently altered the relation. And this is what set up
   that world's reconciliation with Him. It was set up by an act of
   crisis, of judgment.
   Remember always we are dealing with the world in the first instance and
   not with individuals. I constantly come back upon that, for the
   orthodox and their critics forget it alike. I suppose the prodigal was
   a slave, I suppose he had sold himself to that vile work of
   swine-feeding. When he returned I suppose he ran away from his master.
   But the prodigal world, of course, could not run away from its master,
   it could not run away from the power that it was enslaved to. "Myself
   am hell." Supposing now the prodigal had not been able to run away.
   Supposing he had been guarded as a convict is guarded, then he could
   only come back by being bought of. As soon as you go beyond the one
   theme of the parable, the absolute heartiness of grace, and begin to
   think of grace's methods with a world, this point must be faced by all
   who are more than pooh-pooh sentimentalists in their religion. We have
   to deal with a world in a bondage it could not break. If the prodigal
   could not have arisen to go to his father; if the elder brother had
   sold up the whole farm, reduced himself to poverty, taken the sum in
   his hand, followed the prodigal into the far country, and there spent
   the whole amount in buying his brother's manumission from his master
   before a judge; and if it was all done by mutual purpose and consent of
   himself and his father; would not that act be a great and effective
   thing, not so much in producing repentance but in a harder matter - in
   destroying a lien and making absolute certainty of the father's
   forgiveness? He is sure because the father not only says but pays. His
   mere repentance could not make him sure, could not place him at home
   again, could not put him where he set out. His mere repentance could
   turn his heart to his father, but it could not break the bar and fill
   him with certainty of his father's love and forgiveness. And that is
   what the sinner wants, and what the great and classic penitents find it
   so hard to believe. Now, the parable tells us of the freeness of God's
   grace, and its fullness, but the Cross enacts it and inserts it in
   really history. It shows to what length that grace could go in dealing
   with a difficulty otherwise insuperable when we turn from a single
   prodigal to a world. The act which I have described by a New Testament
   extension of the parable - the act of Christ's Cross - is not simply to
   produce individual repentance, but it has its great effect upon the
   relation of the whole world to God. And the judgment, the payment, was
   on that scale. I will show you later that it was not pain that was paid
   but holy obedience.
   What the elder brother does in the supposition I have made is twofold.
   First, he secures the liberation, he deals with the equitable
   conditions of the release. Secondly, he also acts upon the prodigal's
   heart and confidence. In the first case he meets certain judicial
   conditions, certain social conditions, ethical conditions, bound up
   with the existing order, the law of society in which the prodigal was
   living. But it is said sometimes that there the analogy fails, because
   the elder son, acting for the father, in my extension of the story, has
   to deal with a law which is outside his control and outside the
   father's control; he has to deal with the law of society, with the law
   of the land where the prodigal was. Whereas, if you come to think about
   God, there can be no social and moral conditions which are outside His
   control. There, it is said, your illustration breaks down. God could
   ignore any such impediments at His loving will. Now, that is just the
   crucial mistake that you make, that even Kant does not allow us to
   make. God could do nothing of the kind. So far the omnipotence of God
   is a limited omnipotence. He could not trifle with His own holiness. He
   could will nothing against His holy nature, and He could not abolish
   the judgment bound up with it. Nothing in the compass of the divine
   nature could enable Him to abolish a moral law, the law of holiness.
   That would be tampering with His own soul. It had to be dealt with. Is
   the law of God more loose than the law of society? Can it be taken
   liberties with, played with, and put aside at the impulse even of love?
   How little we should come to think of God's love if that were possible!
   How essential the holiness of that love is to our respect for it and
   our faith in its unchangeableness! It God's love were not essentially
   holy love, in course of time mankind would cease to respect it, and
   consequently to trust it. We need not a fond love, but a love we can
   trust, and for ever. What love wants is not simply love in response,
   but respect and confidence. In the bringing up of children today one
   often wishes they had more training in respect, even if less in
   affection. God's holy law is His own holy nature. His love is under the
   condition of eternal respect. It is quite unchangeable. It is just as
   much outside His operation, so far as abrogation goes, as was the law
   of the far country to the father of the prodigal.
   What was there in the work of Christ which went beyond a mere
   impressive declaration of a God who could not help being gracious, but
   fell on the prodigal's neck without more ado? It was solidary judgment.
   I am urging that the difficulty we have in answering that questions is
   due to our modern individualism. Individualism has done its work for
   Christianity for the time being, and we are now suffering from its
   after-effects. We do not realize that we are each one of us saved in a
   racial salvation. We are each one of us saved in the salvation of the
   race, in a collectivist redemption. What Christ saved was the whole
   human race. What He bought, if we may provisionally use the metaphor,
   was the Church, and not any aggregate of isolated souls. So great is a
   soul, and so great is its sin, that each man is only saved by an act
   which at the same time saves the whole world. If you reduce or postpone
   Christ's effect upon the totality of the world, you are in the long run
   preparing the way for a poor estimate of the human soul. The more you
   abolish the significance of Christ's redeeming death once for all, the
   more you are doing to lower Humanity morally, and make it a less
   precious thing than the cosmic world around us. My plea is that with no
   atonement, no solidary judgment of sin, you reduce reconciliation not
   only to sentiment but to a piecemeal series of individual repentances
   and conversions, leaving it a problem whether the race as a whole will
   be saved at last. For the universality of Christianity (so dear to
   Broad Church) you must have that foregone finality which the New
   Testament offers in the atonement.
   I pointed out to you that in the Old Testament, for the most part, what
   faced God was not this prophet or that saint, this king or that
   particular juncture, but Israel. I said that in the subsequent phases
   of Jewish religion, indeed, that idea has its detail filled in; and in
   the later psalms, in many of those psalms which we know could only have
   been written after the captivity, you have pious individualism
   sometimes expressing itself very strongly. But there the two warring
   notes were - new individualism and old collectivism; and between these
   there never came complete reconcilement until Christ came and Christ's
   work. What have we in that great text, John 3:16? "God so loved the
   world" - the world was the prime object of God's love - "God so loved
   the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
   on Him should not perish but have eternal life." Love in the first
   instance directed upon the world, but directed upon the world in such a
   way that it should be taken home in every individual experience. Mark
   the two words, "the world" and "whosoever". Dwell upon the contrast.
   God loved not this or that individual, or group of individuals, only.
   "God so loved the world" that He did something to it in such a way that
   every individual "whosoever" should receive the benefit, and receive it
   in the only way which made a world of saved individuals possible. You
   can never compound a saved world out of any number of saved
   individuals. But God did so save the world as to carry individual
   salvation in the same act. The Son of God was not an individual merely;
   He was the representative of the whole race, and its vis-a-vis, on its
   own scale. So that, in Ephesians, the Church, in rising to Christ, had
   to acquire the fullness of a complete and colossal man. No individual
   prophet of salvation could save the world. He could not be capable of a
   pity great enough, or a love. The world could only be saved by somebody
   as large as the world, and indeed larger. If he could not save the
   world he could make no eternal salvation of any individual. It is
   universal, eternal salvation every way - universal not by the addition
   of all units, but in a solidary sense. What we are tempted to think of
   in our common version of Christianity is a mass of people, great or
   small, a mass of individuals, each one of whom makes his own terms with
   God and gets discharge of his sin. It is salvation by private bargain.
   In conversion every individual makes his own peace with God through
   Jesus Christ, so that the work of God becomes a mere change of
   attitude, feeling, or temper of the side of man after man. That is not
   the New Testament idea.
   Again, in speaking of the change in God, Christ has been represented as
   enabling God to forgive by enabling Him to adjust His two attributes of
   justice and mercy within Himself. Some theologians of the Reformation -
   Melancthon for one - spoke of Christ in that fashion. But we have
   entirely outgrown that way of thinking and talking about it. It has
   produced much difficulty and sceptism. What does it proceed upon? It
   proceeds upon a certain definition of an attribute, as though an
   attribute were something loose within God which He could manipulate -
   as though the attributes of God were not God Himself, unchangeable God,
   in certain relations. The attributes of God are not things within
   Himself which He could handle and adjust. An attribute of God is God
   Himself behaving, with all His unity, in a particular way in a
   particular situation. God is a thinking God, let us say. He has the
   attribute of thought. Does that mean that the attribute of thought
   could be taken away, that God could divest Himself of it? No. The
   thought of God is simply God thinking. So also the love of God is not
   an attribute of God; it is God loving. The holiness of God is not an
   attribute of God; it is the whole God Himself as holy. There is nothing
   in the Bible about the strife of attributes. Rather remember 1 John
   1:9, "He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins." It is in the
   exercise of His faithfulness to Himself and His observance of justice
   that He should forgive. It lies in the very holiness that condemns.
   There is a similar text in the Psalms, "Thou art merciful; Thou givest
   to every man according to his work." He is the faithful and just to
   forgive. There needed no adjustment of His justice with His
   forgiveness. So also in Isaiah, "A just God and a Savior." There can be
   therefore be no strife of attributes.
   What, then, does it mean when we hear about the anger of God being
   turned away? To begin with, the anger of God means a great deal more
   than His passion, His temper, His mode of feeling, more than anger as
   an affection. The anger of God in the Bible means much rather the
   judgment of God in the reaction of His moral and spiritual order. The
   judgment of God is perfectly compatible with His continued love, just
   as a father's punishment is perfectly compatible with his love for his
   children. The father has to discipline his children. He institutes
   certain laws, the children disobey; they must be punished, or, using
   the more dignified term, judged. The anger of God: we shall get the
   most meaning out of it when we think of it as the judgment of God, the
   exalted, inflexible judgment of God.
   Taking a step further, it is judgment on the world. It seems at first
   sight as though it were meaningless to speak as if God could be wroth
   with the world and yet gracious and loving to individuals. But I may be
   very angry with a political party, yet I cherish respect and love for
   individuals belonging to that party. We must be on our guard against
   narrow, individual views, against treating individuals according to
   their public and collective condemnation. We are created, redeemed,
   judged as members of a race or of a Church. Salvation is personal, but
   it is not individual. (There is another distinction for you, if you
   have come in off the street.) It is personal in its appropriation but
   collective in its nature. What did the Reformation stand for? Not for
   religious individualism. But I hear some one asking in the back of his
   mind, Was not the Reformation the charter of private judgment and
   individual independence? It was nothing of the kind. It was the charter
   of personal direct faith and its freedom. What the Reformation did was
   to turn religion from being a thing mainly institutional into a thing
   mainly personal. The reformers were as strong as their opponents about
   the necessity of the Church for the soul - though as its home, not its
   master. They were not individualists. Individualism is fatal to faith.
   It was the backbone of the rationalism and atheism of the French
   Revolution. The Reformation stands for personal religion and social
   religion and not for religious individualism.
   There is no such thing as an absolute individual. What is the change
   that takes place when we are converted? Our change is really from one
   membership to another, from membership of the world to membership of
   the Church. When we become a member of the Church we are not really
   changed from individualism, but from membership of the world. It is
   membership either way. The greatest egoist and self-seeker is a member
   of the world. He could not indulge his egotism if it were not for the
   society in the midst of which he lives and into which he is
   articulated. He is a member of the world who exploits his membership
   instead of serving with it. When we are converted we are not converted
   from a sheer and absolute individual. There never was such a person.
   Certainly Robinson Crusoe was not. We are converted from membership of
   the world to membership of Christ. Before our conversion and after we
   belong. We are not absolute, solitary individuals. We are in a society,
   an organism. We are made by the past. And our selfish, godless actions
   and influence go out, radiate, affect the organism as they could not do
   were we absolute units. They spread far beyond our memory or control.
   In the same way we are acted upon by the other people. We are members
   one of another both for evil and for good. When you are told that evil
   is only selfishness it is worth while bearing this in mind. Even as
   selfish men, as egoists, we belong - only to a pagan order instead of
   to Christ. The selfish man is a member of a kingdom of evil. There is
   no such thing as an absolute individual. Hence, to save us, to
   reconcile us, involves the whole race we belong to. Before God that
   race is an organic unity. It is not a mere mass of atoms joined
   together by various arbitrary relations, sympathies, and affinities.
   Hence, as the race before God is one, a personal God is able to do for
   the race some one thing which at the same time is good for every person
   in it.
   But now, if the race is a unity, where does its unity lie? Does it lie
   in our elementary affections for each other, in the palpable
   relationships of natural life with our parents, brothers, lovers, and
   friends? Or is the unity of the race simply its capacity for being
   organized by skillful engineers? Is the unity of the race like the
   unity of machines? No. The unity of the race is a moral unity.
   Therefore it is a unity of conscience. If you want to find the trunk
   out of which all the loves and practices of humanity proceed, you must
   go to conscience at the center. That is where the unity of Humanity
   lies. It is in the conscience, where man is member of a vast moral
   world. It is the one changeless order of the moral world, emerging in
   conscience, that makes man universal. What have you to preach if you
   have no gospel that goes to the foundations of human conscience? What
   ground have you for a social religion? The most universal God is one
   that goes there, not to the heart in the sense of affections, but to
   the conscience. The great motive for missions of every high kind is not
   sentiment, but salvation. It is dangerous to take your theology from
   poets and literary people. You quote, "One touch of nature makes the
   whole world kin." Well, if you are going to build a religion on that,
   it will have a very short life. In the long run nature means anarchy
   when taken by and for itself. But it was never meant to be taken by
   itself. It was meant to go in an eternal context with super-nature. It
   is not the touch of nature that makes us kin enough for religion, for
   eternity, but the touch, and more than a touch, of the supernatural -
   not nature, but grace. What makes the world God's world is the action
   and unity of God's moral order of which our conscience speaks.
   Now, if that order be broken, how can it be healed? If I slit the
   canvas of this tent it can be patched. I make a fissure, but it is not
   irremediable. I simply get some one to stitch it up. At the worst I can
   have a new width put in. But if the moral order, and its universal
   solidarity, its holiness, is broken, how can that be healed? That
   cannot be patched up. It is not merely a rent in a tissue, a gap in a
   process, which the same process goes on to heal into a scar. The moral
   law differs from all natural law in having in it a demand, a claim, an
   "ought" of a universal kind. It is all of one piece. We use the word
   "law" in a loose kind of way. We apply the same word to gravitation and
   to the moral law of retribution. It is that ambiguity of terms which
   leads us astray. The moral law differs from every other law in having a
   demand, and a universal demand, a claim upon us for ever. And that has
   to be made good as well as the rents and bruises in us from our own
   collision with it. It is not a gap that has to be made good and sound.
   It is a claim, because we are here in a moral and not a natural world.
   It is one thing to make good a gap and another thing to make good a
   claim. The claim must be met. It will not do simply to draw the edges
   together by mere amendment, to have God here and man there, and
   gradually bring them together till they unite. It is two moral persons
   with moral passions we have to do with. It is moral relationship that
   is in question, communion, trustful mutuality, is the object of the
   divine requirement. It is a case of moral, holy reconcilement. It is
   the expression of God's holy personality whenever God makes His claim.
   It is Himself in holy, changeless personality that says, "Thou shalt."
   Then the claim can only be honored by personality of acknowledgment.
   But what does that mean? Some confession, some compunction - "I have
   sinned?" That is a poor acknowledgment of God's holiness. It was
   neither in word nor in feeling that we wounded that, but in life and
   deed. It must be acknowledged in like fashion - practically. The
   holiness of God is the sum of all His action and relation to the world;
   and the acknowledgment of it must be made in like action. Do we
   acknowledge the holiness of God's infinite law simply when its penalty
   wrings from poor us a confession of sin? We acknowledge natural law in
   spite of ourselves when we suffer its penalty amid our rebellion. But
   the acknowledgment of moral, of holy law is something different. It
   must be actively acknowledged - acknowledged not in spite of ourselves
   but by ourselves, with our whole heart; and it cannot be acknowledged
   simply by individual, or, indeed, any suffering. For divine judgment it
   must be acknowledged in kind and scale, and met by a like holiness.
   Mere suffering is no acknowledgment really; it is a pure sequel; it is
   not a confession of the moral law and its righteousness, only of its
   power. Mere suffering is no confession of the holiness of God. God,
   truly, might and does assert His power upon our defiance by making us
   suffer. But do you think any holiness, any loving holiness, could be
   satisfied with making the offender suffer? There is only one thing that
   can satisfy the holiness of God, and that is holiness - adequate
   holiness. To judge is to secure that at cost of any pain both to the
   judge and the culprit. But the pain is not the end. Nothing, no
   penalty, no passionate remorse, no verbal acknowledgment, no ritual,
   can satisfy the claim of holy law - nothing but holiness, actual
   holiness, and holiness upon the same scale as the one holy law which
   was broken. The confession must be adequate. Fix that word in your
   mind. All your repentance, and all the world's repentance, would not be
   adequate to satisfying, establishing the broken law of holy God.
   Confession must be adequate - as Christ's was. We do not now speak of
   Christ's sufferings as being the equivalent of what we deserved, but we
   speak of His confession of God's holiness, his acceptance of God's
   judgment, being adequate in a way that sin forbade any acknowledgment
   from us to be. For the only adequate confession of a holy God is
   perfectly holy man. Wounded holiness can only be met by a personal
   holiness upon the scale of the race, upon the universal scale of the
   sinful race, and upon the eternal scale of the holy God who was
   wounded. It is not enough that the eternal validity of the holy law
   should be declared as some prophet might arise and declare it, with
   power to make the world admire, as the great and sublime Kant did. It
   must take effect. Prophets have arisen who have produced tremendous
   effect by insisting upon the moral ultimacy in life and things. The
   greatest prophets of the last century, like George Eliot, Carlyle,
   Ruskin, and Maurice among ourselves had that as a chief note. But it is
   not enough that the eternal validity and inflexibility of eternal law
   should be powerfully, searchingly declared. It must take effect. Its
   breach must be closed up not merely by recognition, but by judgment. It
   is not enough that the whole human race should come confessing, "We
   have offended against Thy holy law." That would recognize the holy law
   and confess its place, but it would not give it its own, it would not
   bring to pass that which is essential to holiness, namely, judgment. It
   would not actually establish holiness in a kingdom, in command of
   history. You cannot separate the idea of holiness and its kingdom from
   the idea of judgment. In the Old Testament the final coming of the
   Great Salvation was always connected with a great judgment, which was
   therefore not a terror, as we view it, but the grandest hope. If the
   essence of God is that He should be holy, it is equally essential that
   He should judge. If He sets up actual holiness it must be by actual
   adjustment of everything to it. It is not enough that we should say,
   "Thou art our Judge, we submit and are willing to take the penalty. The
   wages of sin is death." All that is best and greatest in human life
   turns upon something more than that. There is a phrase which I never
   tire of quoting, and it is this: "The dignity of man is better assured
   if he were broken upon the maintenance of that holiness of God than if
   it were put aside just to give him an existence." The dignity, the very
   dignity of man himself is better assured if he were broken upon the
   maintenance of that holiness of God than if it were put aside
   arbitrarily, just to let him off with his life. This holy order is as
   essential to man's greatness as it is to God's; and that is why the
   holy satisfaction Christ made to God's holiness is in the same act the
   glorifier of the new humanity. Any religion which leaves out of supreme
   count the judging holiness of God is making a great contribution to the
   degradation of man. We need a religion which decides the eternal
   destiny of man; and unless holiness were practically and adequately
   established - not merely recognized and eulogized, but established -
   there could be no real, deep, permanent change in the world or the
   sinner. The change in the treatment of us by eternal grace must rest on
   judgment taking effect. Man is not forgiven simply be forgetting and
   mending, by agreeing that no more is to be said about it. To make
   little of sin is to belittle the holiness of God; and from a reduced
   holiness no salvation could come, nor could human dignity remain.
   Here, perhaps, you want to ask me what I mean exactly by saying that
   the judgment-death of Christ set up a real and actual kingdom of
   holiness. It is a point which it is easier for faith to realize than
   for theology to explain. But the answer would lie along this line: What
   Christ presented to God for His complete joy and satisfaction was a
   perfect racial obedience. It was not the perfect obedience of a saintly
   unit of the race. It was a racial holiness. God's holiness found itself
   again in the humbled holiness of Christ's "public person." He presented
   before God a race He created for holiness. Remember that the very
   nature of our faith in Christ is union with Him. The kingdom is set up
   by Christians being united with the work, the victory, the obedience,
   the holiness of the King. Christ, in His victorious death and risen
   life, has power to unite the race to Himself, and to work His complete
   holiness into its actual experience and history. He has power, by
   uniting us with Him in His Spirit, to reduce Time to acknowledge in act
   and fact His conclusive victory of Eternity. When you think of what He
   did for the race and its history, you must on no account do what the
   Church and its theology has too often done - you must no omit our
   living union with Him. It is not enough to believe that He gained a
   victory at a historic point. Christ is the condensation of history. You
   must go on to think of His summary reconciliation as being worked out
   to cover the whole of history and enter each soul by the Spirit. You
   must think of the Cross as setting up a new covenant and a new
   Humanity, in which Christ dwells as the new righteousness of God.
   "Christ for us" is only intelligible as "Christ in us" and we in Him.
   By uniting us to Himself and His resurrection in His Spirit He becomes
   the eternal guarantee of the historical consummation of all things some
   great day. I return to this later.
   Sometimes, when I have been talking about this claim of God's holiness,
   a critic has said: "You are treating the holiness of God as though it
   were a power outside God, tying His hands." Nothing of the kind. What
   is meant by the holiness of God is the holy God. We talk nonsense in a
   like way about the decrees of God. We say they stand for the wretched
   survival of an outworn Calvinism, as though they were things that God
   could handle. Do you think that mighty men such as the great Reformers
   were would have been led into saying the things they did about God if
   they thought the decrees were simply things God could handle, or things
   like a doom on God? The decrees of God were to them God decreeing. The
   holiness of God was God as holy. When that holiness is wounded or
   defied, could God be content to take us back with a mere censure or
   other penance and the declaration that He was holy? We could not
   respect a God like that. Servants despise indulgent masters. Sinners
   would despise a God who would take us back when we wept, and speak
   thus: "Let us say no more about it. You did very wrong, and you have
   suffered for it, and I; but let us forget it now you have come back,"
   We should not respect that. We should go on, as servants do in the case
   I have named, to take more liberties still. He would be a God who only
   talked His holiness and did not put it into force. Now, if our
   repentance were our atonement, and the Cross were simply an
   object-lesson to us of God's patient and tender mercy to penitence, He
   would be talking, I said, and not acting. He would mention the gravity
   of our sin very impressively, but that would not be establishing
   goodness actually in the history and experience of man. The sinner's
   reconciliation to a God of holy love could not take place if guilt were
   not destroyed, if judgment did not take place on due scale, if the
   wrath of God did not somehow take real effect. You say, perhaps, it did
   take effect in the unseen world of spirits. But the moral world is not
   a world of ghostly spirits. It is the unseen side of the world of
   history and of experience, it is its inner reality and center. The
   vindication, the judgment, must take place within human history and
   experience. It must take place in the terms of human history, by human
   action, in a place, at some point, on a due scale and with adequate
   depth. That was what took place in the Cross of Christ. The idea of
   judgment is not complete without the idea of a crisis, a day of
   judgment. Now the Cross of Christ was the world's great day of
   judgment, the crisis of all crises for history. The holy love of God
   yearning over souls could not deal with individual sinners, there was a
   cloud between God and the race, till the holiness was owned and
   perfectly praised by its racial confession, until holiness was
   confessed much more than sin, until on man's side there was not only
   confession of sin but confession of holiness from sin's side amid the
   experience of a judgment on the scale of the race, until the confessing
   race was thus put in right relation to God's holiness. Then judgment
   had done its perfect work. The race's sin was covered and atoned by it,
   i.e., by the God who bore it. Individuals could not be reconciled to a
   holy God until He thus reconciled the world. Not until sin had been
   brought to do its very worst, and had in that culminating act been
   foiled, judged, and overcome; not till then could individuals receive
   the reconciliation. That was the unitary reconciliation they must
   receive in detail. God there, in a racial holiness amid racial curse,
   sets up a racial salvation, which our souls enter upon by faith. It is
   by Himself in His changeless love and pity that it is set up. It is not
   the Son's suffering and death, but His holy obedience to both that is
   the satisfying thing to God, the holiness of God the Son. In a sense, a
   great solemn sense, it is an exercise of God's absolute
   self-satisfaction, exhibited after a long historic process, amidst the
   dissatisfaction of a world's ruin. "In His love and in His pity He
   redeemed them." He set up reconciliation by an act of judgment on His
   Son, cutting off His own right hand that we might enter into the
   Kingdom of heaven: "In His love and in His pity He redeemed them; and
   He bare them, and carried them all the days of old." The redemption was
   a thing that was coming through the whole of Israel's history, and in a
   remoter sense through the whole history of the world. The changeless
   holiness must assert itself in such judgment as surely as in the
   kingdom. You all believe that the holiness of God must assert itself in
   the Kingdom of God. But how can there be a final kingdom without final
   judgment? Is not all judgment in the name of the king, even in our
   human society? Are not king and judge inseparable, as inseparable as
   king and father? We say today that king and father are inseparable. But
   king and judge are equally inseparable, especially if you take the
   great Old Testament idea. Christ submitted with all His heart to God's
   holy final judgment on the race. He did not view it as an unfortunate
   incident in His life. He did not treat it as though it happened to drop
   upon Him. But He treated it as the grand will of God, as the
   effectuation in history of God's holiness, which holiness must have
   complete response and practical confession both on its negative side of
   judgment and its positive side of obedience. Christ's death was atoning
   not simply because it was sacrifice even unto death, but because it was
   sacrifice unto holy and radical judgment. There is something much more
   than being obedient unto death. Plenty of men can be obedient unto
   death; but the core of Christianity is Christ's being obedient unto
   judgment, and unto the final judgment of holiness. It is being obedient
   to a kind of death prescribed by God, indispensable to the holiness of
   God's love, necessitated in such a world by the last moral conditions,
   and not simply inflicted by the wickedness of men.
   Get rid of the idea that judgment is chiefly retribution, and directly
   infliction. Realize that it is, positively, the establishing and the
   securing of eternal righteousness and holiness. View punishment as an
   indirect and collateral necessity, like the surgical pains that make
   room for nature's curing power. You will then find nothing morally
   repulsive in the idea of judgment effected in and on Christ, any more
   than in the thought that the kingdom was set up in Him.
   To conclude, then, God could only justify man before Him by justifying
   Himself and His holy law before men. If He had not vindicated His
   holiness to the uttermost in that way of judgment, it would not be a
   kind of holiness that men could trust. Thus a faith which could justify
   man, which could make a foundation for a new humanity, could not exist.
   We can only be eternally justified by faith in a God who justifies
   Himself as so holy that He must set up His holiness in human history at
   any price, even at the price of His own beloved and eternal Son.
   I close, then, upon that unchangeable word of God's self-justifying
   holiness. Even the sinner could not trust a love that could not justify
   itself as holy. It is the holiness in God's love, I urge, that alone
   enables us to trust Him. Without that we should only love Him, and the
   love would fluctuate. For we could not be perfectly sure that His would
   not. It is the holiness in God's love that is the eternal, stable,
   unchangeable element in it - the holiness secured for history and its
   destine in the Cross. It is only the unchangeable that we could trust;
   and there alone we find it. If we only loved the love of God, we should
   have no stable, eternal, universal religion. But we love the holy love
   He established in Christ, and therefore we are safe with an everlasting
   salvation.
     __________________________________________________________________

V. The Cross The Great Confessional

   In the days of our fathers Christian belief was more solid within the
   Church than it is now; and the defending and expounding of
   Christianity, more especially the defending of it, had to concern
   itself with outsiders - outside the Church, and outside Christianity
   very often. Today our difficulties have changed; and a great part of
   our exposition must keep in view the fact that some of the most
   dangerous challenges of Christianity are found amongst those who claim
   the Christian name. There are those who have a very real reverence for
   the character of Jesus Christ, and they can speak, and do speak, quite
   sincerely, with great devotion and warmth and beauty, about Christ, and
   about many of the ideas that are associated with apostolic
   Christianity. All the same, they are strongly and sometimes even
   violently, antagonistic to that redemption which is the very center of
   the Christian faith; and they make denials and challenges which are
   bound to tell upon the existence of that faith before many generations
   are over. We do not take the true measure of the situation unless we
   realize that the thing which is at stake at this moment is something
   that will not affect the present generation, but is sure to affect two
   or three generations hence. Those who are concerned about Christianity
   on the largest scale today are concerned with what may be its position
   and its prospects then. The ideas at the center of the Christian faith
   are too large, too deep and subtle, to show their effects in one age;
   and the challenge of them does not show its effect in one generation or
   even in two. Individuals, society, and the Church, indeed, are able to
   go on, externally almost unaffected, by the way that they have upon
   them from the past; and it is only within the range of several
   generations that the destruction of truths with such a comprehensive
   range as those of Christianity takes effect. Therefore it is part of
   the duty of the Church, in certain sections and on certain occasions,
   to be less concerned about the effect of the Gospel upon the individual
   immediately, or on the present age, and to look ahead to what may be
   the result of certain changes in the future. God sets watchmen in Zion
   who have to keep their eye on the horizon; and it is only a drunken
   army that could scout their warning. We are not only bound to attend to
   the needs and interests of the present generation; we are trustees for
   a long future, as well as a long past. Therefore it is quite necessary
   that the Church should give very particular attention to these central
   and fundamental points whose influence, perhaps, is not so promptly
   prized, and whose destruction would not be so mightily felt at once,
   but would certainly become apparent in the days and decades ahead.
   That is why one feels bound to invite attention, and to press
   attention, upon points concerning which it may very easily be said,
   "These are matters that do not concern my faith and my piety; I can
   afford to let these things alone." Perhaps A, B, and C can, and X, Y,
   and Z can; but the Christian Church cannot afford to let these things
   alone. The Church carries the individual amid much failure of his
   faith; there is a vicarious faith; but what is to carry the Church if
   its faith fail? Remove concern from these things, and the effect of the
   collective message of the Church to the great world becomes undermined.
   Then the world must look somewhere else than to the Church for that
   which is to save it. That is some apology for dwelling upon points
   which many people would say were simply theological and were outside
   the interest of the individual Christian. Theology simply means
   thinking in centuries. Religion tells on the present, but theology
   tells on the religion of the future and the race.
   Moreover, there are always natures among Christian people who refuse,
   and properly refuse, to remain satisfied with superficial experiences
   or current views of their faith. They are bound by the spirit that
   moves within them - by the kind of temperament God has given them they
   are bound to penetrate to the heart, to the depths of things. Their
   work does not immediately pay; and while they grind in their mill the
   Philistines mock and the libertines jeer. But it would be a great
   misfortune if the whole of the work of the Church were measured by the
   standard which is so necessary in the world - the standard of what will
   immediately pay, or promptly tell. It is, of course, a great thing to
   go back upon the history of Christianity, and to point out to ourselves
   and to our people the great things that Christianity has done in the
   course of history. But you cannot rest Christianity upon that. You can
   only rest Christianity upon Christ Himself, and His living presence in
   the New Humanity. You can put the matter in this way. You can ask, On
   what did the Christianity rest of those who believed in the very first
   years of the Church's life? They had no results of Christianity before
   them. They had no history of the Church before them. They had not the
   glorious story of Christian philanthropy before them, nor the
   magnificent expansion of Christian doctrine, nor the enormous influence
   of the Christian Church and its effect upon the course of the world's
   history. On what did they rest their faith? That upon which they rested
   their faith must be that upon which we rest our faith when we come to a
   real crisis, and are driven into a real corner. It thus becomes
   necessary to go into the deep things of God as they are revealed to us
   by the Holy Spirit, through His inspired apostles, in Christ and His
   Cross.
   From what I have said you will be prepared to hear me state that
   reconciliation is effected by the representative sacrifice of Christ
   crucified; by Christ crucified as the representative of God on the one
   hand and of Humanity, or the Church, on the other hand. Also it was by
   Christ crucified in connection with the divine judgment. Judgment is a
   far greater idea than sacrifice. For you see great sacrifices made for
   silly or mischievous causes, sacrifices which show no insight whatever
   into the moral order or the divine sanctity. Now this sacrifice of
   Christ, when you connect it with the idea of judgment, must in some
   form or other be described as a penal sacrifice. Round that word penal
   there rages a great deal of controversy. And I am using the word with
   some reserve, because there are forms of interpreting it which do the
   idea injustice. The sacrifice of Christ was a penal sacrifice. In what
   sense is that so? We can begin by clearing the ground, by asking, In
   what sense is it not true that the sacrifice of Christ was penal? Well,
   it cannot be true in the sense that God punished Christ. That is an
   absolutely unthinkable thing. How could God punish Him in whom He was
   always well pleased? The two things are a contradiction in terms. And
   it cannot be true in the sense that Christ was in our stead in such a
   way as to exclude and exempt us. The sacrifice of Christ, then, was
   penal not in the sense of God so punishing Christ that there is left us
   only religious enjoyment, but in this sense. There is a penalty and
   curse for sin; and Christ consented to enter that region. Christ
   entered voluntarily into the pain and horror which is sin's penalty
   from God. Christ, by the deep intimacy of His sympathy with men,
   entered deeply into the blight and judgment which was entailed by man's
   sin and which must be entailed by man's sin if God is a holy and
   therefore a judging God. It is impossible for us to say that God was
   angry with Christ; but still Christ entered the wrath of God,
   understanding that phrase as I endeavoured to explain it yesterday. He
   entered the penumbra of judgment, and from it He confessed in free
   action, He praised and justified by act, before the world, and on the
   scale of all the world, the holiness of God. You can therefore say that
   although Christ was not punished by God, He bore God's penalty upon
   sin. That penalty was not lifted even when the Son of God passed
   through. Is there not a real distinction between the two statements? To
   say that Christ was punished by God who was always well pleased with
   Him is an outrageous thing. Calvin himself repudiates the idea. But we
   may say that Christ did, at the depth of that great act of
   self-identification with us when He became man, He did enter the sphere
   of sin's penalty and the horror of sin's curse, in order that, from the
   very midst and depth of it, His confession and praise of God's holiness
   might rise like a spring of fresh water at the bottom of the bitter
   sea, and sweeten all. He justified God in His judgment and wrath. He
   justified God in this thing.
   So the act of Christ had this twofold aspect. On the one hand it was
   God offering, and on the other hand it was man confessing. Now, what
   was it that Christ chiefly confessed? I hope you have read McLeod
   Campbell on the Atonement. Every minister ought to know that book, and
   know it well. But there is one criticism to be made upon the great,
   fine, holy book. And it is this. It speaks too much, perhaps, about
   Christ confessing human sin, about Christ becoming the Priest and
   Confessor before God of human sin and exposing it to God's judgment.
   The horror of the Cross expresses the repentance of the race before a
   holy God for its sin. But considerable difficulties arise in that
   connection, and critics were not slow to point them out. How could
   Christ in any real sense confess a sin, even a racial sin, with whose
   guilt He had nothing in common? Now that is rather a serious criticism
   if the confession of sin were the first charge upon either Christ or
   us, if the confession of human sin were the chief thing that God wanted
   or Christ did I think it is certainly a defect in that great book that
   it fixes our attention too much upon Christ's vicarious confession of
   human sin. The same criticism applies to another very fine book, that
   by the late Canon Moberly, or Christ Church, "Atonement and
   Personality." I once had the privilege of meeting Canon Moberly in
   discussion on this subject, and ventured to point out that defect in
   his theory, and I was relieved to find that on the occasion the same
   criticism was also made by Bishop Gore. But we get out of the
   difficulty, in part at least, if we recognize that the great work of
   Christ, while certainly it did confess human sin, was yet not to
   confess that, but to confess something greater, namely God's holiness
   in His judgment upon sin. His confession, indeed, was not in so many
   words, but in a far more mighty way, by act and deed of life and death.
   The great confession is not by word of mouth - it is by the life, in
   the sense, not of mere conduct, but in the great personal sense in
   which life contains conduct and transcends death. Christ confessed not
   merely human sin - which in a certain sense, indeed, He could not do -
   but He confessed God's holiness in reacting mortally against human sin,
   in cursing human sin, in judging it to its very death. He stood in the
   midst of human sin full of love to man, such love as enabled Him to
   identify Himself in the most profound, sympathetic way with the evil
   race; fuller still of love to the God whose name He was hallowing; and,
   as with one mouth, as if the whole race confessed through Him, as with
   one soul, as though the whole race at last did justice to God through
   His soul, He lifted up His face unto God and said, "Thou art holy in
   all Thy judgments, even in this judgment which turns not aside even
   from Me, but strikes the sinful spot if even I stand on it." The
   dereliction upon the Cross, the sense of love's desertion by love, was
   Christ's practical confession of the holy God's repulsion of sin. He
   accepted the divine situation - the situation of the race before God.
   By God's will He did so. By His own free consent He did so. Remember
   the distinction between God's changeless love and God's varying
   treatment of the soul. God made Him sin, treated Him as if He were sin;
   He did not view Him as sinful. That is quite another matter. God made
   Him to be sin - it does not say He made Him sinful. God lovingly
   treated Him as human sin, and with His consent judged human sin in Him
   and on Him. Personal guilt Christ could never confess. There is that in
   guilt which can only be confessed by the guilty. "I did it." That kind
   of confession Christ could never make. That is the part of the
   confession that we make, and we cannot make it effectually until we are
   in union with Christ and His great lone work of perfectly and
   practically confessing the holiness of God. There is a racial
   confession that can only be made by the holy; and there is a personal
   confession that can only be made by the guilty. That latter, I say, is
   a confession Christ could never make. In that respect Christ did not
   die, and did not suffer, did not confess, in our stead. We alone, the
   guilty, can make that confession; but we cannot make it with Christian
   effect without the Cross and the confession there. We say then not only
   "I did this," but "I am guilty before the holiness confessed in the
   Cross." The grand sin is not to sin against the law but against the
   Cross. The sin of sins is not transgression, but unfaith.
   So also of holiness, there is a confession of holiness which can only
   be made by God, the Holy. If God's holiness was to be fully confessed,
   in act and deed, in life, and death, and love transcending both, it can
   only be done by Godhead itself.
   Therefore we press the words to their fullness of meaning: "God was in
   Christ reconciling," not reconciling through Christ, but actually
   present as Christ reconciling, doing in Christ His own work of
   reconciliation. It was done by Godhead itself, and not by the Son
   alone. The old theologians were right when they insisted that the work
   of redemption was the work of the whole Trinity - Father, Son, and Holy
   Spirit; as we express it when we baptize into the new life of
   reconcilement in the threefold name. The holiness of God was confessed
   in man by Christ, and this holy confession of Christ's is the source of
   the truest confession of our sin that we can make. Our saving
   confession is not merely "I did so and so," but "I did it against a
   holy, saving God." "I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight,"
   sinned before infinite holiness and forgiving grace. God could not
   forgive until man confessed, and confessed not only his own sin but
   confessed still more - God's holiness in the judgment of sin. The
   confession also had to be made in life and action, as the sin was done.
   That is to say, it had to be made religiously and not theologically, by
   an experience and not an utterance. A verbal confession, however
   sincere, could not fully own an actual sin. If we sin by deed we must
   so confess. It is made thus religiously, spiritually, experimentally,
   practically by Jesus Christ's life, its crown of death, and His life
   eternal. The more sinful man is, the less can he thus confess either
   his own sin or God's holiness. Therefore God did it in man by a love
   which was as great as it was holy, by an infinite love. That is to say,
   by a love which was as closely and sympathetically identified with man
   as it was identified with the power of the holy God.
   So we have arrived at this. The great confession was made not alone in
   the precise hour of Christ's death, although it was consummated there.
   It had to be made in life and act, and not in a mere feeling or
   statement; and for this purpose death must be organically one with the
   whole life. You cannot sever the death of Christ from the life of
   Christ. When you think of the self-emptying which brought Christ to
   earth, His whole life here was a living death. The death of Christ must
   be organic with His whole personal life and action. And that means not
   only His earthly life previous to the Cross, but His whole celestial
   life from the beginning, and to this hour, and to all eternity. The
   death of Christ is the central point of eternity as well as of human
   history. His own eternal life revolves on it. And we shall never be so
   good and holy at any point, even in eternity, that we shall not look
   into the Cross of Christ as the center of all our hope in earth or
   heaven. It is Christ that works out His own redemption and
   reconciliation, from God's right hand, throughout the course of
   history. I would gather that up in one phrase. Christ is the perpetual
   providence of His own salvation. Christ, acting through His Spirit, is
   the eternal providence of His own salvation. The apostles never
   separated reconciliation in any age from the Cross and blood of Jesus
   Christ. If ever we do that (and many are doing it today) we throw the
   New Testament overboard. The bane of so much that claims to be more
   spiritual religion at the present day is that it simply jettisons the
   New Testament, and with it historic Christianity. The extreme critics,
   people that live upon monism and immanence, rationalist religion and
   spiritual impressionism, are people who are deliberately throwing
   overboard the New Testament as a whole, deeply as they prize it in
   parts. They say that the apostolic views and interpretations of
   Christ's work may have been all very well for people who knew no better
   than men did at so early a period, but we are now a long way beyond
   that, and we must re-edit the New Testament theology, especially as to
   Christ's death. I keep urging, whatever we do let us do it frankly, let
   us do it with our eyes open and with eyes competent to take the measure
   of what we are doing. The trying thing is that tremendous renunciations
   should be blandly made, without, apparently, any sense of their
   appalling dimensions, and of the huge thing that is being so ignorantly
   done. (See note at the end of this lecture.)
   The apostles, I say, never separated reconciliation from the Cross and
   the blood of Jesus Christ. The historic Church has never done so, with
   all its divisions. And what the Cross meant for the apostles as Jews,
   with their history and education, was something like this. If you go
   back to the Old Testament, you find that the whole kingdom of God and
   destiny of man turns on the treatment of sin. And either the sin was
   atoned or the sinner was punished. But there were some sins that never
   could be atoned for, what are described as sins with a high hand,
   presumptuous sins, deliberate, defiant sins, as distinct from sins of
   ignorance or weakness, when a man so identified himself with his sin
   that he became inseparable from it. The man guilty of them was put
   outside the camp, his communication was cut with the saved community of
   Israel. He was committed to the outer darkness. There remained only
   punishment and death. The punishment was expulsion from the covenant,
   and so from life. And as there is little about immortality in the Old
   Testament, it was death for good and all. But in the Cross of Christ
   there is no sin excluded from atonement. I know of course what you are
   thinking about - the sin against the Holy Ghost. That is far too large
   a subject to enter on. I can only say that I am not keeping it out of
   my survey. And I repeat, there is no sin excluded from atonement. Death
   as punishment of sin was absorbed in Christ's sacrifice. Such was its
   atoning work that the judgment due to all mankind was absorbed, and the
   sin of sins now was fixed refusal of that Grace. The Cross bought up
   all other debts, so to say.
   To return to my old point. The objection to speaking of Christ's death
   as penalty is two-fold. God could not punish One with whom He was
   always well pleased. Consequently Christ could not suffer punishment in
   the true sense of the word without having a guilty conscience. If the
   bearing of punishment were the whole of Christ's work, there was
   something in that way which He did not and could not do - He could not
   bear the penalty of remorse. But the whole of His work, was not the
   bearing of punishment; it was not the acceptance of suffering. It was
   the recognition and justification of it, the "homologation" of God's
   judgment and God's holiness in it.
   The death and suffering of Christ was something very much more than
   suffering - it was atoning action. At various stages in the history of
   the Church - not the Roman Catholic Church only but Protestantism also
   - exaggerated stress has been laid upon the sufferings of Christ. But
   it is not a case of what He suffered but what He did. Christ's
   suffering was so divine a thing because He freely transmitted it into a
   great act. It was suffering accepted and transfigured by holy obedience
   under the conditions of curse and blight which sin and brought upon man
   according to the holiness of God. The suffering was a sacrifice to
   God's holiness. In so far it was penalty. But the atoning thing was not
   its amount or acuteness, but its obedience, its sanctity.
   There are pathetic ways of thinking about Christ regard Him too much as
   a mere individual before God. They do not satisfy if Christ's relation
   with man was a racial one and He represented Humanity. Especially they
   do not hold good if that relationship was no mere blood relationship,
   natural relationship, but a supernatural relationship - blood
   relationship only in the mystic Christian sense. We are blood relations
   of Christ, but not in the natural sense of that term, only in the
   supernatural sense, as those who are related to Him in His blood, in
   His death, and in His Spirit. The value of Christ's unity and sympathy
   with us was not simply that He was continuous with the race at its
   head. It was not a relation of identity. The race was not prolonged
   into Him. The value consists in that life-act of self-identification by
   which Christ the eternal Son of God became man. We hear much about
   Christ's essential identity with the human race. That is not true in
   the sense in which other great men, like Shakespeare, for instance,
   were identical with the human race, gathering up in consummation its
   natural genius. Christ's identity was not natural or created identity,
   but the self-identification of the Creator. Everything turns upon this
   - whether Christ was a created being, however grand, or whether He was
   of increate Godhead.
   As Head of the human race by this voluntary self-identification with
   it, Christ took the curse and judgment, which did not belong to Himself
   as sinless. And what He owned was not so much the depth of our misery
   as the depth of our guilt; and He did it sympathetically, by the moral
   sympathy possible only to the holy. Nor did He simply take the full
   measure of our guilt. His owning it means very much more than that His
   moral perceptions were so deep and piercing that He could measure our
   guilt as a bystander of acute moral penetration could. He carried it in
   His own moral experience as only divine sympathy could. And in dumb
   action He spread it out as it is before God. He felt sin and its horror
   as only the holy could as God did. We learn in our measure to do that
   when we escape from the indifference of our egotism and come under His
   Cross and near His heart; we learn to do as Christ did as we enter into
   living union with Christ. And we then rise above purity - for purity is
   only shamed by sin - we rise to holiness, which is burdened with sin
   and all its load. How much more than pure Christ was! How much fuller
   of meaning is such a word as "holy" or "holiness" than either "pure" or
   "purity". Purity is shamed by human sin. Holiness carries it as a load,
   and carries it to its destruction. In the great desertion Christ could
   not feel Himself a sinner whom God rejects. For the sinner cannot carry
   sin; he collapses under it. Christ felt Himself treated as the sin
   which God Recognizes and repels by His very holiness. It covered and
   hid Him from God. He was made sin (not sinful, as I say). The holiness
   of God becomes our salvation not by slackness of demand but by
   completeness of judgment; not because He relaxes His demand, not
   because He spends less condemnation on sin, lets us off or lets sin
   off, or lets Christ off ("spared not"); but because in Christ judgment
   becomes finished and final, because none but a holy Christ could spread
   sin out in all its sinfulness for thorough judgment. I have a way of
   putting it which startles some of my friends. The last judgment is
   past. It took place on Christ's Cross. What we talk about as the last
   judgment is simply the working out of Christ's Cross in detail. The
   final judgment, the absolute judgment, the crucial judgment for the
   race took place in principle on the Cross of Christ. Sin has been
   judged finally there. All judgment is given to the Son in virtue of His
   Cross. All other debts are bought up there.
   It is not simply that in the Cross of Christ all punishment was shown
   to be corrective. A favorite theme on the part of many of those who
   challenge the apostolic position about the death of Christ is that it
   was only the crowning exposition of the great principle that all
   punishment is really corrective and education. We cannot say that.
   There is plenty of punishment that hardens and hardens. That is why we
   are obliged to leave such questions as universal restoration unsolved.
   Even when we recognize the absolute power of God's salvation, we also
   recognize that it is in the power of the human soul to harden itself
   until it become shrunk into such a tough and irreducible mass as it
   seems the very grace of God could do nothing with. Certainly there are
   people here, in this life, who become so tough in their sin that the
   grace of God is in vain. And I am not sure that among those who are
   toughest are not some who are much comforted by their religion. You can
   do something with a hardened sinner. He can be broken to pieces. But I
   do not know what you can do with a viscous saint, with those who are
   wrapped in the wool, soaked in the comfort of their religion, and
   tanned to leather, soft and tough as a glove, by its bitterest
   baptisms. I once used an expression of these people which was somewhat
   criticized. I called them "moral tabbies." Is there anything more
   comfortable, and selfish, and hopeless than a really accomplished
   tabby? When religion becomes perverted to be a means of mere comfort
   and dense self-satisfaction, it becomes an integument so tough that
   even the grace of God cannot get through it, or a substance so flaccid
   that it cannot be handled.
   I find it convenient, you observe, to distinguish between punishment
   and penalty. A man who loses his life in the fire-damp, where he is
   looking for the victims of an accident, pays the penalty of sacrifice,
   but he does not receive its punishment. And I think it useful to speak
   of Christ as taking the penalty of sin, while I refuse to speak of His
   taking its punishment. I would avoid every word that would suggest that
   He was punished in connection with His salvation. It robs the whole act
   of ethical value to say so. Penalty is made to honor God in the Cross
   of Christ, and thus it becomes a blessing to us. Not that our
   punishment is turned to good account in its subjective results upon us,
   but that Christ's judgment has objective value to the honor of God's
   holiness. He turned the penalty He endured into sacrifice He offered.
   And the sacrifice He offered was the judgment He accepted. His passive
   suffering became active obedience, and obedience to a holy doom. He did
   not steel His face to the suffering He had to endure, as though it were
   a fate to which He had to set His teeth and go through it in a stoic
   way. He never regarded it as a mere infliction. For Him, whoever
   inflicted it, it was the holiest thing in all the world - it was the
   will and judgment of God. All the Old Testament told Him that the
   Kingdom of God could never come without the prior judgment of God; and
   He was prepared to force that judgment in His impatience for the
   Kingdom. [1] He answered the judgment of God with a grand affirmative
   act. The willing acceptance of final judgment was for Jesus the means
   presented by God for effecting human reconciliation and the Divine
   Kingdom. The essence of all sacrifice, which is self-surrender to God,
   was lifted out of the Old Testament garb of symbolism, and was made a
   moral reality in Christ's holy obedience. In the Old Testament we have
   the lamb and the various other things brought for offering; but where
   did their essential value lie? In the obedience of the offerer; in the
   fact that those institutions were given and prescribed by holy God,
   however their details were due to man. And the presentation of the
   victim was valuable, not because of anything in the victim, but because
   of the obedience and surrender of the will with which the offerer
   presented it. This is the bearing of sin - the holy bearing of its
   judgment. This is the taking of sin away - the acknowledgment of
   judgment as holy, wise, and good, and its conversion into blessing; the
   absorption and conversion of judgment into confession and praise, the
   removal of that guilt which stood between God and man's reconciliation
   - the robbing sin of its power to prevent communion with God.
   I should, therefore, express the difference between the old view and
   the new by saying that one emphasizes substitutionary expiation and the
   other emphasizes solidary reparation, consisting of due acknowledgment
   of God's holiness, and the honoring of that and not of His honor.
   Now let me pass as I close today to two or three points I want
   specially to emphasize.
   There is one quotation which I wanted to make at a particular point and
   did not. The Reformers are still on the whole, the maters of the great
   verities of experience in connection with the work of Christ. They had
   an amazing insight into the morbid psychology of the conscience. They
   did understand what sin meant, and they said this - the sinner,
   beginning with indifference, must keep flying from God until he
   actually hate God as a persecutor, unless he grasp the pursuit as God's
   mercy. Indifference could not stop at indifference, but goes on through
   aversion to hate. Even if a man die indifferent in this life, he comes
   into circumstances where he ceases to be indifferent. If we believe
   about a future at all, it will be impossible for an indifferent man to
   remain indifferent when he has passed on there. Indifference is an
   unstable position. It changes either upward or downward - downward into
   antagonism, into deadly hate against God, something Satanic; or upwards
   it passes into acceptance of God's mercy by faith, and all its blossom
   and fruit, its joy and peace in the Holy Ghost. The Reformers were
   perfectly right. It is only our dull experience and preoccupied vision
   which prevent us seeing that it is so.
   Then I should like to call attention to this value in such a cross. It
   is only the judgment sacrifice of the Son of God that assures the
   sinner of the deep changelessness of grace. Forgiving is not
   forgetting. Popular theology too often tends to pacify us by reducing
   the offense. But the Reformers put the matter quite otherwise in saying
   that a justifying faith only goes with a full sense of guilt. You
   cannot get a full, justifying faith without a full sense and confession
   of guilt. We always have mistrust in the background of our own
   self-extenuations. When conscience begins to work and you begin to
   extenuate, when you try your hand earnestly at justifying yourself to
   yourself, you have some idea of how much more vast must be God's
   justification of you before Himself. You cannot cease to ask what
   charge conscience has against you. Then you magnify that to God's
   charge. If your heart condemn you, His condemnation is greater than
   that of your condemning heart. Do you consider His conscience? His
   conscience has to be pacified as well as His heart indulged. And if His
   conscience be not met, ours is not sure. Has His conscience been met?
   Conscience has always mistrust in the background if grace is mere
   remission. Mere remission of sin does not satisfy even us. If
   conscience witnesses, against our extenuations, to the holy majesty of
   moral claim, is it to be less severe and less changeless than the claim
   of God Himself? Conscience has in trust God's law and its majesty,
   which must be made good, as mere remission does not make it. Suppose I
   transgress and I hear the message of grace, does it tell me the
   accusing, irrepressible demand of conscience, the haunting fear of
   judgment, was an illusion? It is doing me very ill service if it does.
   True, there is now no condemnation for faith; but if the message of
   grace ever teaches us that the judgment of conscience is exaggeration,
   is illusion, it is not the true grace of God. If a message of grace
   tell us there was and is no judgment any more, and that God has simply
   put judgment on one side and has not exercised it, that cannot be the
   true grace of God. Surely the grace of God cannot stultify our human
   conscience like that! So we are haunted by mistrust, unless conscience
   be drowned in a haze of heart. We have always the feeling and fear that
   there is judgment to follow. How may I be sure that I may take the
   grace of God seriously and finally, how be sure that I have complete
   salvation, that I may entirely trust it through the worst my conscience
   may say? Only thus, that God is the Reconciler, that He reconciles in
   Christ's Cross that the judgment of sin was there for good and all. We
   are judged now by the Cross, and by the Cross we stand or fall. The
   great sin is not something we do, but it is refusing to make ourselves
   right with God in Christ's Cross. We are judged in the end by our
   relation to the Cross of Christ. It is the principle of our moral
   world. All judgment is committed to that Son. We stand before God at
   last according as we are owned by Christ. We are confessed by Him
   according to our confession of Him. Nemesis on us is hallowed as a part
   of the judgment on Him to whose death we are joined. There is no such
   thorough assertion of God's holy, loving law anywhere as there, where
   in the Cross it was given its own, and was perfected in judgment in Him
   who became a curse for us. His prayer for His murderers, or the closing
   sigh of victory in the midst of that judgment, vouches for ever to
   this, that it is the same holy will which judges man's wickedness and
   also loves us and gives His Son for a propitiation for us. Only that
   holiness which is changeless in its judgment could be changeless also
   in grace. His grace was so little to be foiled that He graciously took
   His own judgment. Thus the severity of conscience becomes the certainty
   of salvation.
   But changeless in judgment! Does that mean exacting the uttermost
   farthing of penalty, of suffering? Does it mean that in the hour of His
   death Christ suffered, compressed into one brief moment, all the pains
   of hell which the human race deserved. We cannot think about things in
   that way. God does not work by such equivalents. What is required is
   not an equivalent penalty, but an adequate confession of His holiness.
   Let us get rid of that materialist idea of equivalents. What Christ
   gave to God was not an equivalent penalty, but an adequate confession
   of God's holiness, rising from amid extreme conditions of sin. God's
   holiness, then, was so little to be mocked, that He actually took His
   own judgment to save it. He spared not His own Son - His own self. His
   severity of conscience becomes at the same moment our security of
   salvation. And the more conscience preaches the changelessness of the
   judging God, the more it preaches the same changelessness in the grace
   of Christ.
   There is another consequence. Only the eternal Reconciler, the High
   Priest, can guarantee us our full redemption. "Take, my soul, thy full
   salvation." You cannot do it except you do it in such a Cross. It is
   not enough to have in the Cross a great demonstration of God's love, a
   forgiveness of the past which leaves us to fend for ourselves in the
   future Is my moral power so great after all, then, that, supposing I
   believe past things were settled in Christ's Cross, I may now feel I
   can run in my own strength? Can I be perfectly confident about meeting
   temptation? Nay, we must depend daily upon the continued energy of the
   crucified and risen One. We must depend daily upon the action of that
   same Christ whose action culminated there but did not end there. His
   death is as organic with His heavenly life as it was with His earthly.
   What is the meaning of His perpetual intercession if it does not mean
   that - the exhausted energy of His saving act? It is by His work from
   heaven that we appropriate His work upon earth. He guarantees our
   perfection as well as our redemption.
   The last step. It is only the atoning reconciliation of a whole world
   that guarantees the final perfecting of that world by its Creator. How
   do we know that creation is going to be perfected? How do we know that
   it is to be to the glory of God who made it and called it good? How do
   we know the world will not be a failure for God with all but the group
   of people saved in an ark of some kind? We only know because we believe
   in the reconciliation of the whole world in Christ's Cross. There is a
   great deal of pessimism today, much doubt as to whether perfection
   really remains for the whole world; and you find people in the burdened
   West drawn to the Buddhistic idea of the human soul's extinction. Some
   Christians content themselves with individual salvation out of a world
   which is left in the lurch, or they are satisfied with personal union
   with Christ securing their own future. But the gospel deals with the
   world of men as a whole. It argues the restoration of all things, a new
   heaven and a new earth. It intends the regeneration of human society as
   a whole. Christ is the Savior of the world, who was also the agent of
   its creation. The Creator has not let His world get out of hand for
   good and all. That is to say, our faith is social and communal in its
   nature. We must have a social gospel. And this you cannot get upon the
   basis of mere individual or sectional salvation. You can only have a
   social gospel upon one basis, namely, that Christ saved, reconciled the
   whole world as a unity, the whole of society and history. The Object of
   our faith, Jesus Christ, is what our fathers used to call a federal
   Person, a federal Savior, in a federal act. All humanity is in Him and
   in His act. It is quite true every man must believe for himself, but no
   man can believe by himself or unto himself. The Christian faith fades
   away if it is not nourished and built up in a community, in a Church.
   And the Church fades away if it do not hold this faith in trust for the
   whole world. Each one of us is saved only by the act and by the Person
   that saved the whole world.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] See Schweitzer's very remarkable "Quest of the Historical Jesus"
   (A. and C. Black) - the last two chapters - where a dogmatic and
   atoning motive in Jesus is declared by an advanced critic to have been
   the explanation of His death.
     __________________________________________________________________

VI. The Precise Problem Today [2]

   There is a popular impression about both philosophy and theology that
   the history of their problems is very sterile; that it is not a long
   development, carrying the discussion on with growing insight from age
   to age, and passing from thinker to thinker with growing depth, but
   rather a scene in which each newcomer demolishes the work of his
   predecessor in order to put in its place some theory doomed in turn to
   the same fruitless fate. Truly, as Hegel says, if that were so with
   philosophy, its history would become one of the saddest and sorriest
   things, and it would have no right to go on. And if it were so with
   theology, we should not only be distressed for Humanity, but we should
   be skeptical about the Holy Spirit in the Church. It could be the
   Church of no Holy Spirit if those who translated its life into thought
   did not offer to posterity a spectacle higher than dragons that tare
   each other in the slime, or lions that bit and devoured one another.
   As a matter of truth and fact, both philosophy and theology have not
   only a chronicle but a history. They register the highest spiritual
   evolution of the race. The wave behind rolls on the wave before. The
   past is not devoured but lives on, and comes to itself in the future.
   The new arrivals do not consume their predecessors, and do not ignore
   them; they interpret them and carry them forwards. They take their
   fertile place in the great organic movement. They modulate what is
   behind upwards into what is to come. They correct the past and enrich
   it; and they hand on their corrected past to be a foundation for the
   workers yet to be.
   The amateur, or the self-taught, therefore is at a great disadvantage.
   He does not take up the problem where the scientific succession laid it
   down. He does not come in where his great co-workers left off. He must
   start ab ovo. He must do over again for himself what they have
   conspired to do better. He risks "being a fool at first hand." He wants
   himself criticizing what has long been dropped, and slaying the
   long-time slain. He throws away effort in establishing what the
   competent have agreed to accept. And he misses the right points to
   attack or to strengthen, because he has not surveyed the ground. Every
   now and then one meets the capable amateur, whose misfortune it has
   been to have no schooling in the scientific history or method of the
   subject, who applied to it a shrewd mother-wit or an earnest but
   uninstructed conscience, and who perhaps publishes a theory of
   Incarnation or Atonement which, for all its hints and glimpses of
   truth, makes no real contribution either to the history or the merits
   of the case. This is the misfortune of the self-taught who goes
   straight to his Bible for the materials of his theology, and ignores
   most of the treatment the problem has received from the greatest minds
   in the history of the Church or the soul. The Bible is enough for our
   saving faith, but it is not enough for our scientific theology.
   To make the most therefore of godly and able men, who would else be
   wasted more or less, it is well that we should teach them at the outset
   to take up the question where they find it, to begin where their best
   predecessors left off, to work upon results, and to carry forward the
   subject in the train of its evolution from the great and growing past.
   Let us couple up with the past, and repay its gifts by fructifying them
   for the future. Let us call in our thought, and concentrate it upon the
   precise question which previous thinkers have left us to solve.
   There is, thus, another thing we have to do. We have to try to find a
   due place for those views which, however one-sided, yet do compel
   attention to aspects that the Church from time to time ignores. We have
   to meet, satisfy, and exceed such views. Much, for instance, has been
   done in the lifetime of most of us to correct and extend those views of
   Christ's work which were so rigidly objective that they became
   external. It has been urged that the Church long thought too much of
   Christ's action on God and not enough of His action on man. And what is
   called the moral theory of the Atonement has therefore been pressed
   upon us, to replace the ultra-objective and satisfactionary view. And
   the pressure has often been so hard that an objective theory has been
   entirely denied as immoral, and denied sometimes with a scorn
   unjustified by either the mental acumen or moral dignity of the critic.
   But in spite of this over-pressure, and the occasional insolence that
   goes with ignorance, it remains our duty to find a proper place in our
   view of the whole great subject for that effect of Christ upon men
   which has meant so much of the sanctity of the Church. We have to meet,
   satisfy, and transcend those pleas which have been called into
   existence to redress the balance of theological neglect, and to fill
   out that which was behind in our grasp of the manifold work. Especially
   we have to adjust our theology of Christ's work to those who observe
   that the repentance of the guilty is an essential condition of
   forgiveness, and who go on to ask how we can speak of a finished
   reconciliation or atonement by a sinless Christ, who could not possibly
   present before God a repentance of that kind.
   There are certain results which, it may be said, we have definitely
   reached in correction of what has long been known as the popular view
   of Christ's death and work. They are modern, and they owe much to
   Schleiermacher, Ritschl, McLeod Campbell, Maurice and others; but they
   have also been shown to be scriptural, by a new, objective and
   scientific investigation of what the Bible has to say on the subject.
   When we have brought the long history of the question up to date,
   balanced the books, and taken account of the general agreement on the
   modern side, we can then go on to ask where exactly the question now
   stands.
   The modifications on which the best authorities are substantially at
   one we have seen to be such as these: -
   1. Reconciliation is not the result of a change in God from wrath to
   love. It flows from the changeless will of a loving God. No other view
   could make the reconciliation sure. If God changed to it, He might
   change from it. And the sheet-anchor of the soul for Eternity would
   then have gone by the board. Forgiveness arose at no point in time.
   Grace was there before even creation. It abounded before sin did. The
   holiness which makes sin sin, is one with the necessity to destroy sin
   in gracious love.
   2. Reconciliation rests on Christ's person, and it is effected by His
   entire work, doing, and suffering. This work does three things. (1) It
   reveals and puts into historic action the changeless grace of God. (2)
   It reveals and establishes His holiness, and therein also the
   sinfulness of sin. And (3) it exhibits a Humanity in perfect tune with
   that will of God. And it does more than exhibit these things - it sets
   them up, grace, holiness, and the new Humanity in its Head.
   3. This reconciling and redeeming work of Christ culminates in His
   suffering unto death, which is indeed more of an act than an
   experience. Here, in the Cross, is the summit of His revelation of
   grace, of sin, and of Humanity. And the central feature of this
   threefold revelation in the Cross is the holiness of God's love. It is
   this holiness that deepens error into sin, sin into guilt, and guilt
   into repentance; without which any sense of forgiveness would be but an
   anodyne and not a grace, a self-flattering unction to the soul and not
   the peace of God.
   4. In this relation to God's holiness and its satisfaction, nobody now
   thinks of the transfer of our punishment to Christ in its entirety -
   including the worst pains of hell in a sense of guilt. Christ
   experienced the world's hate, and the curse of the Law in the sense of
   the suffering entailed on man by sin; but a direct infliction of men's
   total deserts upon Him by God is unthinkable. His penalty was not
   punishment, because it was dissociated from the sense of desert.
   Whatever we mean by atonement must be interpreted in that sense. And
   judgment is a much better word than either penalty or punishment.
   5. What we have in Christ's work is not the mere pre-requisite or
   condition of reconciliation, but the actual and final effecting of it
   in principle. He was not making it possible, He was doing it. We are
   spiritually in a reconciled world, we are not merely in a world in
   process of empirical reconciliation. Our experience of religion is
   experience of a thing done once for all, for ever, and for the world.
   That is, it is more than even experience, it is a faith. The same act
   as put God's forgiveness on a moral foundation also revolutionized
   Humanity. Hence we are not disposed to speak of substitution [3] so
   much as of representation. But it is representation by One who creates
   by His act the Humanity He represents, and does not merely sponsor it.
   The same act as disburdens us of guilt commits us to a new life. Our
   Savior in His salvation is not only our comfort but our power; not
   merely our rescuer but our new life. His work is in the same act
   reclamation as well as rescue.
   6. Another thing may perhaps be taken as recognized in some form by the
   main line of judicious advance in our subject. The work of Christ was
   moral and not official. It was the energy and victory of His own moral
   personality, and not simply the filling of a position, the discharge of
   an office He held. His victory was not due to His rank, but to His will
   and conscience. It lay in His faithfulness to the uttermost amid
   temptations morally real and psychologically relevant to what He was.
   It was a work that drew on His whole personality, and was built into
   the nature of that personality as a moral necessity of it. What He did
   He did not do simply in the room and stead of others, He did it as a
   necessity of His own person also - though its effect for them was not
   what it was for Him. He fulfilled an obligation under which His own
   personality lay; He did not simply pay the debts of other people. He
   fulfilled a personal vocation.
   And His faithfulness was not only to a vocation. It was to a special
   vocation, that of a Redeemer, not merely a saint. The immediate source
   of His suffering was not the sight of human sin, and it was not a
   general holiness in Him. It was not the quivering of the saint's purity
   at the touch of evil. But it was the suffering of One who touched sin
   as the Redeemer. He would not have suffered for sin as He did, had He
   not faced it as its destroyer. Not only was this His vocation as a
   moral hero, but His special vocation as Savior. It was the work of a
   moral personality at the heart of the race, of One who concentrated on
   a special yet universal task - that of Redemption.
   His perfection was not that of a paragon, one who could do better what
   every soul and genius of the race could do well. He was not all the
   powers and excellencies of mankind rolled into one superman. But His
   perfection was that of the race's Redeemer. It was interior to all
   other powers and achievements. It was central both for God and man. He
   made man's center and God's coincide. He took mankind at its enter and
   laid it on the center of God. His identification with man was not
   extensive but intensive, it was not discursive and parallel, so to say.
   It was morally central and creative. He was not Humanity on its divine
   side; He was its new life from the inside. The problem He had to solve
   was the supreme and central moral problem of guilt; and the work could
   only be done by the native action of a personality moral in its nature
   and methods, moral to the pitch of the Holy.
   It is an immense gain thus to construe Christ's work as that of a moral
   personality instead of a heavenly functionary. It brings it into line
   with the modern mind and into organic union with the moral problem of
   the race. It enables us to realize that every step of the moral victory
   in His life was a step also in the Redemption of the whole human
   conscience. And we grasp with new power the idea that His crowning
   victory of the Cross was the victory in principle of the whole race in
   Him - that Justification is really one with Reconciliation, and what He
   did before God contained all He was to do on man. It makes possible for
   us what my last lecture will attempt to indicate - a unitary view of
   His whole work and person.
   7. After these great modifications and gains, we have cleared the
   ground to ask with some exactness just where the question at the moment
   stands. What was the divinest thing, the atoning, satisfying thing, the
   thing offered to God, in Christ; the thing, therefore, final and
   precious in what He did? The permanent thing in Christianity must be
   that which gives it its chief value to God. We are now beyond the crude
   alternative that so easily besets us, "Did Christ's work bear upon God
   or on man?" Neither alone would be true Reconciliation. Neither
   Orthodoxy nor Socinianism has it. But we have to ask this: "Can we
   combine the truth in each alternative? Can we reach the value of
   Christ's saving work to God (i.e. its true and final value) if we
   exclude its effect within man? Must we not take that in? Nihil in
   effectu quod non prius in causa. Must we not include the effect to get
   the full value of the cause, and give a full account of it?"
   Now, let us own at the outset that the first things we must be sure
   about are the objective reality of our religion, its finality, and its
   initiative in God's free grace independent of act or desert of ours.
   But if we start there, it looks as if we were shut up to the first of
   the crude alternatives, as if the idea of Christ's work as acting on
   God only gave the best effect to these conditions. It looks as if the
   old theory alone guaranteed a salvation finished on the Cross, one
   wholly God's in His grace, one that ensures a full and objective
   release of the conscience. These things are not secured by what we do,
   but by Christ's work on the Cross. Moreover, that work was done for the
   whole of mankind, and was complete even for those who as yet make no
   response. And, besides, that first alternative is a view that seems to
   have the letter of Scripture with it. It does look as if we could not
   have full security except by trust of an objective something, done over
   our heads, and complete without any reference to our response or our
   despite.
   But the difficulties begin when we ask what the objective something
   was. How describe it? For that purpose the old doctrine used juridical
   forms. But these are not large enough for the dimensions of a modern
   world, or for its deepened ethical insight. How exactly could the
   obedience of Christ stand for the obedience of all? It was the
   fulfilment of His own personal vocation; how does it stand for the
   obedience of every other person? Or how does the suffering of Christ
   restore the moral order, especially one He never broke? If you treat it
   as punishment, that punishment alone does not restore the moral order.
   And, if we say He did not do that, He did not restore a moral order, so
   much as acknowledge and confess the holiness of God in His judgment, is
   not the value of that recognition still greatly impaired by the fact
   that it is not made by the guilty but the Guiltless, who is not
   directly affected by the connection between sin and suffering. A
   finished religion would then be set up without the main thing - the
   acknowledgment by the guilty. That acknowledgment, that repentance,
   would then be outside the complete act, and would be at best but a
   sequel of it; whereas we ought to give a real place in a complete work
   of Reconciliation to our repentance (which some extremists say is all
   that is required), or to Christ's moral action on us. Do we not need to
   include in some way the effect in the cause, in order to give the cause
   its full and final value, i.e., its value to God. The thing of price
   done by Christ for God, must it not already include the thing done upon
   men? Does not Christ's confession of God's holiness include man's
   confession of his sin?
   Let us return to that idea of the moral order which is at the bottom of
   this objective theory. We ask whether the moral order is what the Bible
   means by the idea of the righteousness of God. The righteousness of God
   is not only holy but gracious, not only regulative and retributory, but
   also forgiving and restoring. It seems, indeed, in the Gospels to need
   no other condition of forgiveness than repentance. This is so; and it
   is all very well, we have seen, for individual cases. But we have to
   deal, as Christ at last had to deal, with the forgiveness of a world,
   the pardon of solidary sin. And we need to be sure, as Christ alone
   with His insight could be sure, that the repentance is true and deep.
   There it is that we are carried into questions which the Cross alone
   can answer. How shall I know how much repentance is deep enough? Where
   find a repentance wide enough to cover the sin of a guilty world? Could
   Christ offer that? No; directly, He could not. He could not offer it as
   a pathos, a personal experience, for He had no guilt. But, then, guilt
   is much more than a sense of guilt. And the essence of repentance is
   not its intensity or passion but the thing confessed. It is therefore
   the holiness more even than the sin that holiness makes so sinful. It
   is the due and understanding acknowledgment of the holiness offended.
   And this only a sinless Christ could really do, who was also
   sympathetic enough with men to do it from their side. And only the
   sinless could realize what sin meant for God.
   Farther, this acknowledgment is not simply verbal, nor simply a matter
   of profound moral conviction and admission, but it must be a practical
   confession, as practical as the sin. It must place itself as if it were
   active sin under the reaction of the Divine holiness; it must be made
   sin. That is, it must accept judgment as the only adequate
   acknowledgment of the holy God in a sinful world; it must allow His
   holy law to assert itself in the Savior's person in the form forced on
   the sinner's Friend. He bore this curse as God's judgment, praised it,
   hallowed it, absorbed it; and His resurrection showed that He exhausted
   it.
   But would His acceptance of judgment for us be possible, would it stand
   to our good, would it be of value in God's sight for us, if He were not
   in moral solidarity with us? How could it? What God sought was nothing
   so pagan as a mere victim outside our conscience and over our heads. It
   was a Confessor, a Priest, one taken from among men. But then this
   moral solidarity is the very thing that also gives, and must give, Him
   His mighty and revolutionary power on us. What makes it possible for
   Him to be a Divine victim or a Divine priest for us also makes Him a
   new Creator in us His offering of a holy obedience to God's judgment is
   therefore valuable to God for us which also makes Him such a moral
   power upon us and in us. His creative regenerative action on us is a
   part of that same moral solidarity which also makes His acceptance of
   judgment stand to our good, and His confession of God's holiness to be
   the ground of ours. The same stroke on the one Christ went upward to
   God's heart and downward to ours.
   Is this not clear? Christ could make no due confession of holiness for
   us in judgment if He were outside Humanity, if He were a third party
   satisfying God over our head. The acknowledgment would not be really
   from the side of the culprit, certainly not from his interior, his
   conscience. The judgment would not really be the judgment of our sin,
   which would therefore be still due. To be of final value the atoning
   judgment must be also within the conscience of the guilty. But how is
   the judgment, the self-condemnation, the confession within our guilty
   conscience to be offered to God as an ingredient of Christ's
   reconciling work and not its mere sequel? It is not yet there. Or else
   it is nothing worth offering by way of atonement when it is there. Is
   there any way of offering our self-condemnation as a meritorious
   contribution to forgiveness? Can it be included in the Divine ground of
   forgiveness in a guiltless Christ? Repentance is certainly a condition
   of forgiveness. But Christ could not repent. How then could He
   perfectly meet the conditions of salvation? The answer is that our
   repentance was latent in that holiness of His which alone could and
   must create it, as the effect is really part of the cause - that part
   of the cause which is prolonged in a polar unity into the sequential
   conditions of time.
   Not only, generally, is there an organic moral connection and a
   spiritual solidarity between Christ and us, but also more particularly,
   there is such a moral effect on Humanity included in the work of
   Christ, who causes it, that that antedated action on us, judging,
   melting, changing us, is also part of His offering to God. He comes
   bringing His sheaves with Him. In presenting Himself He offers
   implicitly and proleptically the new Humanity His holy work creates.
   The judgment we brought on Him becomes our worst judgment when we
   arraign ourselves; and it makes it so impossible for us to forgive
   ourselves that we are driven to accept forgiveness from the hands of
   the very love which our sins doomed to a curse.
   What Christ offers to God is, therefore, not simply an objective
   satisfaction outside His revolutionary effect on the soul of man in the
   way of faith, repentance, and our whole sanctification. As the very
   judgment He bore for us is relevant to our sin by His moral solidarity
   with us, so the value of His work to God includes also that value which
   it has in acting on us through that same solidarity, and in presenting
   us to God as the men it makes us to be. He represents before God not a
   natural Humanity that produces Him as its spiritual classic, but the
   new penitent Humanity that His influence creates. He calls things that
   are not yet as though they were. In Him a goodness of ours that is not
   yet rising from its antenatal spring, brings to naught the sin that is.
   There was presented to God, in Christ's holiness, also that repentance
   in us which it alone has power to create. He stretches a hand through
   time and seizes the far-off interest of our tears. The faith which He
   alone has power to wake is already offered to God in the offering of
   all His powers and of His finished work. That obedience of ours which
   Christ alone is able to create, is already set out in Him before God,
   implicit in that mighty and subduing holiness of His in which God is
   always well-pleased. All His obedience and holiness is not only fair
   and beloved of God, but it is also great with the penitent holiness of
   the race He sanctifies. Our faith is already present in His oblation.
   Our sanctification is already presented in our justification. Our
   repentance is already acting in His confession. The effect of His Cross
   is to draw us into a repentance which is a dying with Him, and
   therefore a part of the offering in His death; and then it raises us in
   newness of life to a fellowship of His resurrection.
   He is thus not only the pledge to us of God's love but the pledge to
   God of our sure response to it in a total change of will and life. We
   see now how organic, how central to Christ's gospel of Atonement is
   Paul's idea of dying and rising with Him, how vital to His work is this
   effect of it, this function of it. For such a process, such an
   experience, is not a mere moral sequel or echo of ours to the story of
   the Cross, it is no mere imitation or repetition of its moral
   greatness; nor is it a sensitive impression of its touching splendor.
   To die and rise with Christ does not belong to Christian ethic, to the
   method of Jesus, but it has a far deeper and more religious meaning. It
   is to be taken into His secret life. It is a mystic incorporation into
   Christ's death and resurrection as the standing act of spiritual
   existence. We are baptized into His death, and not merely into dying
   like Him. We do not echo His resurrection, we share it. As His trophies
   we become part of Christ's offering to God; just as the captives in his
   procession were part of the victor's self-presentation to the divinity
   of Rome. God leadeth us in triumph in Christ (2 Cor. 2:14). It is,
   indeed, for Christ's sake we are forgiven, but for the sake of a Christ
   who is the Creator of our repentance and not only the Proxy of our
   curse. And it is to our faith, which is no more perfect than our
   repentance. It is to nothing so poor as our faith or our repentance
   that new life is given, but only to Christ on His Cross, and to us for
   His sake who is the Creator and Fashioner of both. Our justification
   rests on this atoning creative Christ alone. And when the matter is so
   viewed, the objection some have to the phrase "for Christ's sake"
   should disappear.
   No martyrdom could do what the death of Christ does for faith. No
   martyrdom could offer God in advance the souls of a changed race. For
   no martyr as such is sure of the future. It is easier to forget all the
   martyrs that the Savior; and their power fades with time, while His
   grows with the ages. With the martyr's death we can link many admirable
   reflections, exhortations, and even inspirations. What it does not give
   us is the new and Eternal Life. It is not the consummation of God's
   saving purpose for the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2] This chapter owes much to Kirn, Herzog, xx., Art. "Versohnung."

   [3] Because substitution does not take account of the moral results on
   the soul, and for a full account of the cause we must include all the
   effects. To do justice to the whole of Christ's work we must include
   the Church, and in justification include sanctification.
     __________________________________________________________________

VII. The Threefold Cord

   There are three great aspects of the work of Christ which have in turn
   held the attention of the Church, and come home with special force to
   its spiritual situation at a special time. There are:

     1. Its triumphant aspect; 2. Its satisfactionary aspect; 3. Its
     regenerative aspect.

   The first emphasizes the finality of our Lord's victory over the evil
   power of devil; the second, the finality of His satisfaction,
   expiation, or atonement presented to the holy power of God; and the
   third the finality of His sanctifying or new-creative influence on the
   soul of man. The first marked the Early Church, the second the Medieval
   and Reformation Church, while the third marks the Modern Church.
   And if you fall back upon the New Testament, where all the subsequent
   development of the Church is in the germ, as a philosophy might be
   packed in a phrase, you will find those three strands wonderfully and
   prophetically entwined in 1 Cor. 1:30, where it is said that Christ is
   made unto us (2) justification; (3) sanctification; and (1) redemption.
   The whole history of the doctrine in the Church may be viewed as the
   exegesis by time of this great text of the Spirit.
   Now, it is not meant that in the period specially marked by one of
   these aspects the other two were absent. In various of the medieval
   theologians you find all three. And it is a good test of the native
   aptitude of any theologian, and of his evangelical grasp, that he
   should find them all necessary to express the fullness of the vast
   work, and its adequacy to anything so great and manifold as the soul.
   But what we do not find in the classic theologians of the past is the
   co-ordination of the three aspects under one comprehensive idea, one
   organic principle, corresponding to the complete unity of Christ's
   person, who did the work. We do not find such a unitary view of the
   work as we should expect when we reflect that it was the work of a
   personality so complete as Christ, and so absolute as the God who acted
   in Christ. Yet we must strive after such a view, by the very nature of
   our faith. A mere composite or eclectic theology means a distracted
   faith. A creed just nailed together means Churches that cannot draw
   together. We cannot, at least the Church cannot, rest healthily upon
   medley and mortised aspects of the one thing which connects our one
   soul with the one God in one moral world. We cannot rest in unresolved
   views of reconciliation. As the reconciliation comes to pervade our
   whole being, and as we answer it with heart and strength and mind, we
   become more and more impatient of fragmentary ways of understanding it.
   We crave, and we move, to see that the first aspect is the condition of
   the second, and the second of the third, and that they all condition
   each other in a living interaction.
   Now the object I have in view in this lecture is to press a former
   point as furnishing this unity - that the active and effective
   principle in the work of Christ was the perfect obedience of holy love
   which He offered amidst the conditions of sin, death, and judgment. The
   potent thing was not the suffering but the sanctify, and not they
   sympathetic confession of our sin so much as the practical confession
   of God's holiness. This principle (I hope to show) co-ordinates the
   various aspects which have been distorted by isolation. This one action
   of the holy Savior's total person was, on its various sides, the
   destruction of evil, the satisfaction of God, and the sanctification of
   men. And it is in this moral medium of holiness (if I may so say) that
   these three effects pass and play into each other with a spiritual
   interpenetration.
   Thus Christ's complete victory over the evil power or principle. His
   redemption (1), is the obverse of His regenerating and sanctifying
   effect on us (3). To deliver us from evil is not simply to take us out
   of hell, it is to take us into heaven. Christ does not simply pluck us
   out of the hands of Satan, He does so by giving us to God. He does not
   simply release us from slavery, He commits us in the act to a positive
   liberty. He does not simply cancel the charge against us in court and
   bid us walk out of jail, He meets us at the prison-door and puts us in
   a new way of life. His forgiveness is not simply retrospective, it is,
   in the same act, the gift of eternal life. Our evil is overcome by
   good. We are won from sin by an act which at the same time makes us not
   simply innocent but holy.
   So also we must see that the third - our regenerate sanctification - is
   the condition of the second - the complete satisfaction of God. The
   only complete satisfaction that can be made to a holy God from the
   sinful side is the sinner's restored obedience, his return to holiness.
   Now, the cheap and superficial way of putting that is to say that
   penitent amendment is the only satisfaction we can give to a grieved
   God. But future amendment does no more than the duty of the future
   hour. And rivers of water from our eyes will not wash out the guilt of
   the past; nor will they undo the evil we have set afloat in souls far
   gone beyond our reach or control. Yet it remains true that nothing can
   atone to holiness but holiness. And it must be the holiness of the
   sinner. It must also be an obedience of the kind required by the whole
   situation, moral and spiritual. It must be the obedience not of
   improvement but of reconciliation, not of laborious amendment but of
   regenerated faith. But faith in what? Faith in One who alone contains
   in Himself a holy obedience so perfect as to meet the holiness of God
   on the scale of our sin; but One also who, by the same obedience, has
   the power to reproduce in man the kind of holiness which alone can
   please God after all that has come and gone. No suffering can atone. No
   pain can satisfy a holy God; no death, as death. Yet satisfied He must
   be; else the freedom of grace becomes but an arbitrary and non-holy
   thing, a thing instinctive to the divine nature instead of a victory of
   the divine will. Also consider this: much of your difficulty in
   connection with satisfaction will yield if you keep in view that what
   we are concerned with is not the satisfaction of a demand but of a
   Person, not of a claim by God but of the heart and soul of God. I know
   it is easier to discuss and adjust statutory claims than to grasp the
   manifold action of a living and eternal Person. So I am afraid I must
   be very theological for a moment and tax you accordingly. The chief
   reason why so many hate theology is because it taxes; and there is
   nothing we shrink from like spiritual toil. But let the choice and
   earnest spirit consider this.
   The essence of holiness is God's perfect satisfaction, His perfect
   repose in eternal fullness. And the Christian plea is that this is
   Self-satisfaction, in the sublimest sense of the phrase. For us,
   mostly, the word has an ignoble sense. But that is only because what we
   meet most is an exclusive self-satisfaction, an individual
   self-sufficiency. But when we have an entirely inclusive
   self-satisfaction, an eternal and compete adequate to Himself in the
   most critical situation, we have the whole native fullness of God
   blessed for ever, with men beneath the shadow of His wing. The
   perpetual act of holy God is a perpetual satisfaction or accord between
   His nature and His will at every juncture, and a satisfaction from His
   own infinite holy resource - a Self-satisfaction. God is always the
   author of His own satisfaction; that is to say, His holiness is always
   equal to its own atonement. God in the Son is the perfect satisfaction
   and joy of God in the Father; and God holy in the sinful Cross is the
   perfect satisfaction of God the holy in the sinless heavens.
   Satisfaction there must be in God's own nature, whether under the
   conditions of perfect obedience in a harmonious world, or under those
   of obedience jarred and a world distraught. God has power to secure
   that the perfect holy obedience of heaven shall not be eternally
   destroyed by the disobedience of earth. He has power to satisfy
   Himself, and maintain His holiness infrangible, even in face of a world
   in arms. But satisfied He must be. For an unsatisfied God, a
   dissatisfied God, would be no God. He would reflect the distraction of
   the world, and so succumb to it.
   But a holy God could be satisfied by neither pain nor death, but by
   holiness alone. The atoning thing is not obedient suffering but
   suffering obedience. He could be satisfied and rejoiced only by
   hallowing of His name, by perfect and obedient answer to His holy heart
   from amid conditions of pain, death, and judgment. Holy obedience
   alone, unto death, can satisfy the Holy Lord.
   Now as to this obedience mark two things.
   1. It includes (we saw) the idea that in obedience Christ accepted the
   judgment holiness must pass upon sin, and did so in a way that
   confessed it as holy from amidst the deepest experience of it, the
   experience not of a spectator but a victim. His obedience was not
   merely a fine, perfect, and mighty harmony of His own with God's
   blessed will; but it was the acceptance on man's behalf of that
   judgment which sin had entailed, and the confession on man's behalf in
   a tremendous act that the judgment was good and holy. For the holiness
   of God makes two demands; first, for an answering holiness in love, and
   second, for a judgment on those who do not answer but defy. And Christ
   met both, in one and the same act. He was judged as one who, being made
   sin, was never sinful, but absolutely well-pleasing to God.
   2. And the second point is this: The satisfactory obedience must be
   obedience from the race that rebelled. Its holiness must atone for its
   sin. But how can that possibly be? Can it be by mere amendment from us?
   Can we bring any amendment to atone for the past and secure its
   remission? Could the race do it? Solidary in its sin by its moral
   unity, could the race earn a solidary salvation? Could you conceive of
   mankind as one vast sinful soul repenting with a like unity, turning
   like the prodigal, and deputing the most illustrious spiritual hero of
   its number to offer its repentance to God in Jesus Christ? If the
   supposition were possible, that might indeed be a certain welcome
   offering made to God's holiness; but it would not be made by it. It
   would be something beyond the resources of holiness, and God would not
   be the Savior. He would accept more sacrifice than He had power to
   make. And it would make the action of Christ a power conferred on Him
   by self-saved man instead of inherent in Him from God. His commission
   would be but to God, not from God. And how should a sinful race offer
   from its own damaged resources what would satisfy the holiness of God?
   Or, if repentance could satisfy holiness, how are we to know how much,
   how deep, repentance would do it, and leave us sure it was done?
   The holiness that atones, though it return from the race that rebelled,
   must therefore be the gift of the holiness atoned. For if holiness cold
   be satisfied by anything outside itself it would not be absolutely
   holly. So if holiness can be satisfied with nothing but holiness it can
   only be with a holiness which itself creates. God alone can create in
   us the holiness that will please Him. And this He has done in Jesus
   Christ incarnate. But it is in Jesus Christ as the creator of man's
   holiness, not as the organ of it, as man's sanctifier, and nor merely
   man's delegate. Christ is our reconciler because on the Cross He was
   our redeemer from sin's power into no mere independence or courage or
   safety, but into real holiness; because the same act that redeems us
   produces holiness, and presents us in this holiness to God and His
   communion. The holiness of Christ is the satisfying thing to God, yet
   not because of the beauty of holiness offered to His sight in the
   perfect character of Christ. We are not saved either by Christ's
   ethical character or our own, but by His person's creative power and
   work on us. Christ's holiness is the satisfying thing to God, because
   it is not only the means but also the anticipation of our holiness,
   because it carries all our future holiness latent in it and to God's
   eye patent; because in His saving act He is the creative power of which
   our new life is the product. It is not only that Christ conquered for
   Himself and emerged with His soul for a prey, but, He being what He
   was, His victory contained ours. If He died all died. It was not only
   that all the sin of the world, pointed to its worst, could not make Him
   a sinner. It was that by all the holiness of eternity He had power to
   make the worst sinners saints. Of course, there is no way to
   sanctification but by deliverance from sin, by being "unsinned." But no
   sinful man can "unsin" himself, however he amend.
   It can only be done by the creation in him of a new life. It can only
   be done by the sinless Son of God, who lived from eternity in God's
   holiness, entered man, lived that holiness out in the face of sin, and
   thus not only broke the evil power by living it down but created that
   holiness in us by living it in. What is our redemption is thus also our
   reconciliation. If the atoning thing is holiness (which it is), and not
   suffering (which it is not), then Christ atoned by an act which created
   a new holiness in us and not a new suffering. The act which overcame
   the world intensively for good and all was also the act which slowly
   masters the world in the extensive sense. His moral and spiritual
   victory was so deep and thorough that it gives Him power to subdue
   other consciences to His holy self, world without end.
   There is an old word used in this connection which there is much
   disposition at the present to recall and reclaim. It is the word
   surety, of which some of our fathers were so fond. The word substitute
   has unfortunate and misleading suggestions, and it has practically been
   dropped in favor of a word more ethical and more constitutional, like
   representative. But even that word misleads us to think of Christ as
   the spiritual protagonist of a democracy, drawing His power from those
   He represents; and it muffles the truth that His relation to us is
   royal and not elective, that it is creative and not merely expository.
   He does not express the natural repentance of the old humanity but
   creates the penitent faith of the new - "the new man created unto
   holiness." It is not easy to find a word that has no defect, since all
   words, even the greatest, are made from the dust and spring from our
   sandy passions, earthly needs, and fleeting thoughts; and they are hard
   to stretch to the measure of eternal things without breaking under us
   somewhere. The word surety itself gives way at a great strain - as does
   guarantee. Christ's function for us was not simply an assurance to God,
   from one who knew us well, that for all our aberrations we were sound
   and could be trusted at bottom. His confession of us was not simply His
   expression of His conviction, as deep as life, that man, though tough
   and slow, would in the long-run turn, obey, and confess if properly
   treated from above. It was not a pledge to God, or an encouragement to
   man, that Humanity would come right when experience had done its work
   on his native goodness and his spiritual nature, so much deeper than
   his sin. It was not a warranty to God that human nature would at last
   recover its spiritual balance, of which recovery Christ might point to
   Himself as being an earnest, a prelude, a classic illustration. It was
   not that Christ staked His insight into the deep nature of this most
   excellent creature man that he would one day rise from his swine, and
   return from his rebellion, and fall into the Father's arms. Such poor
   suggestions as these spring from our common and commercial use of a
   word like surety or guarantee. As if Christ were a third party between
   two who did not quite believe in each other. As if God by this aid
   might be led to foresee that man would come to himself in a faith and
   repentance distant but certain, might credit it to him in advance, but
   might pardon on that ground. That would destroy grace. And it would
   give man the satisfaction of satisfying God if He would but give him
   time to collect the wherewithal.
   Christ is no third party, no arbitrator, no moral broker. And He is not
   the first installment of man's return to God, its harbinger. In no such
   sense is He our surety before God. Because His work is not one of
   insight but of regeneration. It did not turn on His genius for reading
   us, but His power to create us anew. He Himself is the creator in us of
   what He promises for us. Any surety that Christ gives to God for man is
   really God swearing by Himself; it is the Creator's self-assurance of
   His own regenerative power. Christ, as the Eternal Son of Holy God, can
   offer Him a holiness which creates and includes that of the race, and
   does not simply prophesy it.
   We might put it thus: Christ alone in His sinless perfection can feel
   all God's holiness in judging sin; and therefore He alone could confess
   and honor it. No sinful man could do that; and therefore no sinful man
   could duly repent. The value of repentance is always in proportion to
   the sense of God's holiness. To confess that holiness is the great
   postulate in order to confess sin. And the race cold duly confess its
   sin and repent only if there arose in it One who by a perfect and
   impenitent holiness in Himself, and by His organic unity with us, could
   create such holiness in the sinful as should make the new life one long
   repentance transcended by faith and thankful joy. This was and is
   Christ's work. And the satisfaction to God, as it was certainly not His
   suffering, was also more than the spectacle of His own holy soul
   presented to God. It was that holy soul (the holier as He faced and
   conquered evil ever growing more black and bitter) - it was that holy
   soul seen by God as the cause and creator of the race's confession,
   both of holiness and of sin, in a Church of the reborn. The
   satisfaction to God was Christ, not as an isolated character, or in an
   act wholly outside us and our responsive union with Him; but it was
   Christ as the author of our sanctification and repentance. Our
   repentance and our sanctity are of saving value before God only as
   produced by the creative holiness of Christ. Christ creates our
   holiness because of His own sanctification of Himself - John 17:19 -
   and His complete victory over the evil power in a life-experience of
   moral conflict.
   You wish perhaps here to ask me this question: Is then the sanctity of
   a Unitarian who rejects any satisfaction by Christ, any atonement, as
   the ground of man's holiness, is that sanctity of no account before
   God? Is the true repentance of those who do not know of an atoning
   Christianity of little price with Him? Far from it. But from our point
   of view we must regard them as incomplete stages, which draw their
   value with God from a subliminal union with that completed and holy
   offering of Christ which He never ceases to see, however far it be
   beneath our conscious light.
   When therefore we speak of Christ as our Surety, we mean much more than
   would be meant by a mere sponsorship. We suppose a solidary union of
   faith created by the Savior in the sinner, which not only impresses him
   but incorporates him with Christ. All turns upon that spiritual
   solidarity. All turns upon the reality of that new life for which Paul
   had to invent a new phrase - "in Christ." A tremendous phrase, like
   that other, "the New Creation" - and hardly intelligible to a youthful
   or impressionist Christianity. The real ground of our forgiveness is
   not our confession of sin, and not even Christ's confession of our sin,
   but His agonized confession of God's holiness, and its absorbing effect
   on us. To be in grace we must be found in Him. Our new penitent life is
   His creation. He contains the principle and power of our forgiveness.
   And it comes home to us only as we abide in Him. In Him, and only in
   Him, the normal holy man, the man holy with all the holiness of God,
   have we the living power of release from guilt, escape from sin,
   repentance, faith, and newness of life. We are justified only as we are
   incorporate (not clothed) in the perfect righteousness of Christ, our
   Regenerator, and not in proportion as the righteousness of Christ has
   made palpable way in us. It is not as Christ is in us that we are
   saved, but as we are in Christ. It is this being in Christ for our
   justification that makes justification necessarily work out to
   sanctification, and forgiveness be one with eternal life.
   We shall be misled even by what is true in the representative aspect of
   Christ unless we grasp how much more He is, how creative He is, how the
   solidarity involved in His representation is due to His own act of
   self-identification and not to natural identity with us. We must take
   quite seriously that supreme word of a "new creation in Jesus Christ."
   We need not get lost in discussing the metaphysic of it; but we must
   have so tasted the new life that nothing but the strongest word
   possible is just to it.
   Christ our New Creator! He was not simply a new departure n the history
   of ethical civilization, by the introduction of an exalted morality. If
   that was what He came with, He brought much less than the conscience
   needs; and on countless points He has left us without guidance today.
   Nor was He simply a great new departure in the history of religious
   ideas. He did much more than bring us a new idea of God. If that was
   all, again it was not what we need. For we have more and higher ideas
   of God than we know what to do with, more than we have power to
   realize. But He stands for a new departure in the history of Creation.
   His work in so far is cosmic. It is a new story added to the world. It
   is a new departure in the action which made the universe. It is an
   entirely new stage in the elevation of human nature, so imperfect in
   our first creation, to its divine height in holiness. By His moral
   treatment of our sinful case, which is our actual historic case, we are
   taken into a share of His superhuman life. That is our salvation. It is
   life and power we need. It is to be made over again by the Maker's
   redeeming hand. We are redeemed from the ban of sin's magic circle by
   the only One who has the secret of the unseen powers; we are joined
   with the sin-destroying life of Christ. And we are redeemed, by the
   very nature of that redemption, into the fellowship of His eternal and
   blessed peace. And that is our Reconciliation. The act that justified
   sanctifies and reconciles. And that totality of Christ in His Church is
   what God looks on and is satisfied. We are, as a believing race, in the
   Son in whom He is always well pleased.
   Now what is it that has created so much difficulty for the old
   Protestant doctrine? I mean difficulty in the mind of Christian
   believers, and still more in their experience. For we need not trouble
   here about difficulty from the side of the worldlings or the ethical
   sentimentalists. But difficulty arose within the pale of the most
   devout and devoted evangelical experience. Perhaps it has arisen in
   your own minds. Well, the old Protestantism, as you know, was greatly
   exercised about the true relation between faith and works. And it had
   to insist so strongly on the sole value of faith in order to cope with
   Rome that its later years fell into an excessive dread of good works,
   lest there should be ascribed to them saving effect. As a result faith
   was credited with a merely receptive power, or no more beyond that than
   a power of assent. Men lost hold of the great Lutheran fact that faith
   is the most mighty and active thing in the soul, that our faith is our
   all before God, that it is an energy of the whole person, that good
   works are done by this whole believing person, and that faith by its
   very nature, as trust in God's love, is bound to work out in love. They
   misread the moral impulse in faith, its power to recast personality and
   refashion life. They did not, of course, overlook the necessity of such
   renovation; but they put it down to a subsequent action of the Spirit
   over and above faith - almost as if the Spirit and His sanctification
   were a second revelation, a new dispensation. Which indeed many of the
   mystics thought it was - like many rationalist mystics today, who think
   we have outgrown historic Christianity and the historic Christ through
   our modern light. The old Protestant orthodoxy did not realize that the
   real source of the Spirit is the Cross. It therefore detached faith
   from life in a way that has produced the most unfortunate results, both
   in an antinomianism within the Church, and in a Socinian protest
   without, which was inevitable, and so far valuable, but was equally
   extreme. Faith was treated by the positive school then as a mystic
   power, or an intellectual, but not as a moral. It was not the
   renovating power in life, but only prepared the ground for the
   renovating power to come in. It had not in itself the transforming
   power either individually or socially. Its connection with love was
   accidental and not necessary - as it must be, being faith in love.
   Now, if we translate this experimental language into theological, it
   means that they did not connect up justification and sanctification.
   Forgiveness of sin was not identified closely enough with eternal life.
   Eternal life was detached from identity with that which was the true
   eternal in life, from faith's practical (i.e., experimental) godliness.
   Forgiveness did not go, as it should, with renewal of heart and conduct
   in one act. It delivered from an old world without opening a new and
   planting us in its revolutionized principles. Faith had, indeed, the
   power to do works of love, but it was not driven to them so that it
   could do no other. And this flaw in faith corresponded to a like flaw
   in the reading of Christ's act which was the object of faith. They
   treated the work of Christ in a way far too objective. It was something
   done wholly over our heads. There was not a solidary connection between
   Christ's work and the Church it created. Attention was concentrated
   upon one aspect of Christ's work - its action on God. That is quite an
   essential aspect (perhaps the chief), but it must not be isolated. No
   aspect of that work must be isolated, as I began by saying. It is the
   service an accomplished theology does for the Church to keep all
   aspects in one purview, in the proportion of a great and comprehensive
   faith. We have today gone to another extreme, and isolated another
   aspect - the moral effect of Christ on man. So we need not give
   ourselves any airs of superiority to the old orthodoxy in that respect
   of one-sidedness. And we must also remember that the whole secret of
   truth in this matter is not what we are sometimes told - a change of
   emphasis. We have changed the emphasis, and yet we are short of the
   truth; and the state of the Church's piety shows it. We have moved the
   accent from the objective to the subjective work of Christ; and we fall
   victims more and more to a weak religious subjectivism which has the
   ethical interest but no the moral note. We fall into a subjectivism
   which is reflected in one aspect of Pragmatism and overworks the
   principle contained in the words, "By their fruits shall y know them"
   (know them, whether they are true to the Gospel, not the Gospel and
   whether it is true to God and reality). So that people say, "I will
   believe whatever I feel does me good. My soul will eat what I enjoy,
   and drink what makes me happy." They are their own test of truth, and
   "their own Holy Ghost." The secret, therefore, is not change of accent
   but balance of aspects. And the true and competent theology is not only
   one which regards the Church's whole history and outlook (thinking in
   centuries, I called it), but it is one disciplined to think in
   proportion, to think together the various aspects of the Cross, and
   make them enrich and not exclude one another.
   The defect of the old view was, then, as I have said, that it could not
   couple up justification and sanctification. It could not show how the
   same act of Christ which delivered from the guilt of sin delivered also
   from its power. And this was because in the justification too much
   stress was laid upon the suffering; and suffering in itself has no
   sanctifying power. You see how our practical experience, when it is
   well noted, provides our theological principles. We do find that
   suffering by itself debases, and even imbrutes, instead of purifying;
   that pain is an occasion rather than a cause of profit. That is a moral
   principle of spiritual experience. Consequently when excessive
   attention was given to the suffering of Christ, and the atoning value
   was supposed to reside there instead of in the holy obedience, the work
   of Christ lost in purifying and sanctifying effect, whatever it may
   have done in pacifying or converting. The atoning thing being the holy
   obedience to the Holy, the same holiness which satisfied God sanctifies
   us. That is the idea the Reformers did not grasp through their
   preoccupation with Christ's sufferings. But it is the only idea which
   unites justification and sanctification and both with redemption. For
   the holiness which satisfied God and sanctifies us also destroyed the
   evil power in the world and its hold on us. It was the moral conquest
   of the world's evil, amid the extreme conditions of sin and suffering,
   by a Victor who had a capital solidarity with the race, and not merely
   an individual connection with it as a member. So that it has been said
   that we must explain and correct current ideas of substitutionary
   expiation by the idea of solidary reparation. The curse on man was the
   guilty power of sin and its train - hitherto invincible. There was but
   one way in which this could be mastered. A moral curse could be
   mastered only in a purely moral way, the world-curse by the
   world-conscience. It could be mastered but by One whose sinlessness was
   not only negatively proof against all that sin could do, but positively
   holy; and He was thus deadly to sin, satisfactory to God's loving
   judgment, and creative of a new humanity in the heart of the old. This
   was a task beyond mere substitutionary penal suffering as that phrase
   is now so poorly understood. For that would have been just and
   effectual only if it had fallen on the arch-rebel, who, with the
   nobility of Milton's Satan in his first stage, assumed himself all the
   worst consequences of his revolt to spare the other souls whom he had
   misled.
   The truth is that Anselm, in spite of the unspeakable service he did
   both to the faith and thought of his time and all time, yet put
   theology on a false track in this matter. He had too much to say of a
   superethical tribute paid to God's honor by the composition of a
   voluntary suffering. Our sin was compounded rather than really atoned.
   He did not grasp the sacrifice of Christ as made to God's holiness; as
   one therefore which could only be ethical in its nature, by way of holy
   obedience. This obedience was the Holy Father's joy and satisfaction.
   He found Himself in it. And it was also the foiling and destruction of
   the evil power. And it was farther the creative source of holiness in a
   race not only impressed by the spectacle of its tragic hero victorious,
   but regenerate by the solidarity of a new life from its creative Head.
   The work of Christ was thus in the same act triumphant on evil,
   satisfying to the heart of God, and creative to the conscience of man
   by virtue of His solidarity with God on the one side, and on the other
   with the race. He subdued Satan, rejoiced the Father, and set up in
   Humanity the kingdom - all in one supreme and consummate act of His one
   person. He destroyed the kingdom of evil, not by way of preparation for
   the kingdom of God, but by actually establishing God's kingdom in the
   heart of it. And He rejoiced, filled, and satisfied the heart of God,
   not by a statutory obedience, or by one private to Himself, which
   spectacle disposed God to bless and sanctify man; but by presenting in
   the compendious compass of His own person a Humanity presanctified by
   the irresistible power of His own creative and timeless work.
   The holy demand of God is always couched in a false form when it is
   made to call for the expiation of an equivalent suffering instead of a
   confession of God's holiness, adequately holy, from the side of the
   sinner under judgment. Heaven and its happiness are wrongly conceived
   as immunity from judgment instead of joy in the consummation of
   judgment in righteousness and holiness for ever. It was not clear to
   the old view that the very nature of justification was sanctification,
   that the Justifier was so only as One who always perfectly sanctified
   Himself, and was organic, in the act, with the race in its new life. It
   appeared to our fathers as if sanctification were only a facultative
   sequel of justification.
   Whatever we mean, therefore, by substitution, it is something more than
   merely vicarious. It is certainly not something done over our heads. It
   is representative. Yet not by the will of man choosing Christ, but by
   the will of Christ choosing man, and freely identifying Himself with
   man. It is a matter not so much of substitutionary expiation (which, as
   these words are commonly understood, leaves us too little committed),
   but of solidary confession and praise from amid the judgment fires,
   where the Son of God walks with the creative sympathy of the holy among
   the sinful sons of men. It is not as if Christ were our changeling, as
   if His lot and ours were transposed on the Cross. But He was our
   self-appointed plenipotentiary, and what He engaged for we must
   implement by an organic spiritual entail. So far His work was as
   objective as our creation, as independent of our leave; and it
   committed us without reference to our consent but to our need. When He
   died for all, all implicitly died. The great transaction was done for
   the race. But objective as it was, gift as it was to us from pure
   grace, it was so in its initiative rather than in its method.
   Essentially it was a new creation of us, but practically the new
   creator was in us, and the word was flesh. In such a way that He and
   His are one by faith in a solidarity corresponding from beneath,
   mutatis mutandis, to the solidarity between Father and Son from above.
   He and His form an organic spiritual unity - one will in two parties or
   persons. Mere substitution is mere exchange of parts, in which one is
   excluded and immune. But the work of Christ is inclusive and committal,
   by our continuity of life with Him through the spirit in a Church. [4]
   The suffering of Christ is but the under and seamy side of that
   solidarity whose upper side is the beauty of our corporate holiness in
   Him. The same law, the same act, which laid our sin on Him lays His
   holiness on us, and absorbs us into His satisfaction to God. In the
   same act God made Him to be sin for us and made us righteousness in
   Him. In the empirical sense we are no more made righteous than He was
   made sinful. But we are as closely incorporated in the holy world as He
   was in the sinful. And our holiness is not ours, in the same sense as
   our sin was not His - in the sense of initiative and individual
   responsibility for it.
   It was as our self-appointed representative that Christ died. He died
   as the result, as the finale, of the act by which He identified Himself
   with us and emptied Himself from heaven. He is our Head by divine right
   and not by election of ours. Our representative, our surety He was -
   not our choice illustration, not our mandatory champion, not our moral
   deputy, not our friendly sponsor promising that we should one day pay
   our debt because of His optimistic faith in us. It was not in us that
   He had faith so much as in Himself as the power and grace of God. He
   did not promise that we would pay (if the metaphor may be allowed); He
   paid for us, knowing that in Himself alone could we raise the vast
   advance. What was presented to God was not only Christ's perfection,
   nor was it His confidence in us, but also His antedated action on us,
   His confidence in Himself for us. That was what stood to our good.
   There was offered to God a racial obedience which was implicit in the
   creative power of His, and not merely parallel with His, as if He were
   our first fruits instead of our Sun.
   The juristic aspect is a real element in Christ's death. It has a moral
   core; and we cannot discard it without discarding the moral order of
   the world as one revelation of that irrefragable holiness of God which
   must be expressed in judgment and confessed from its midst. The chief
   defect of the great revolution which began in Schleiermacher and ended
   in Ritschl has been that it allowed no place to that side of Christ's
   work. And it is a defect that much impoverishes the current type of
   religion, beclouds it, and robs it of the power of moral conviction by
   reducing the idea of sin and dismissing the note of guilt. It makes
   grace not so much free as arbitrary, because it does not regard in its
   revelation what is due to the holiness of God. It banishes from our
   Christian faith the one note which more than any other we have today
   come to need restored - the note of judgment. When properly construed
   the juristic element is a great power to life faith from the mere
   ethicism to which Ritschl tends into the mystic region which is so
   essential to make a moral power a religious, to provide a home for the
   soul as well as a lamp to our feet, and to secure for believers a
   hidden communion with Christ. It also saves the grace of God from being
   a mere favoritism to believers, or a mere concession to misery.
   There is no doubt we are in reaction from a time when that side of
   things was overdone. The juristic aspect taken alone, and taken in
   relation to legal demand rather than personal holiness - such
   satisfaction, when isolated, does not do justice to the aspect in which
   Christ was triumphant over evil (redemption) nor to the aspect in which
   His work is regenerative for mankind (sanctification). And it tended to
   promote the fatal notion that holiness could be satisfied with
   suffering and death, or with anything short of an answering holiness
   effected and guaranteed. The satisfaction in it was offered to a
   distributive justice rather than to a personal holiness, to a claim
   rather than a person, to a regulative law rather than to a constitutive
   life. All that and more is quite true.
   But I must ask you to deal sympathetically with those juristic views,
   to treat them with spiritual insight. It was the vice of Socinianism,
   and it is the vice of the Rationalism which is its legatee, that it
   criticized orthodoxy by the fierce light of the natural conscience
   instead of by the inner nature and better knowledge of the relation on
   which orthodoxy founded all. It criticized theology by the natural
   reason and not by the supernatural Gospel. There is nothing more vulgar
   than slashing criticism in such a matter. You cannot slash here without
   cutting the face of some great and true saints to whom these views are
   dearer than life because bound up with their entrusted Gospel and their
   life eternal. One of the most damnatory features of popular theological
   liberalism is the violent handling of what it calls orthodoxy, and its
   total lack of spiritual flexibility and interpretative sympathy -
   caused largely by the prior lack of theological knowledge and culture.
   That some orthodoxy is also shallow and insolent is no justification
   for those whose plea is that they know better. I pray you to listen to
   the old theology not as fools but as wise, as evolutionists and
   reformers, not as dynamitards. Consider what was gained for us in it.
   True, it sometimes presented its gain in false forms, as when it spoke
   of the equivalence of Christ's suffering to what we all deserved. That
   was but the form, and the Socinians did good work in the correction of
   such things. But this at least had been gained - the conviction that it
   was not the touchy honor of a feudal monarch that was to be dealt with
   at the had of the world, but the love of a just God. The conviction
   behind all was the grandest moral conviction possible - that all things
   are by Christ in the hands of infinite righteousness and holy love.
   This vast moral step had been taken. Men had come to realize that the
   result of Christ's work was eternal right; and especially that it was
   right, not in reference to the claims of an evil will, but in regard to
   those of a will perfectly good. The days were certainly outgrown by
   this juristic theology when there could be any such talk as filled the
   early Church about dealing with the rights Satan had won over man. Evil
   has no rights in the soul. From that, indeed, it was a great advance
   even to Anselm's apotheosis of God's honor. And it was a further
   advance still beyond feudal dignity when the great and noble categories
   of juris-prudence were invoked to replace the notion of courtly or
   military honor which made God and man duelists rather than ought else.
   It was a vast step in the moralizing of theology when its grand concern
   came to be the establishment of men before a righteous and social
   judge. Do not speak contemptuously of that step. It is one of our own
   stages. It gave us rest and uplifting on our journey to where we now
   stand. We have only had to carry further that moralizing of the nature
   of justice. The whole idea was ethical and social compared with what
   went before it - at least as much so as ours now marks a farther
   advance. It was ethical as regards claims by an evil power which can
   have no moral rights. And it was social in that it brought Christian
   belief into line with the ruling principles of society as it then was.
   It is a view, moreover, which has shown itself capable of inspiring
   some of the deepest, sweetest, and most beneficent piety the world has
   ever seen. Moreover, it had in it active conditions of moral growth
   which broke through the packthreads of its own time. We today have only
   had to carry forward that process of moralizing the idea of our
   relation to God which the jurists began. Their theology had a moral
   passion which shed the features in it that were ethically defective,
   and assimilated the moral idea of the Gospel as we are now taught to
   read it in a Bible rediscovered and reconstrued by the Spirit's action
   both in the faith and the criticism of the day.
   Among these three aspects of Christ's work some minds will be drawn by
   preference to one, some to another, just as different ages have been.
   Some souls, according to their experience, will gravitate to the great
   Deliverance, some to the great Atonement, and some to the great
   Regeneration. Some ministries will be marked by the influence of one,
   some of another. That is all within the free affinities of the
   spiritual life, and the preferential sympathies of the moral
   idiosyncrasy. And the Church is enriched by the complementary action of
   such diversities of ministry. But what ought not to be encouraged is
   any tendency on the part of those who prefer the one line to deny the
   equal right of the others. And what ought not to be tolerated is the
   habit of denunciation, by those who see the one side, of the sides they
   find nothing in; and especially the habit of assuming that the sides
   they are blind to represent a lower Christian level. Where this is
   possible there has really been little done for the conscience by the
   view that is adopted. And it is both absurd and overweening to ask us
   to believe that those sections of the Church, and those lights of
   piety, who held to views at present in the background were all
   theological bigots and moral inepts; that real moral aptitude and
   theological faculty did not arise till now; that a like devotion
   obscures such questions; that babes and suckling perfect theological
   praise; that wisdom is justified by children; and that it is now the
   monopoly of those who detach theology from religion, and dismiss it to
   a historical museum.
   If Christ by the Savior of the world in any sense, the thing He did
   must be at least as great as the world. And if as great, then no less
   manifold, and no less the object for first-rate intelligence than the
   lower objects of experience. Faith in such a Savior cannot continue to
   live for either heart or conscience if it is detached from mind. Nor
   can mind submit to be warned off the supreme object of the soul's
   concern if that object is loved and sought with all our heart and soul
   and strength. The very type of prayer in the non-theological forms
   which claim to be Christian shows to what we can sink when faith is
   stripped of mind and strength. It is only a poor Christ that can be
   housed in a poor creed, and a feeble prophet that is canonized when a
   sentimentalized ethic is offered as religion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4] In His saving act He so became one with the race that the new
   Humanity He set up arises in history as the company of those who answer
   and seal His incarnate act with their faith. By his incarnation and
   redemption Christ did not simply deify Humanity, as a pagan
   Christianity had it in the fourth century, nor manifest the essential
   deity of Humanity as a pagan Christianity has it in the twentieth. But
   He so took a Humanity predestined for Him that those who take Him
   should become the new Humanity in the true Church.
     __________________________________________________________________

Addendum

   There is a point in chapter iv where, in speaking freely, I have spoken
   loosely, and I have expressed myself with some want of caution likely
   to cause misunderstanding of my full meaning. I there say that the
   wrath of God is not to be taken as a pathos or affection, but as the
   working out of His judgment in a moral order. My intention was to
   discourage the idea that it was a mood or temper, and to connect it
   with the sure changelessness of God's moral nature. But on reviewing
   the passage I find I have so put it that I might easily suggest that
   the anger of God was simply the automatic recoil of His moral order
   upon the transgressor, the nemesis which dogs him and makes hard his
   way, his self-hardening; as if there were no personal reaction of a
   Holy God Himself upon the sin, and no infliction of His displeasure
   upon the sinner. This is an impression I should be sorry to leave; for
   it is one that would take much of its most holy significance and solemn
   mystery out of the work of Christ.
   Was Christ's bearing of God's wrath just His exposure to the action of
   the vast moral machine? Did He just become involved, as our rescuer, in
   the mechanism which regulates ethical Humanity, using at times man's
   anger as its agent? This mechanism might be there possibly without the
   ordinance of a God that it should be so, or possibly as the institution
   of a deist and distant God who calmly watches His world spin with the
   motion He gave it. But is God not personally immanent and active in His
   own moral order? Did Christ just incur the automatic penalty of that
   order as He strove to save its victims? Was He just caught in the
   works? Or was there implied, and felt, also the element of personal
   displeasure acting through that order - the element that would
   differentiate wrath from mere nemesis, and infliction from mere recoil?
   Granting then that there was in Christ's suffering the element of
   personal displeasure and infliction, was it man's or God's? Was His
   treatment simply the reaction of sinful man against holiness, or was it
   the reaction of a holy God against sin? Did He Himself feel He was
   yielding to man's dark will, or God's will, darker, but higher and
   surer? Did He suffer, just as the holiest saint might in a wicked
   world, the extreme hate of men; or was God's displeasure also upon Him?
   We have abundantly seen that this could not be upon Him as His own
   desert, not as it lies upon a guilty conscience. If He was made sin He
   was not made sinful; if He was made a curse He was not accursed. And
   have we not also seen that He who acted in our stead could act with no
   fitness and no precision if He took on Him the mere equivalent of what
   the guilty would have paid had they never been redeemed (that would
   have needed a generous arch-rebel), but only if he paid what was
   appointed as the price of their redemption? The uttermost farthing is
   not the last mite of their desert but of God's ransom price. But the
   curse of sin's sequel is most real whatever the amount. And it was
   certainly on Christ, by His freely putting Himself under it beside the
   men on whom it lay. That curse then - was it an infliction from God,
   which did not lift, did not cease to be inflicted, even when the Son
   put Himself in its way; or was it something that struck Him only from
   men below and not from God above at all?
   Surely as it falls on man at least it is God's infliction. We do not
   only grieve God but we provoke His anger. There is nothing we need more
   to recall into our sense of sin at present than this (though we must
   extend it, as we must extend our redemption, to a racial and solidary
   wrath of God in which we share). Its absence has slackened and
   flattened the whole tone and level of Christian life. The love of God
   becomes real anger to our sin, and to us as we identify ourselves with
   the sin, to us while, outside Christ, we are no more than members of a
   sinful race. Is not our satisfaction and increase in well-doing the
   personal blessing of God? Then surely our misery and infatuation on the
   other path is His personal anger. If a true evolution carries with it
   the personal and joyful action of God in blessing its results, is the
   result of degeneration a mere natural process in the moral region,
   secluded from God's displeased action and infliction? Is it all His
   will only as a thing willed, and not as His action in willing it?
   Weigh, as men of real moral experience, what is involved in the
   hardening of the sinner. That is the worst penalty upon sin, its
   cumulative and deadening history. Well, is it simply self-hardening? Is
   it simply the reflex action of sin upon character, sin going in,
   settling in, and reproducing itself there? Is it no part of God's
   positive procedure in judging sin, and bringing it, for salvation, to a
   crisis of judgment grace? When Pharaoh hardens his heart, is that in no
   sense God hardening Pharaoh's heart? When a man hardens himself against
   God, is there nothing in the action and purpose of God that takes part
   in that induration? Is that anger not as really as the superabounding
   grace? Are not both bound up in one complex treatment of the moral
   world? When a man piles up his sin and rejoices in iniquity, is God
   simply a bystander and spectator of the process? Does not God's
   pressure on the man blind him, urge him, stiffen him, shut him up into
   sin, if only that he might be shut up to mercy alone? Is it enough to
   say that this is but the action of a process which God simply watches
   in a permissive way? Is He but passive and not positive to the
   situation? Can the Absolute be passive to anything? If so, where is the
   inner action of the personal god whose immanence in things is one of
   His great modern revelations? Everything you call absolute is in active
   relation to the whole creation. Go into the psychology of sin as it is
   understood, not indeed today, but by those in the long, deep history of
   the moral soul whose experience coincided with a real genius for
   reading it - true sons of him of Romans 7. Ask such experients if it is
   never thus - that the anger of God promotes a sin, cherished in the
   private imagination, to actual transgression; which then shocks,
   appalls, the dallier into the horrified loss of all confidence in the
   flesh; that out of the collapse may rise a totally new man? God never
   put sin in the world; but, sin being in the world, with its spreading
   power, does God never bring it to such a head as precipitates its
   destruction? Does He never drive the lunatic over a precipice into
   water where he can be saved and divert him from the quarry edge where
   he would be dashed to pieces? Did God not so act with Israel (John
   12:39)? When sin has once begun, is there no such thing morally
   possible as the provocative action of God's law? With God's law sin
   gains life (Romans 7:10) and becomes more sinful. Every law deepens the
   guilt of defying it. That is the curse of the law. And is that law
   detached from God, and cut adrift to do its own mechanic work under His
   indifference? Is it not His curse and anger still, if God be in His
   law, as we now do believe Him to pervade His world?
   The love of God is not more real than the wrath of God. For He can be
   really angry only with those He loves. And how can Absolute Love love
   without acting to save?
   Well, if it be so, that God's direct displeasure and infliction is the
   worst thing in sin's penalty, did the displeasure totally vanish from
   the infliction when Christ stood under it? Would He have really borne
   the true judgment on sin if it had? Was Christ's great work not the
   meeting of that judgment and hallowing it? Did the complete acceptance
   of God's displeasure as an essential factor in the curse? A holy God
   could not look on sin without acting on it; nor could He do either but
   to adhor and curse it, even when His Son was beneath it. Wherein is
   guilt different from sin but in this - that it is sin, not cut adrift
   from God and let go its own way and go to pieces, but sin placed under
   the anger of God, under the personal reaction of that Absolute Holy God
   which no creature, no situation, can escape? And could Christ bear our
   guilt and take it away if He did not carry it there, and bear it there,
   and hallow its judgment there? Did He just throw it down there, leave
   it, and rid Himself of it? Does not the best of sons suffer from the
   angry gloom that spreads from the father over the whole house at the
   prodigal's shameless shame? Did God not lay on Him the iniquity of us
   all, and inflict that veiling of His face which darkened to dereliction
   even the Redeemer's soul? It is not desert that is the worst thing in
   judgment, but desertion - the sense of desert forsaken by God. The
   forsakenness is the worst judgment. For with God's presence my sense of
   desert may be my sanctification. What Christ bore was not simply a
   sense of the connection between the sinner and the impersonal
   consequences of sin, but a sense of the sinner's relation to the
   personal vis-a-vis of an angry God. God never left Him, but He did
   refuse Him His face. The communion was not broken but its light was
   withdrawn. He was forsaken but not disjoined. He was insolubly bound to
   the very Father who turned away and could not look on sin but to abhor
   and curse it even when His Son was beneath it. How could He feel the
   grief of being forsaken by God if He was not at bottom one with Him?
   Neglect by one to whom we have no link makes no trouble.
   Even a theologian so little orthodox as Weizsacker says: -

     "The moral experience of guilt is too strong to let me say that it
     can be met by any mere manifestation of grace or of love from God to
     man - even when that manifestation carries in it the sympathetic
     suffering of sin's curse, borne merely in the way of confirming the
     manifestation and pressing the object-lesson." "When repentance
     helps the believer to peace it is not ex opere operato, because he
     has repented and may now trust grace; but it is because in his
     repentance he has part and lot in the infinite pain and confession
     of Christ."
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   John

   [1]3:16   [2]12:39   [3]17:19

   Romans

   [4]3:25   [5]5:1-11   [6]7   [7]7:10   [8]11:15

   1 Corinthians

   [9]1:30   [10]2   [11]13

   2 Corinthians

   [12]2:14   [13]3:6   [14]5:14-6:2   [15]5:15-6:2   [16]5:19

   Ephesians

   [17]2:16

   Colossians

   [18]1:10-29

   1 John

   [19]1:9   [20]4:10   [21]4:10
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi-p1.12
   2. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=39#x-p1.6
   3. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=19#ix-p3.18
   4. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#ii-p1.5
   5. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv-p1.2
   6. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#x-p1.5
   7. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=10#x-p1.7
   8. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=15#v-p3.21
   9. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#ix-p3.3
  10. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv-p2.14
  11. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#ii-p1.4
  12. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#viii-p1.29
  13. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v-p3.16
  14. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iv-p1.1
  15. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iv-p2.19
  16. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v-p3.18
  17. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iv-p1.4
  18. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv-p1.3
  19. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi-p1.14
  20. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#ii-p1.3
  21. file:///ccel/f/forsyth/work/cache/work.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iii-p1.16
