     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Nature of the Atonement
      Creator(s): Campbell, John McLeod (1800-1872)
     Print Basis: London: Macmillan and Co., 1905
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

    THE

                            NATURE OF THE ATONEMENT

   AND ITS RELATION TO

REMISSION OF SINS

    AND

ETERNAL LIFE

   BY

JOHN McLEOD CAMPBELL.

   Cambridge:

   MACMILLAN AND Co.

   1856.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CONTENTS.

   CHAPTER I.
   PAGE

   THE ENDS CONTEMPLATED IN THE ATONEMENT AWAKEN THE EXPECTATION THAT WE
   ARE TO UNDERSTAND IN NATURE
   1

   CHAPTER II.

   TEACHING OF LUTHER
   32

   CHAPTER III.

   CALVINISM, AS TAUGHT BY DR. OWEN AND PRESIDENT EDWARDS
   49

   CHAPTER IV.

   CALVINISM, AS RECENTLY MODIFIED
   75

   CHAPTER V.

   REASON FOR NOT RESTING IN THE CONCEPTION OF THE NATURE OF THE ATONEMENT
   ON WHICH THESE SYSTEMS PROCEED.--THE ATONEMENT TO BE SEEN BY ITS OWN
   LIGHT
   113

   CHAPTER VI.

   RETROSPECTIVE ASPECT OF THE ATONEMENT
   128

   CHAPTER VII.

   PROSPECTIVE ASPECT OF THE ATONEMENT
   150

   CHAPTER VIII.

   FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OF THE FIXED AND NECESSARY CHARACTER OF SALVATION
   AS DETERMINING THE NATURE OF THE ATONEMENT AND THE FORM OF THE GRACE OF
   GOD TO MAN
   191

   CHAPTER IX.

   THE INTERCESSION WHICH WAS AN ELEMENT IN THE ATONEMENT CONSIDERED AS
   PRAYER
   227

   CHAPTER X.

   THE ATONEMENT, AS ILLUSTRATED BY THE DETAILS OF THE SACRED NARRATIVE
   240

   CHAPTER XI.

   HOW WE ARE TO CONCEIVE OF THE SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST, DURING THAT CLOSING
   PERIOD OF WHICH SUFFERING WAS THE DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER
   253

   CHAPTER XII.

   THE SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST, IN WHICH THE ATONEMENT WAS PERFECTED,
   CONSIDERED IN THEIR RELATION, 1ST, TO HIS WITNESSING FOR GOD TO MEN,
   AND 2DLY, TO HIS DEALING WITH GOD ON BEHALF OF MEN
   273

   CHAPTER XIII.

   THE DEATH OF CHRIST CONTEMPLATED AS HIS "TASTING DEATH," AND "FOR EVERY
   MAN;" AND THE LIGHT IT SHEDS ON HIS LIFE, AND ON THAT FELLOWSHIP IN HIS
   LIFE, THROUGH BEING CONFORMED TO HIS DEATH, TO WHICH WE ARE CALLED
   295

   CHAPTER XIV.

   COMPARATIVE COMMENDATION OF THE VIEW NOW TAKEN OF THE NATURE OF THE
   ATONEMENT AS TO (1) LIGHT, (2) UNITY AND SIMPLICITY, (3) A NATURAL
   RELATION TO CHRISTIANITY, AND (4) HARMONY WITH THE DIVINE RIGHTEOUSNESS
   314

   CHAPTER XV.

   THAT GOD IS THE FATHER OF OUR SPIRITS, THE ULTIMATE TRUTH ON WHICH
   FAITH MUST HERE ULTIMATELY REST
   334

   CHAPTER XVI.

   CONCLUSION
   371
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE

NATURE OF THE ATONEMENT.

  CHAPTER I.

   THE ENDS CONTEMPLATED IN THE ATONEMENT AWAKEN THE EXPECTATION THAT WE
   ARE TO UNDERSTAND ITS NATURE.

   THE fundamental place which the atonement occupies in Christianity,
   gives importance to every aspect in which it can be contemplated. Of
   these aspects the chief are, its reference, its object, and its nature.
   For whom was it made? what was it intended to accomplish? what has it
   been in itself?

   These are distinct questions, though the discussion of any one of them
   has generally more or less involved that of the other two. Certainly to
   be in possession of the true answer to any one of them must be a help
   in seeking the answers of the others; as also a misconception as to the
   answer of one must tend to mislead us in our consideration of the
   others. This is true, whichever aspect of the subject we may regard as
   the most important, or as having in it most light.

   The question between the Reformers and the Church of Rome--the question
   of justification by faith alone--was most closely connected with the
   second aspect of the atonement, viz. what it has accomplished. The
   discussions which subsequently divided the Reformers among themselves
   turned on the first; being as to whether the atonement had been made
   for all men, or for an election only. Much recent advocacy of the
   atonement has dealt freely with the third point, i.e., what the
   atonement is in itself, as to which there was no question raised in the
   earlier discussions, but as to which it has been latterly felt, that
   the other questions could not be rightly taken up until this one was
   more closely considered; and as to which the advocates of the
   universality of the atonement have begun to feel, that the received
   conceptions of its nature have given to the advocates of an atonement
   referring to an election only, an advantage in argument which a true
   apprehension of what the atonement has been would do away with.

   It is this third aspect of the atonement--i. e., its nature--that I now
   propose to consider; which I propose to do with more immediate
   reference to the second aspect of the atonement, viz. what it has
   accomplished--i. e., its relation to the remission of sins, and the
   gift of eternal life. The first point, viz., the extent of the
   reference of the atonement, it is no part of my immediate purpose to
   discuss. I believe that the atonement has been an atonement for sin,
   having reference to all mankind; I believe this to be distinctly
   revealed; I believe it to be also implied in what the atonement is in
   itself. But it is the illustration of the nature of the atonement which
   I have immediately in view; for it is in the prevailing state of men's
   minds on this subject that I feel a call to write.

   I have just noticed that the exigencies of controversy, and the natural
   desire to give a philosophical harmony to theological system, has
   recently led to a reconsideration of the subject of the nature of the
   atonement. I shall subsequently have occasion to notice particularly
   what the result has been; and why, I am not satisfied with that result:
   which had I been, I should gladly have felt this volume superseded. But
   the intellectual exigencies of systems are, if real, closely connected
   with the spiritual exigencies of the living man; and something higher
   than an intellectual demand, though that is not to be slighted as if it
   were not of God also, is felt to call for light on the nature of the
   atonement, when previously received conceptions no longer satisfy
   conscience, developed, and spiritually enlightened. The internal
   evidence of Christianity all prize, and anything felt to be a real
   addition to it all must welcome, though the freedom with which men seek
   such increase in the internal light of the gospel, is various. Some,
   indeed, may give too much ground for the charge of intellectual
   arrogance, in the demand they make for internal evidence at every step;
   while others, while thankfiilly receiving such evidence, fall into the
   error of treating it as something over and above what was needed for
   faith. I believe the former little realise how much more they believe
   than they understand; and I believe the latter as little realise how
   much their reception of what they believe depends ultimately upon what
   of it they do understand, and spiritually discern to be to the glory of
   God. I am not now to write on the nature of the atonement as one whose
   first faith in the atonement rested on a clear understanding of its
   nature; and yet I do not look back on that first faith as unwarranted
   and unreal. Our first faith may have in it elements which are true and
   abiding, although mingled with much darkness, which, in the low
   undeveloped condition of conscience, causes us no pain or uneasiness.
   As the divine life is developed in us, these two things proceed happily
   together, viz. a growing capacity of judging what the conditions are of
   a peace with God in full harmony with his name and character; and the
   apprehension of these conditions as all present in the atonement. But
   it would be altogether in contradiction to the nature of that love,
   which, while we were yet sinners, gave Christ to die for us, to suppose
   that true yieldings to the drawings of that love, however dimly and
   imperfectly apprehended, ever deceive the heart; or that the hope
   towards God, which accompanies them, can ever disappoint. To come to
   see more of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ is not to come
   to see reason to conclude that my hope was vain while I saw less. Yet
   surely, on the other hand, that God acknowledged me while I saw least,
   yet seeing something truly, is no reason why I should not seek to see
   more,--yea as much as God may give me to see.

   The kindness and love of God our Saviour towards man--the grace of God
   which hath appeared bringing salvation to all men--has a twofold
   aspect; the one retrospective, referring to the evil from which that
   grace brings deliverance; the other prospective, referring to the good
   which it bestows. Of that evil men have the varied and sad experience,
   as they have also feelings that may be interpreted as longings after
   that good; but that experience is unintelligent and these longings are
   vague, and the grace which brings salvation is itself the light which
   reveals both our need of salvation, and what the salvation is which we
   need; explaining to us the mystery of our dark experience, and
   directing our aimless longings to the unknown hope which was for us in
   God.

   The light which reveals to us the evil of our condition as sinners, and
   the good of which God saw the capacity still to remain with us, reveals
   to us, at the same time, the greatness of the gulf which separated
   these two conditions of humanity; and the way in which the desire which
   arose in God, as the Father of spirits, to bridge over that gulf, has
   been accomplished. That way is the atonement; as to which it is certain
   that, if we were so far from seeing the evil of our own evil state as
   God saw it, and, I may say, so much farther still from being conscious
   to the measure of our own capacity of good, the way in which God was to
   accomplish the desire of his love for us we could not have of ourselves
   anticipated, but God himself must make it known to us.

   But we know that, though the gospel alone sheds clear and perfect light
   on the evil of man's condition as a sinner, conscience fully recognises
   the truth of that revelation of ourselves which the gospel makes to us.
   Were it otherwise, assuredly its light would be no light to us. So also
   as to the gift of eternal life. When that gift is revealed to our
   faith, its suitableness to us, and fitness to fill all our capacities
   of well-being as God's ofispring, is discerned by us in proportion as
   we are awakened to true self-consciousness, and learn to separate
   between what God made us, and what we have become through sin. And, in
   like manner, I believe that the atonement, related as it must needs be,
   retrospectively to the condition of evil from which it is the purpose
   of God to save us, and prospectively to the condition of good to which
   it is his purpose to raise us, will commend itself to our faith by the
   inherent light of its divine adaptation to accomplish all which it has
   been intended to accomplish. Nor can I doubt that the high prerogative
   which belongs to us of discerning, and, in our measure, appreciating
   the divine wisdom, as well as the divine goodness, in other regions of
   God's acting, extends to this region also; which doubtless is the
   highest region of all, but which, while the highest, is also the region
   in which our human consciousness, and the teaching of the Spirit of God
   in conscience, should help our understandings most. When the apostle
   represents himself as by manifestation of the truth commending himself
   to every man's conscience in the sight of God, we are not to doubt that
   he so speaks with reference, no less to the atonement itself than to
   the high ends which it contemplates.

   In this view the internal evidence of the atonement ought to be the
   securest stronghold of Christianity: whereas we find many who profess
   to rest all their hope of acceptance with God upon the atonement,
   receiving it as a mystery which they do not feel it needful to
   understand; so that to them it is no part of the evidence of
   revelation, being commended to their faith only by the authority of a
   revelation itself received upon other grounds; while there are others
   to whom the presence of that doctrine in revelation is a strong
   objection to revelation itself. In this state of things it is natural
   to ask, "Can it be that conception of the atonement which the apostle
   expected would commend itself to every man's conscience in the sight of
   God which some thus treat as an argument against revelation, and which
   others, while receiving it, hold only as a mystery?" and the latter
   part of the question is the more difficult: for a rebellious spirit may
   reject revelation for the very reason for which it has most claim to be
   received; while a meek, obedient spirit may be expected at once to
   receive and to understand. For the secret of the Lord is with them that
   fear him, and he will shew them his covenant.

   The lowest measure of internal evidence claimed for the doctrine of the
   atonement is, that conscience testifies to a need be for an atonement.
   It has been usual, in arguing with those who refuse to concede even
   this much, to urge the fact that in all nations, in every age, men have
   sought to atone for sin by sacrifice. Whether this practice be
   referable to the universal tradition of an original institution of
   sacrifice, or be regarded as a consentaneous utterance of humanity,
   expressing its thoughts independently at all successive periods, and in
   places the most remote from each other, it is unquestionably an
   arresting fact. But, not to found a sweeping rejection of all the
   elements of the worship of the heathen on the testimony that they
   sacrificed to devils and not to God, even in the highest view that can
   be taken, their worship was that of "the unknown God,'' and, when
   brought by us to a higher light, must be judged by that higher light.
   If, in attempting so to judge, one man says,--"I see here sacrifices
   offered to propitiate the divine favour. They are offered in manifest
   ignorance, for some of them are monstrous and revolting, and the least
   objectionable are manifestly inadequate to the end contemplated; but
   still we must respect the feelings that suggested sacrifice;" another
   may reply, "To me the feeling and its expression are alike referable to
   radical ignorance of God." Clearly the determination of this
   controversy must be sought elsewhere than in the historical fact which
   is its subject.

   As to the use that has been made of the recorded instances of heroic
   self-sacrifice connected with assumed divine requirements,--in
   reference to which it has been lately beautifully said that the love of
   Christ was "foreshadowed in these weaker acts of love'' (Thomson, p.
   35),--however much we must admire the self-devotion manifested, it is
   not very clear how far the moral element in the sacrifice, by which the
   person sacrificing himself was endeared to those for whose sakes he so
   devoted himself, was that which was supposed to give its value to the
   sacrifice in the eyes of the angry deities whom it was sought to
   propitiate. All that the demand implied was the high value of the
   offering to those from whom it was required, and the offended gods may
   have been thought of only as accepting what cost the people dearly; as
   Moloch received the children cast into the fire. But if indeed we are
   to conclude that the spirit of self-sacrifice in the victim was
   recognised as constituting the virtue of the sacrifice, there is here
   unquestionably a marvellous ray of light, from the midst of that gross
   darkness, shed upon the nature of atonement.

   But if the testimony of conscience on the subject of the need be for an
   atonement, is sought in the history of religion, let it be sought in
   the history of Christianity: and let not this seem a begging of the
   question. No man is entitled to put aside the assertion of a true man,
   declaring what the testimony of his conscience is, because that
   testimony coincides with the man's faith. And to those who say that
   they find in themselves no internal testimony to the doctrine of the
   atonement, we present a fact which no serious mind will lightly put
   aside, when we refer, not to the dark and blind endeavours of the
   heathen to propitiate an unknown God, but to the experience, recorded
   by themselves, of those who, in all ages of the Church, have seemed to
   have attained to the highest knowledge of God, and closest communion
   with him, and who have professed that they have seen a glory of God in
   the cross of Christ; that is, in the atonement as the channel through
   which sinful man receives the pardon of sin and eternal life. No one,
   indeed, is called upon to constrain his conscience to adopt the
   testimony of the conscience of others, whoever they may be. But if a
   man understand the nature of conscience, and realise how imperfect its
   development usually is, and how much the more matured Christian mind of
   one man may, without dictating, aid the faith of another man, he can
   never make little account of the conclusions on this great subject at
   which men characterised by holiness, and love to God and man, have
   arrived.

   But the question is not to be decided by authority. Nor would I seem to
   be insensible--for I am not--to the force of what may be urged, even in
   reference to the recorded experience of the better portion of the
   Church, as to the extent to which theological systems, and traditional
   habits of thought, may affect, and have affected, religious
   experiences. I have, indeed, seen, in cases of deep awakening of spirit
   on the subject of religion, an identity of experience in reference to
   this matter under teachings so very different as to form of thought, as
   to preclude the idea that these experiences were an echo of the
   teaching; while, most certainly, they were not traceable to any
   previous habits of thought in the taught. But I dwell not on the
   argument from this source, as no man will, or should accept the
   doctrine of the atonement because it has commended itself to the
   consciences of others while it does not as yet commend itself to his
   own.

   But a response in conscience as contemplated by the apostle, implies
   much more than a reception of a need be for an atonement; nor can it be
   regarded as accomplished, unless the atonement revealed be felt to
   commend itself by its own internal light, and its divine fitness to
   accomplish the high ends of God in it. And as this presupposes that
   these ends are themselves seen in the light of God, it is necessary,
   before proceeding further, to fix attention for a little, on the amount
   of the assertion, that there is a response in conscience to the
   testimony of the gospel regarding the evil condition in which the grace
   of God finds us, and the excellence of the salvation which it brings.

   When it is said that the representations of revelation on the subject
   of our sin and guilt, and need of forgiveness, have a response in
   conscience, this is not asserted on the ground of the ordinary habit of
   thought of men's minds on these subjects, or of the feeling with which
   they usually treat the statements of the word of God regarding them.
   Men, indeed, readily enough confess that they are sinners, and that
   they need forgiveness; but this does not at all imply that they
   understand the charge of guilt, which the Scriptures contain, far less
   respond to it; or that they have any conception of the forgiveness
   which they need, while they speak about it so easily. How far it is
   otherwise becomes very manifest when the reality of sin is steadily
   contemplated, and the charge of guilt is weighed, and the testimony of
   conscience in reference to that charge is calmly listened to, and its
   solemn import is considered. All the experience that now ensues, shews
   how much the fact of sin is a discovery to the awakened sinner. Seeing
   what it amounts to, he now shrinks from the admission which he had
   previously made so easily;--though he may not now dare to recall
   it;--while, as to forgiveness, in proportion as he comes to understand
   that he really needs it, he finds it difficult to believe that he
   himself, and his own sins, can be the subject of it. As long as to
   confess that I am a sinner is felt to be nothing more than to confess
   that my moral state is an imperfect one, that it presents a mixture of
   good and evil,--that much in me needs forgiveness,--I cannot say how
   much; while I trust that there is also good in me which God accepts,
   and which may so far counterbalance the evil, I can easily say, "'I
   know I am a sinner; but I trust in God's mercy." But when the light of
   that word, ''Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
   with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind,
   and thy neighbour as thyself," shines in upon me, and the clear, calm,
   solemn testimony within, is heard responding, "It is true--so it ought
   to be;" and in proportion as I am honest with myself I feel constrained
   to reply, "But it is not so with me, I do not so love God, I do not so
   love my neighbour;" then the case is altogether changed. I am tempted
   to turn away, alike from the testimony of Scripture, and the testimony
   of conscience.--shrinking from the confession which, if I listen and
   reply honestly, I must make. Or, if I am too much awakened, and too
   much in earnest, so to tamper with the light that is dawning on me,--if
   I feel that I must look this terrible fact of sin full in the face, and
   do look at it; then does the forgiveness, of which I spoke easily while
   I knew not what it was to be forgiven, become to me most difficult of
   faith.

   Now it is not strange, or, in one sense, wrong, that we should shrink
   from the feeling of simple unqualified guilt. It would not be well that
   it should be otherwise than both painful and terrible to conclude that,
   in the sight of God, I am guilty of not loving God, and not loving men.
   Things would be worse than they are with us, if such a discovery could
   be without causing both self-loathing and fear. Nor, as to forgiveness,
   is it to be wondered at, that, when we really come to understand that
   we need it, we find it most difficult to believe in it. God has been to
   us too much an unknown God, and our thoughts of him too far removed
   from the apprehension that there is forgiveness with God that he may be
   feared, to permit it to be otherwise. But, however painful the
   discovery of our sin, and however unprepared we may be to bear it by
   the knowledge of the help that is for us in God, the thoroughly
   awakened conscience, or rather conscience when we are thoroughly
   awakened to hear its voice, forces upon us the conviction, that the
   testimony of the Scriptures as to our sin and guilt before God, and our
   need of forgiveness,--of a forgiveness that shall be purely and simply
   such,--the forgiving of a debt to one who has nothing to pay, is just
   and true.

   If any will not concede this much,--if any will extenuate the guilt of
   sin by referring what man is to his circumstances,--or by treating his
   moral condition as a low state of development, corresponding to that in
   which intellectually he is found in savage life, and if the forgiveness
   needed be thus reduced to the lowest possible amount, until, indeed, it
   ceases to be forgiveness, and there is room left only for a benevolent
   pity at the most; from persons in this mind I cannot expect that they
   will take the next step with me in this path, seeing they do not take
   the first. But, although I can concede much qualification of the
   apprehension of sin which we find uttered by newly awakened sinners,
   and admit that their language is very much affected by their ignorance
   of God, and the perturbing effect of the awful discovery as to their
   own moral and spiritual state which they have made, I cannot qualify
   the assertion, that the testimony of Scripture as to the reality and
   guilt of sin, and the sinner's dependence upon free grace for pardon,
   has a clear and unequivocal response in conscience; the recognition of
   which response on the sinner's part, is the proper attitude for his
   mind to assume, in listening to, and weighing the doctrine of the
   atonement.

   Nay, more, looking at sin in reference to a still deeper weighing of a
   man's own state as a sinner, I believe that the experience which the
   apostle Paul speaks of, in the close of the seventh chapter of his
   Epistle to the Romans, must be recognised as the completeness of that
   development of conscience, which fitly prepares the mind for
   understanding and welcoming the atonement. I refer to that condition of
   the human spirit in which a man has so seen the claims of the law of
   God in the light of conscience, that he can say, "I delight in the law
   of God after the inner man," while, by that same light, he judges what
   his own flesh is, and what its power over him makes him to be; so that
   he says, "I find a law in my members warring against the law of my
   mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin that is in my
   members," and his heart's cry is, "O wretched man that I am! who shall
   deliver me from the body of this death?" Until, not only the
   contrariety that is between sin and the law of God, and the position of
   guilt in which it places the sinner, are seen in the light of
   conscience; but, beyond this, the inward contradiction with the law of
   his own well-being, and with that which he must recognise as the true
   ideal of excellence for humanity, is also seen in that light, and
   painfully felt, a man is not truly having the full testimony of
   conscience on the subject of sin, or conscious in himself to that foil
   response which is in man to the teaching of revelation on this subject.
   And until a man has come to stand at this point, he is not fully
   prepared to consider the atonement retrospectively, that is, in its
   relation to the evil condition from which it is our deliverance.

   As to the testimony of conscience to the discovery of revelation on the
   subject of the gift of eternal life, to which the atonement has
   prospective reference, the fact of this testimony is not alleged on the
   ground of men's ordinary habits of thought and feeling, in this case
   any more than in the former. The intelligent apprehension of that which
   is said, when it is said, that "God has given to us eternal life," and
   the enlightened self-consciousness in which that gift is welcomed as
   altogether suited to man, and the highest good of which he is capable,
   imply a development of conscience, and a clearness of inward light,
   beyond even what the fullest reception of the teaching of the Bible on
   the subject of sin, and guilt, and spiritual death, supposes.

   But conscience is capable of such development; and eternal life may be
   apprehended by us as a manner of existence--a kind of life, the
   elements of which we understand, the excellence of which commends
   itself to us, and our own capacity for participation in which as
   originally created in God's image, and apart from our bondage to sin,
   we can discern in ourselves.

   I speak of eternal life--that life which was with the Father before the
   world was, and which is manifested in the Son--of his own acquaintance
   with which as a life lived in humanity, through his acquaintance with
   Him in whom it was manifested, the apostle John speaks with such
   fulness of expression in the beginning of his first epistle. I do not
   speak of an unknown future blessedness, in a future state of being, of
   which conscience can understand nothing; but I speak of a life which in
   itself is one and the same here and hereafter,--however it may be
   developed in us hereafter, beyond its development here. Of this life
   conscience can take cognisance, its elements it can understand and
   consider,--comparing them with the elements of that other perishing
   life of which man has experience; and, taking both to the light of what
   man is as God's offspring, it can, in that light, decide on the
   excellence of eternal life, and on the great grace of God in bestowing
   it, and the perfect salvation in which man partakes in receiving it.
   How little men's consciences address themselves to this high task, is
   too manifest; inasmuch as ordinary religion is so much a struggle to
   secure an unknown future happiness, instead of being the meditation on,
   and the welcoming of the present gift of eternal life. But to this high
   task conscience is equal, and to engage in it is the imperative demand
   which the preaching of the gospel makes on it, that preaching which
   seeks to commend itself to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

   This, then, is the second part of the due preparation for considering
   the nature of the atonement, with the purpose of coming to know what
   response that doctrine has in the heart of man, viz.--that the gift of
   eternal life, revealed as bestowed on us through the atonement, be
   taken to the light of conscience; and what that gift is, be there seen;
   and the high result that is accomplished in man in his coming to live
   that life, be truly conceived of. For thus having before the mind what
   God has proposed to do through the atonement, now prospectively, as
   formerly retrospectively, there is the likelihood that its nature, and
   its suitableness for accomplishing the divine end, shall become visible
   to us; if that may be at all.

   These two extreme points being clearly conceived of, and together
   present to the mind; and the evil condition of man which the gospel
   reveals, and the blessed condition to which it raises our hopes, being
   seen in the light of conscience, developed to this degree under the
   teaching of God; the gulf which separates them is seen to be very
   great. We are contemplating extreme opposites, in the highest and most
   solemn region of things:--spiritual darkness and death, sin and guilt,
   the righteous condemnation and wrath of God, inward disorder and strife
   between man and the law of his own well-being;--from these our thoughts
   pass to divine light filling humanity, eternal life partaken in,
   righteousness and holiness, the acceptance and favour of God, inward
   harmony experienced in the fulfilment in man, of that ideal for him
   which was in the divine mind from the beginning.

   It is difficult for us to realise the opposite states, which, by such
   words, we attempt to describe. The very words we use, though we know
   them to be the right words, we use with the consciousness, that they
   have, in our lips, but a small part of their meaning. If
   we set ourselves steadfastly to study their use in the Scriptures, and
   listen with open ear and heart to the interpretation of them, which
   conscience, under the teaching of the Holy Spirit, accepts, we find
   these awful realities of evil and good, becoming gradually more and
   more palpable and real to us; so that they come to be felt as the only
   realities, and existence comes to have its interest entirely in
   relation to them. But the wings of our faith do not long sustain this
   flight. Not that we come to doubt the conclusions at which in such
   seasons we have arrived; but that, so to speak, we descend from this
   high region of light and truth, and come down to the earth, and to
   ordinary human life, and the conditions of humanity that present
   themselves around us; and, looking at men and women as they are, and at
   the mixture of good and evil which they exhibit,--seeing also ourselves
   in others--we practically reconcile ourselves to them, and to
   ourselves; and the vision of unmixed evil, and of perfect good, fades
   from our remembrance, or, at best, from having been felt as that which
   was most real, becomes but as an ideal.

   One cause of the practical difficulty that is experienced in keeping
   our habitual thoughts and feelings in harmony with the perceptions of
   our most far-seeing moments, is this, that the world in which we are is
   actually a mixture of good and evil; that it presents neither the
   unmixed evil of which the Scriptures speak, and to which conscience
   testifies as man's sinful state, nor this unmixed good, which the
   Scriptures reveal, and which, in the light of conscience, we recognise
   as eternal life. We are not in a world yet unvisited by the grace of
   God; on the contrary, we are encompassed by fruits of that very
   atonement in which we are called to believe. Nay, the appearances
   presented in man's condition as we know it, which have furnished the
   objectors to the atonement with their most specious arguments, are
   actually to be traced to that atonement itself; while, at the same
   time, the power for good which belongs to the atonement, and its true
   working, have no perfect realisation in what men are seen to be; for
   none are, simply and absolutely, what the atonement would make them; so
   that, on the one side, none are seen so far from God as, but for the
   atonement, they would have been;--while, on the other hand, none are
   seen so near to God as it has been the end of the atonement to bring
   them. The light shining in the darkness modifies the darkness, even
   while the darkness comprehends it not;--and, even where it is
   comprehended, the darkness is not yet seen altogether destroyed by it.

   Therefore we must, in studying the subject of the atonement, exercise
   our minds to abide in that sense and perception of things to which we
   attain, when the teaching of the Bible, as to the sinful state from
   which the atonement delivers us, and the eternal life which through it
   we receive, is having a full response in conscience. So shall we see
   the work of God in Christ in the light of a true apprehension of what
   that work had to accomplish; and shall not fall into the error of
   allowing the partial effects of that work itself to be to us arguments
   for doubting its necessity and reality.

   The first demand which the gospel makes upon us, in relation to the
   atonement, is, that we believe that there is forgiveness with God.
   Forgiveness--that is, love to an enemy surviving his enemy, and which,
   notwithstanding his enmity, can act towards him for his good; this we
   must be able to believe to be in God toward us, in order that we may be
   able to believe in the atonement.

   This is a faith which, in the order of things, must precede the faith
   of an atonement. If we could ourselves make an atonement for our sins,
   as by sacrifice the heathen attempted to do, and as, in their self
   righteous endeavours to make their peace with God, men are, in fact,
   daily attempting, then such an atonement might be thought of as
   preceding forgiveness, and the cause of it. But if God provides the
   atonement, then forgiveness must precede atonement; and the atonement
   must be the form of the manifestation of the forgiving love of God, not
   its cause.

   But surely the demand for the faith that there is forgiveness in God
   has a response in conscience; and doubtless it is, in part at least,
   ignorance of God that causes the difficulty in believing in
   forgiveness, which is felt when an actual need of forgiveness that
   shall be purely such, is realised. For it ought not to be difficult to
   believe that, though we have sinned against God, God still regards us
   with a love which has survived our sins. Nay more, we cannot realise
   the two ideas with reference to man which we have just been
   considering, viz.,--the evil state into which sin has brought him, and
   the opposite good state of which the capacity has remained in him, as
   together present to the mind of the Father of the spirits of all flesh,
   without feeling that he must desire to bridge over the gulf that
   separates these two conceived conditions of humanity;--that if it can
   be bridged over He will bridge it over; that, if that conceivable good
   for man is a possible good for man, it will be put within man's reach.
   Therefore, the first tone that catches the ear of the heart in hearing
   the gospel being, that ''there is forgiveness with God," it ought not
   to be felt difficult to believe this joyful sound. It ought to have,
   and doubtless it has an answer in conscience.

   The expression once familiar to the lips of ministers of Christ in our
   land, and which the greater awakenedness of their people's minds on the
   subject of sin, caused them to feel the need of practically, viz.,
   "that it is the greatest sin to despair of God's mercy," surely is a
   record of the inward sense of mercy as entering into our original and
   fundamental apprehension of God: ''Unto us belong shame and confusion
   of face: unto the Lord our God belongeth mercy," is an instinctive
   utterance of the human heart. Accordingly, when our Lord teaches us to
   "love our enemies that we may be the children of our Father in heaven,
   who makes his sun to shine on the evil and on the good," he assumes,
   that the witness without which God has never from the beginning left
   himself, in that he has given rain from heaven and fruitful seasons,
   has addressed something in man which could interpret the acting of love
   to enemies.

   The atonement, I say, presupposes that there is forgiveness with God;
   and in doing so has a response in conscience. But this is not the
   question which the doctrine of the atonement raises, neither is it
   because it implies such forgiveness that it has been objected to: on
   the contrary, the objection has been made,--but an objection that could
   apply only to a false view of the atonement,--that that doctrine did
   not recognise the mercy that is essentially in God, inasmuch as it
   represented God as needing to be propitiated--to be made gracious. An
   atonement to make God gracious, to move him to compassion, to turn his
   heart toward those from whom sin had alienated his love, it would,
   indeed, be difficult to believe in; for, if it were needed it would be
   impossible. To awaken to the sense of the need of such an atonement,
   would certainly be to awaken to utter and absolute despair. But the
   Scriptures do not speak of such an atonement; for they do not represent
   the love of God to man as the effect, and the atonement of Christ as
   the cause, but,--just the contrary,--they represent the love of God as
   the cause, and the atonement as the effect. "God so loved the world,
   that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him,
   might not perish, but have everlasting life."

   Those, therefore, who object to the doctrine of the atonement on the
   assumption that the atonement is presented to them as the cause of
   God's forgiving love, are placed under a great disadvantage by this
   misapprehension of the demand that is made on their faith. What they
   are asked to believe has its difficulties,--and I do not wish to
   understate these; but they are as nothing in comparison; and let them
   learn with thankfulness, that that is not the true conception of the
   atonement which has so repelled them. That which they are really asked
   to consider as what, it is expected, being truly apprehended, will
   commend itself to conscience in the sight of God, is the way in which
   the forgiving love of God has manifested itself for the salvation of
   sinful men.

   Those who, being under no misapprehension on this point, still draw
   back from the faith of the atonement, do so as feeling a difficulty
   which may be thus expressed: Seeing that there is forgiveness with God,
   that he may be feared, and that his love not only survives men's
   transgressions, but can confer new gifts on those who have
   transgressed, why should not this love be manifested without an
   atonement? Why should not the pardon of sin as an act of Divine
   Clemency be simply intimated? Why should not this new and great gift of
   eternal life be simply bestowed, and presented to men as the rich
   bounty of God?

   I have referred to the difficulty which a thoroughly awakened sinner
   feels in believing that God will pardon his sins, and grant to him
   eternal life; and such an objector would say, "Why should he feel any
   such difficulty? Is it not the evidence of a morbid moral state so to
   feel?" Now I have admitted that the feeling in question, arises in part
   from the extent to which God has been previously an unknown God. But
   only in part. There are other elements in that difficulty which are
   connected with the dawn of a true knowledge of God. God's mercy has not
   been previously apprehended, otherwise it would be felt wrong to
   despair of it;--but neither have God's holiness and righteousness, and
   his wrath against sin been previously apprehended;--and the fears,
   represented as indications of a morbid moral state, are, I believe, in
   reality the effect of light visiting the spirit of the man--flight as
   to the real sinfulness of sin, and its contrariety to the mind of God.
   Admitting that there is much perturbation of mind;--admitting that the
   light that is shed upon the truth of man's moral and spiritual
   condition, is but partial, and that the name of God and its glory have
   not yet shone in upon his soul and conscience full orbed,--still it is
   light that is visiting the man who uses language as to his own
   sinfulness, and the deserts of his sin, with the expression of fears as
   to the wrath of God, which the objector would refer to a morbid state
   of mind,--fears which may, indeed, seem extravagant, and almost madness
   to others who have not yet taken themselves, and what they are in
   themselves, to that light of God in which he sees himself, and who can
   therefore speak to him of trusting in God's mercy, and rebuke his
   fears, so easily; not because they know more of God's mercy and
   forgiveness than he does, but because they have such different
   apprehensions of that sin, as to which forgiveness is needed.

   Nor is the distress experienced connected with the forgiveness of past
   sin alone. That grace for the time to come--that gift of eternal
   life--which it appears to the objector to the atonement may so easily
   be believed in as the free bounty of God, may be so far conceived of by
   the awakened sinner, and may so commend itself to him, that he can say,
   "I delight in the law of God after the inward man;"--and yet, to
   believe that the good he apprehends is freely granted to him, is so far
   from an easy and natural act of faith in God's goodness, that the ideal
   which has dawned upon him, is felt to be the ideal of a hopeless good.
   He finds "a law in his members warring against the law of his mind, and
   bringing him into captivity to the law of sin that is in his
   members;"--so that he cries out,--"O wretched man that I am! who shall
   deliver me from the body of this death?"

   Now, we know that where, in such cases, all general urging of God's
   mercy and clemency, and willingness to pardon and to save, fail to give
   peace, or quicken hope; the presenting of the atonement for the
   acceptance of faith does both. Awakened sinners, (and I use the
   expression simply as to my own mind the most accurate, while also it is
   the echo of the word "Awake, thou that sleepest,") who are finding
   themselves unable to believe that God,--not because He is not merciful
   and gracious, but though merciful and gracious, and however merciful
   and gracious He is,--can pardon their sins and bestow on them eternal
   life, are found able to believe in such pardon, and to receive the hope
   of eternal life, when these are presented to them in connexion with the
   sacrifice of Himself by which Christ put away sin, becoming the
   propitiation for the sins of the whole world.

   This fact is surely deserving of the serious consideration of those
   whose objection to the atonement is, that it should be enough for man's
   peace and hope to be told, that the Lord God is merciful and gracious
   and ready to forgive, and to relieve all who call upon him. Here there
   is manifested an inability to believe in God's forgiveness as meeting
   man's need, when presented simply as clemency and mercy;--but,
   presented in the form of the atonement, it is believed in. Not surely
   because less credit for love and mercy is given to God now;--for on the
   contrary the conception of love simply forgiving, and of love forgiving
   at such a cost to itself, differ just in this, that in the latter, the
   love is infinitely enhanced.

   An objector may reply that doubtless this is a remarkable mental
   phenomenon, and that he does not deny that what are called religious
   memoirs abound in illustrations of it; but that he cannot assume that
   those who have had this history were in the light, and that he himself
   is in the dark;--and that, to his mind, to preach forgiveness, and the
   gift of eternal life, in connexion with an atonement, is only to
   increase the difficulty of faith;--for that, while he sees in both
   these, contemplated simply in themselves, what he receives as worthy of
   the goodness of God, the addition of the doctrine of the atonement
   introduces other, and to him, mysterious elements into the question,
   complicating what should be a simple matter, and, in fact, representing
   the love of God as not at liberty freely to express itself, but, having
   difficulties and hindrances to encounter,--the removal and overcoming
   of which involved such mysteries as the incarnation, and the self
   sacrifice of the Son of God.

   It is even so: and this, doubtless, is the difficulty,--the great and
   ultimate difficulty; and let its amount be distinctly recognised. That
   God should do anything that is loving and gracious--which implies only
   an act of will--putting forth power guided by wisdom, this seems easy
   of faith. But, either that any object should appear desirable to God's
   love, which infinite power, guided by infinite wisdom, cannot
   accomplish by a simple act of the divine will, or that, if there be an
   object not to be thus attained, God will proceed to seek that object by
   a process which implies a great cost to God, and
   self-sacrifice,--either of these positions is difficult of faith. But
   the doctrine of the atonement involves them both: and this we must
   realise, and bear in mind, if we would deal wisely, nay justly, with
   objectors.

   Yet, doubtless, the elements, in the atonement which cause difficulty
   are the very elements which give it its power to be that peace and hope
   for man which the gospel contemplates, and which a simple intimation of
   the divine clemency and goodness could not quicken in him. It is that
   God is contemplated as manifesting clemency and goodness at a great
   cost, and not by a simple act of will that costs nothing, that gives
   the atonement its great power over the heart of man. For that is a
   deep, yea, the deepest spiritual instinct in man which affirms, that in
   proportion as any act manifests love it is to be believed as ascribed
   to God who is love. No manifestation of power meeting me can so assure
   me that I am meeting God as the manifestation of love does. Therefore
   they greatly err who seek an external evidence of power, instead of an
   internal evidence of love, in considering the claim of anything to be
   received as from God.

   Accordingly, a high argument in favour of Christianity, and which has
   awakened a deep response in many a heart, has been founded upon this
   very aspect of the doctrine of the atonement, viz., that it represents
   God as manifesting self-sacrificing love; and so reveals the depth, not
   to say the reality, of love, as creation and providence could not do.
   And as a final cause for the permission of a condition of things,
   giving opportunity to the divine love to shew the self-sacrificing
   nature of love, and to bless with the blessedness of being the objects
   of such love, and, as the fruit of this, the blessedness of so
   loving--in this view--this argument is both true and deep.

   But the internal evidence which at the point at which we stand in our
   inquiry we need, must be something different from this. The evil
   condition to which sin had reduced man, the good of which nevertheless
   man still continued capable; these ideas in relation to man being
   conceived of as together present to the divine mind, it appeared to us
   that we could believe, that the desire would arise in the heart of the
   Father of the spirits of all flesh to bridge over this gulf if that
   could be: nay, it seemed impossible to believe that that desire should
   not arise. Now the gospel declares, that the love of God has, not only
   desired to bridge over this gulf, but has actually bridged it over, and
   the atonement is presented to us as that in which this is accomplished.
   What we seek is internal evidence--a response in our own spirits, as to
   the divine wisdom manifested in what is thus represented as the means
   by which divine love attains the object of its desire.

   But in this view it is not enough to say that this way is that in which
   the greatest proof of love is afforded. Love cannot be conceived of as
   doing anything gratuitously, merely to shew its own depth, for which
   thing there was no call in the circumstances of the case viewed in
   themselves. A man may love another so as to be willing to die for
   him;--but he will not actually lay down his life merely to shew his
   love, and without there being anything to render his doing so necessary
   in order to save the life for which he yields up his own.

   Therefore the question remains, "How was so costly an expression of
   love as the atonement necessary?"--and how costly this expression of
   divine love has been to God we must fully recognise. For there is no
   doubt that a chief source of the difficulty which is felt in receiving
   the doctrine of the atonement is, that the atonement presupposes the
   incarnation. "God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were
   yet sinners, Christ died for us." A man who is contented to die for
   another manifests his love at ihe greatest cost to himself. By such an
   illustration, therefore, the Apostle teaches that the love that is
   manifested in Christ's dying for us is manifested at a great cost to
   God. Of course this assumes that Christ is God. That God should
   sacrifice one creature for another,--subject one of His offspring to
   death that others of His offspring might live,--would have nothing in
   it parallel to a man's laying down his own life for another. To say
   that Christ was not after all sacrificed in this transaction;--that
   what he endured was on his part voluntary, and endured in the
   contemplation of a reward,--for that, "for the joy set before him he
   endured the cross, despising the shame," is no answer; for that God
   takes credit to Himself for the love that

   Christ manifests in dying for us--this is the point of the Apostle's
   argument! As to the reward set before Christ, it is that fruit of His
   self-sacrifice which must be presupposed in order that the
   self-sacrifice should be a reasonable transaction. Self-sacrificing
   love does not sacrifice itself but for an end of gain to its objects;
   otherwise it would be folly. Does its esteeming as a reward that gain
   to those for whom it suffers, destroy its claim to being
   self-sacrifice? Nay, that which seals its character as self-sacrificing
   love is, that this to it is a satisfying reward. ''He shall see of the
   travail of his soul, and be satisfied."

   In considering why our redemption has been at such a cost, and the
   whole subject of the nature of the atonement, we shall be greatly
   helped by keeping distinctly before our minds, these two extreme points
   to which the atonement is related in that it refers to the one
   retrospectively, to the other prospectively, viz. the condition in
   which the grace of God finds us, and the condition to which it raises
   us.

   Christ has "redeemed us who were under the law, that we might receive
   the adoption of sons"--Christ "suffered for us, the just for the
   unjust, that he might bring us to God." Both that we were "under the
   law" and "unjust" and that we were "to receive the adoption of sons"
   and to be "brought to God" may be expected to have affected the nature
   of the atonement as determining what it must be adequate to: more
   especially the latter, as the great result contemplated. Accordingly,
   in the writings of the Apostles, we find the necessity for the
   atonement being what it was connected with both--but more especially
   with the latter.

   Yet in our systems of theology the former, and not the latter, has been
   chiefly the foundation of the arguments employed. Not that the latter
   has not also been taken into account, and provision made for it; but it
   has not been regarded as shedding light on the nature of the atonement.
   This is certain. For however our "receiving the adoption of sons" and
   our being "brought to God" enter into the scheme of salvation as
   represented in these systems, it is in the fact that we "were under the
   law" and "unjust"--that is to say, that we were sinners, under the
   condemnation of a broken law, that the necessity for the atonement has
   been recognised.

   The important consequences that have followed from this, as seems to
   me, departure from the example of the Apostles will appear as we
   proceed. But with the conclusions arrived at as to the necessity for an
   atonement, as arising from the fact, that we, whom the grace of God has
   visited, were sinners under the condemnation of a broken law, I fully
   accord. I believe that "by the deeds of the law could no flesh living
   be justified"--understanding by the law, not the Mosaic ritual, but
   that law of which the Apostle speaks when he says, "I delight in the
   law of God after the inward man"--that is to say, the law, "Thou shalt
   love the Lord thy God with all thine heart and mind and soul and
   strength, and thy neighbour as thyself." I believe that no modification
   of the law as a law, in accommodation to man's condition as a sinner,
   is conceivable that could either give the assurance of the pardon of
   sin, or quicken us with a new life ; and that all idea of bridging
   over, by a modified law, the gulf which we have been contemplating is
   untenable. I believe that, if this was to be accomplished, it could
   only be by some moral and spiritual constitution quite other than the
   law: while, at the same time, such other constitution cannot be
   conceived of as introduced in any way that does not duly honour the
   law; or that delivers from the consequences of transgressing it,
   without vindicating the righteousness of the law, and the consistency
   of the law-giver. Finally, I believe that this requirement is
   recognised in the gospel, being fully met in the atonement.

   But I must guard against seeming to give to the reasonings by which
   these conclusions have been arrived at, an unqualified assent. When it
   is argued that the justice or righteousness of God and his
   holiness,--and also his truth and faithfulness, presented difficulties
   in the way of our salvation, which rendered for their removal an
   atonement necessary, I fully absent to this; and, when it is added, as
   I have seen it lately urged, that the goodness, the love of God as the
   moral ruler and governor of the universe, also demanded an atonement,
   that our salvation might be consistent with the well being of the moral
   universe,--I can freely concede this also: nay, more, I would say, not
   the love of God having respect to the interests of the moral universe
   only, but the love of God having respect to the interests of the
   subjects of the salvation themselves. For indeed to me salvation
   otherwise than through the atonement is a contradiction.

   But while in reference to the not uncommon way of regarding this
   subject which represents righteousness and holiness as opposed to the
   sinner's salvation, and mercy and love as on his side, I freely concede
   that all the divine attributes were, in one view, against the sinner in
   that they called for the due expression of God's wrath against sin in
   the history of redemption; I believe, on the other hand, that the
   justice, the righteousness, the holiness of God have an aspect
   according to which they, as well as his mercy, appear as intercessors
   for man, and crave his salvation. Justice may be contemplated as
   according to sin its due; and there is in righteousness, as we are
   conscious to it, what testifies that sin should be miserable. But
   justice looking at the sinner, not simply as the fit subject of
   punishment, but as existing in a moral condition of unrighteousness,
   and so its own opposite, must desire that the sinner should cease to be
   in that condition; should cease to be unrighteous,--should become
   righteous: righteousness in God craving for righteousness in man, with
   a craving which the realisation of righteousness in man alone can
   satisfy. So also of holiness. In one view it repels the sinner, and
   would banish him to outer darkness, because of its repugnance to sin.
   In another it is pained by the continued existence of sin and
   unholiness, and must desire that the sinner should cease to be sinful.
   So that the sinner, conceived of as awakening to the consciousness of
   his own evil state, and saying to himself, "By sin I have destroyed
   myself. Is there yet hope for me in God?" should hear an encouraging
   answer, not only from the love and mercy of God, but also from his very
   righteousness and holiness. We must not forget, in considering the
   response that is in conscience to the charge of sin and guilt, that,
   though the fears which accompany that response are partly the effect of
   a dawning of light, they also in part arise from remaining darkness. He
   who is able to interpret the voice of God within him truly, and with
   full spiritual intelligence, will be found saying, not only, "There is
   to me cause for fear in the righteousness and holiness of God"--but
   also, "There is room for hope for me in the divine righteousness and
   holiness." And when gathering consolation from the meditation of the
   name of the Lord, that consolation will be not only, "Surely the divine
   mercy desires to see me happy rather than miserable"--but also, "Surely
   the divine righteousness desires to see me righteous--the divine
   holiness desires to see me holy--my continuing unrighteous and unholy
   is as grieving to God's righteousness and holiness as my misery through
   sin is to His pity and love." "Good and righteous is the Lord;
   therefore will He teach sinners the way which they should choose." "A
   just God and a Saviour;" not as the harmony of a seeming opposition,
   but "a Saviour," because "a just God."

   If this thought commends itself to my reader's mind as it does to mine,
   he will feel it to be important; and he will see, in reference to the
   atonement, not that it tends to make an atonement appear less
   necessary, but that it may greatly affect the nature of the atonement
   required: for it implies that the prospective aspect of the
   atonement,--its reference to the life of sonship given to us in Christ,
   has been its most important aspect as respects the demands of
   righteousness and holiness, as it confessedly is as respects those of
   mercy and love. This is so--while, assuredly, it is also true that the
   retrospective aspect of the atonement as connecting the pardon of sin
   with the vindicating of the honour of the divine law, is not less a
   meeting of a demand of divine love than of the demands of righteousness
   and holiness. How could it be otherwise, seeing that the law is love?
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER II.

   TEACHING OF LUTHER.

   THE evil of the condition in respect of which we needed salvation, and
   the excellence of the salvation given to us in Christ; and the reality
   and exceeding greatness of the difficulties which stood in the way of
   our salvation, and which the Saviour had to encounter in accomplishing
   our redemption, have perhaps never been more vividly realised than by
   the great reformer Luther. And, though he does not afford much help to
   one seeking a clear intellectual apprehension of the nature and essence
   of the atonement, or of that might by which Christ prevailed; yet that
   his spiritual insight into these things has been great, is implied in
   the depth of his understanding of justification by faith, and of the
   relation in which peace in believing stands to that which our Lord
   asserted concerning himself when He said, "He that hath seen me hath
   seen the Father." I believe it will be of much advantage to us
   subsequently to occupy a little space here with the consideration of
   his teaching in relation to the atonement, and what it has
   accomplished.

   I have referred more than may meet the indulgence of some readers,
   though less than my own feeling of its value as a source of light would
   have inclined me to do, to the experience of deeply awakened sinners.
   The great reformer was such an one: and this part of his history has
   impressed a special character on his teaching more than anything else
   that went to make him what he was. To any who read his words, not as
   extravagance and fanaticism, but,--as I believe they are entitled to be
   read,--words of truth and soberness, his commendation of his great
   doctrine of "Justification by faith alone" from his own experience of
   its preciousness, is deeply interesting, and, I may say, most
   affecting. For, when Luther speaks of the law and the Gospel,--of the
   righteousness of works, and of the righteousness of faith, it is not as
   a speculative theologian, reasoning out principles to their
   conclusions, and arranging the parts of a system in their due
   relations. He speaks of the law as what wrought with his spirit until
   it had brought him to the brink of despair. He speaks of the gospel as
   what had spoken peace and life to him, and, by its revelation of Christ
   to his faith, had raised him as from hell to heaven. Seeking to be
   justified by works is to him no mere theological error, as to which he
   can conclusively reason. The very thought of it moves him to the depths
   of his being; renewing to him, with all its horrors, the past in which
   he had himself so sought justification, and stirring him to a vehement
   indignation against those who direct men's steps into that path of
   death. On the other hand, the righteousness of faith seems to be to him
   that of which he cannot speak without the renewed sense of his first
   peace and joy in believing, and of the excellent glory of that "new
   world" into which "faith mounts up, where is no law, no sin, no remorse
   or sting of conscience, no death, but perfect joy, righteousness,
   grace, peace, life, salvation, glory." (p. 84.) The law and the gospel
   in their relation to the human spirit, are to Luther as two spiritual
   regions which his spirit knows, having trembled and agonised in the
   one, and rejoiced and triumphed in the other;--but the former of which
   has no claim upon his presence in it, and ought to be to him as if it
   were not; being, indeed, done away by Christ, and having no existence
   now but through unbelief; while in the latter it is the will of God
   that he should dwell by faith; to do which is to give God glory and be
   righteous in His sight. The vividness and picturing form of his speech
   is quite startling: yet is it in no sense figurative or rhetorical; for
   he is manifestly keeping as close to the simple expression of his
   mental and spiritual perceptions as he can. Reading his pleadings
   against the law, and for the gospel, it is impossible not to feel that
   he who gave such a fundamental place to justification by faith, was
   himself the preacher of it in an altogether distinctive and preeminent
   sense.

   I shall endeavour briefly to express the conception of Luther's mind on
   the subject of the atonement which I have received from a careful study
   of his full commentary on the Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the
   Galatians.

   This epistle has had a special interest to Luther, because he
   recognised Paul's controversy with the judaising teachers, by whom the
   Galatian converts to Christianity had been seduced, as substantially
   the same with that in which he himself was engaged with the church of
   Rome; and, as is common to him with the other Reformers,--his arguing
   on the subject of the atonement has a special character impressed upon
   it, by the relation to certain errors in the church of Rome in which he
   was contemplating it. Luther had not to contend with persons denying
   the doctrine of the atonement: what he had to contend against was human
   additions to the provision for peace of conscience and hope towards
   God, revealed in the gospel; and what we learn of his mind on the
   subject of the atonement is what he is led to utter in pleading for
   justification by faith alone.

   I have said that no man ever more realised than Luther did, that there
   were actual difficulties in the nature of things to be dealt with in
   accomplishing our redemption,--difficulties which a simple act of the
   Divine will could not do away with; but which have been successfully
   and triumphantly dealt with in the atonement for the sins of men, made
   by the Son of God. His deep feeling of the dishonour done to Christ by
   combining any other element with our vision of Him by faith, in our
   peace and confidence towards God, may have, in part, moved him to the
   use of the strong language which he employs, both in setting forth what
   Christ had to accomplish, and how He has accomplished it. But it is
   manifest that he could not speak of these subjects without feeling it
   difficult to find language strong enough for his convictions. And the
   law, and sin, and death, and the devil who had the power of death, are
   set before us as awful realities against man; and as to be encountered
   and overcome by Him who had undertaken to save man: and Christ's
   victory over them is seen in Luther's words, not as a simple act of
   divine, resistless, power, but as a moral and spiritual victory,--the
   triumph of good as good over evil as evil, of righteousness and life,
   over sin and death; bringing with it all secondary external results in
   its train.

   Not that on these difficult and mysterious subjects, he does not,--as
   well as those who do not give the same impression of having approached
   them nearly,--leave us disposed to ask many questions. He, as well as
   others, speaks of our sins as laid upon Christ, without helping us to
   understand what this means;--while he is distinguished from others by
   the anxiety he shews to select the strongest words to express the
   identification of Christ with our sins; refusing (p. 300) to understand
   "was made sin for us," in 2 Cor. v. 21, as meaning a sacrifice for sin,
   (while he admits that the word used will bear that meaning) choosing
   rather to insist that He was made sin for us in some more absolute way
   of identifying Himself with us and our sin, in order that we, with
   whose sin He had so identified Himself, might be identified with Him in
   respect of His righteousness; and that sin and righteousness meeting in
   Him, and righteousness triumphing over sin, we might partake in the
   triumph and all its fruits.--"Because in the self-same person which is
   the highest, the greatest and the only sinner, there is also an
   everlasting and invincible righteousness; therefore these two do
   encounter together the highest, the greatest and the only sin, and the
   highest, the greatest and the only righteousness. Here one of them must
   needs be overcome and give place to the other . . . righteousness is
   everlasting, immortal, invincible . . . therefore in this contest sin
   must needs be vanquished and killed, and righteousness must overcome
   and reign. So in Christ all sin is vanquished, killed and buried, and
   righteousness remaineth a conqueror and reigneth for ever." (pp. 294,
   295.) This conception of Christ as the one man, having present together
   in Himself the sin of all other men, and His own righteousness, Luther
   endeavours in all possible forms of speech to present as an actual
   fact, and as what justifies, and underlies
   such statements as that, "the Lord laid on Him the iniquity of us all,"
   and that "He bore our sins in His own body on the tree." And, whatever
   difficulties the matter may have presented to Luther's own mind, or
   whatever difficulties his words may cause to us, attempting to attach
   to them a definite and consistent meaning, he leaves no room to doubt
   that what he sought to set forth he conceived of as a reality, and not
   as a legal fiction. For he thus illustrates the identifying of Christ
   with men,--"For when a sinner cometh to the knowledge of himself
   indeed, he feeleth, not only that he is miserable, but misery itself;
   not only that he is a sinner, and is accursed, but even sin and
   malediction itself. For it is a terrible thing to bear sin, the wrath
   of God, malediction and death. Wherefore that man which hath a true
   feeling of these things, as Christ did truly and effectually fed them
   for all mankind, is made even sin, death, malediction." (p. 300.) But
   to think of Luther as really having any unworthy conceptions of Christ
   would be altogether erroneous. It was, doubtless, because of his great
   realisation of the divine and perfect righteousness which were in
   Christ, and which in the deepest, and doubtless, he must have felt only
   absolute sense were alone His, that he was able to use that which he
   thus calls an "apostolic liberty of speech" in setting forth the
   reality of His bearing our sins.

   Such is Luther's teaching as to the retrospective aspect of the
   atonement. His teaching as to its prospective bearing,--the positive
   fruits of benefit to us through Christ's victory, the gift of eternal
   life itself,--is the following out of that root conception of Christ's
   identifying of Himself with us. In virtue of this identification, the
   freedom and righteousness and life which are in Christ, being His own
   proper endowments, and of which His coming under our sins did not
   despoil Him, but which proved themselves mightier than all that power
   of darkness,--coming forth triumphant from the conflict,--these all are
   ours. As ours we are called to recognise them. As endowed with them we
   are called to conceive of ourselves. As the provisions of the salvation
   granted to us we are to use them. As the elements of our new divine
   life we are to live in them and by them. They are all ours as Christ is
   ours,--"He is made of God unto us wisdom and righteousness and
   sanctification and redemption." Christ our life is presented to our
   faith, that believing in Him we may live,--yet not we, but Christ in
   us. Faith does not make these high endowments, the elements of the gift
   of Christ, ours: they are ours by the gift of God. Faith apprehends
   them, accepts them,--gives God glory in accepting them; and thus faith
   saves by bringing us into living harmony with the divine constitution
   of things in Christ;--and, come into this harmony, God pronounces us
   righteous,--and, abiding in this faith, light, and life, and joy in God
   abound in us, and the end of God in Christ is being fulfilled in
   us;--partially now and here,--to be completely so hereafter.

   I do not feel that I can more pointedly express Luther's conception of
   faith than in saying, that it lifts us into Christ and makes us one
   with Him, both in our own consciousness, and in God's judgment of
   us;--as we were, before faith, one with Him in God's gracious desire
   and purpose.

   Luther's conception of how God is justified in "justifying the ungodly
   who believe," we may learn from what he says, first of Faith's own
   nature; and then of the results of the living relation to Christ into
   which it brings us.

   First of Faith's own nature he says, "Paul by these words 'Abraham
   believed,' of faith in God maketh the chiefest sonship, the chiefest
   duty, the chiefest obedience, and the chiefest sacrifice. Let him that
   is a rhetorician amplify this place, and he shall see that faith is an
   almighty thing; and that the power thereof is infinite and inestimable;
   for it giveth glory unto God, which is the highest service that can be
   given unto Him. Now to give glory unto God, is to believe in Him, to
   count Him true, wise, righteous, merciful, almighty; briefly, to
   acknowledge Him to be the author and giver of all goodness. This reason
   doth not, but faith. That is it which maketh us divine people, and, as
   a man would say, it is the Creator of (a) certain divinity, not in the
   substance of God, but in us. For without faith God loseth in us His
   glory, wisdom, righteousness, truth, and mercy. To conclude: no majesty
   or divinity remaineth unto God, where faith is not. And the chiefest
   thing that God requireth of man is, that he give unto Him His glory and
   His divinity; that is to say that he taketh Him not for an idol, but
   for God, who regardeth him, heareth him, sheweth mercy unto him and
   helpeth him. This being done, God hath His full and perfect divinity,
   that is. He hath whatsoever a faithful heart can attribute unto Him. To
   be able therefore to give that glory unto God it is the wisdom of
   wisdoms, the righteousness of righteousness, the religion of religions,
   and sacrifice of sacrifices. Hereby we may perceive what an high and
   excellent righteousness faith is, and so, by the contrary, what an
   horrible and grievous sin infidelity is. Whosoever then believeth God,
   as Abraham did, is righteous before God, because he hath faith, which
   giveth glory unto God; that is, he giveth God that which is due to
   Him." (pp. 250, 251.)

   But, secondly, because this excellent condition of faith is in us but
   as a germ--a grain of mustard-seed--a feeble dawn, God, in imputing it
   as righteousness, has respect unto that of which it is the dawn--of
   which, as the beginning of the life of Christ in us, it is the promise,
   and in which it shall issue, even the noontide brightness of that day
   in which the righteous shall shine as the stars in the kingdom of their
   Father. So he adds in reference to the words "it was imputed to him for
   righteousness,"--"For Christian righteousness consisteth in two things,
   that is to say, in faith in the heart, and in God's imputation. Faith
   is indeed a formal righteousness, and yet this righteousness is not
   enough; for after faith there remain yet certain remnants of sin in our
   flesh. This sacrifice of faith began in Abraham, but at last it was
   finished in death. Wherefore the other part of righteousness must needs
   be added also, to finish the same in us, that is to say God's
   imputation. For faith giveth not enough to God, being imperfect; yea
   our faith is but a little spark of faith, which beginneth only to
   render unto God His true divinity. We have received the firstfruits of
   the Spirit, but not yet the tenths . . . Wherefore faith beginneth
   righteousness, but imputation maketh it perfect unto the day of Christ,
   (p. 252.) . . . Wherefore let those which give themselves to the study
   of the Holy Scripture, learn out of this saying, "Abraham believed God,
   and it was counted to him for righteousness," to set forth truly and
   rightly this true Christian righteousness after this manner:--that it
   is a faith and confidence in the Son of God--or rather a confidence of
   the heart in God through Jesus Christ; and let them add this clause as
   a difference; which faith and confidence is counted righteousness for
   Christ's sake . . . For as long as I live
   in the flesh sin is truly in me. But because I am covered under the
   shadow of Christ's wings, as is the chicken under the wings of the hen,
   and dwell without fear under that most ample and large heaven of the
   forgiveness of sins, which is spread over me, God covereth and
   pardoneth the remnant of sin in me; that is to say, because of that
   faith wherewith I began to lay hold upon Christ, He accepteth my
   imperfect righteousness even for perfect righteousness and counteth my
   sin for no sin, which notwithstanding is sin indeed." (p. 254.) The
   essence of the difference between the law and the gospel, as conceived
   of by Luther, seems to be shortly this;--that the law reveals man
   himself to man,--that the gospel reveals God to man;--that the law
   brings man to self-despair, in order that the gospel may teach him
   faith and hope in God. Therefore, in the gospel, and not in the law, is
   God to be seen and known.

   And this is substantially true. For, though the law, being love, may
   seem to reveal God who is love, yet is it rather a demand for love than
   a revelation of love; and, though it might have been, in the light of
   high intelligence, and where there was no darkening of sin, concluded
   that love alone could demand love, yet does the mere demand never so
   speak to sinners;--but "by the law is the knowledge of sin:" wherefore
   ''the law worketh wrath." But the first front and aspect of the gospel
   is, the revelation of love; then follows the end contemplated, the
   quickening of love in us, (in fact the fulfilment of the righteousness
   of the law in us,--Rom. viii. 4,) but its instrument of working is, not
   the law, but grace. "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that He
   loved us, and sent His Son to be the propitiation for our sins;" "We
   love Him because He first loved us."--"If God so loved us, we ought
   also to love one another."--I John iv. 11.

   Therefore, the gospel being the revelation of what God is, rather than
   of what He calls for,--though therein implying what He calls for, and
   providing for its accomplishment,--Luther, understanding this, rests,
   not in the scheme of redemption as a plan, or in the work of Christ as
   a work, the parts of which he is careful to analyse, that he may turn
   them to their several uses in his intercourse with God; but, in the
   scheme and the work, and shining through all the details of the work,
   he sees God appearing to him as He is in Himself, as He eternally is;
   and he yields his heart and his whole being to the attraction of the
   heavenly vision. Thus he learns that "God is the

   God of the humble, the miserable, the afflicted, the oppressed and the
   desperate, and of those that are brought even to nothing; and His
   nature is to exalt the humble, to feed the hungry, to give sight to the
   blind, to comfort the miserable, the afflicted, the bruised, the
   broken-hearted, to justify sinner, to quicken the dead, and to save the
   very desperate and damned. For he is an almighty Creator, and maketh
   all things of nothing." (p. 321). Not that the law had not spoken truly
   of God, not only when it declared the will of God as to what man should
   be, but also when its terrors were revealed in the conscience, through
   its testimony of God's wrath against sin;--but it left untold,--it was
   not its function to tell,--what deeper thing than wrath against sin was
   in God--even mercy towards the sinner.

   So Luther, as one whom "the gospel hath led beyond and above the light
   of law and reason into the deep secrets of faith,'' (p. 168) and to a
   knowledge of God to which reason had not attained, commenting upon the
   words--"Seeing the world by wisdom knew not God, in the wisdom of God,
   it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
   believe," applies them as teaching "that men ought to abstain from the
   curious searching of God's majesty." (p. 100.)--For "true Christian
   divinity setteth not God forth unto us in His majesty, as Moses and
   other doctors do. It commandeth us not to search out the nature of God;
   but to know His will set out to us in Christ. (Ibid.) . . . Therefore
   begin thou there where Christ began, viz. in the womb of the virgin, in
   the manger, and at His mother's breasts, etc. For to this end He came
   down, was born, was conversant among men, suffered, was crucified, and
   died, that by all means He might set forth Himself plainly before our
   eyes, and fasten the eyes of our hearts upon Himself; that thereby He
   might keep us from climbing up into heaven, and from the curious
   searching of the divine majesty. Whensoever thou hast to do, therefore,
   in the matter of justification, and disputest with thyself how God is
   to be found that justifieth and accepteth sinners; where, and in what
   sort He is to be sought; then know thou that there is no other God
   besides this man Christ Jesus, Embrace Him and cleave to Him with thy
   whole heart, setting aside all curious speculations of the divine
   majesty. For he that is a searcher of God's majesty shall be
   overwhelmed of His glory. I know by experience what I say. But these
   vain spirits, which so deal with God that they exclude the Mediator, do
   not believe me. Christ Himself hath said, "I am the way, the truth, and
   the life; no man cometh unto the Father but by me,"--John xiv. 6.
   Therefore, besides this way, Christ, thou shalt find no way to the
   Father, but wandering, no verity, but hypocrisy and lying, no life, but
   eternal death. Wherefore mark this well in the matter of justification,
   that when any of us wrestle with the law, sin, and death, and all other
   evils, we must look upon no other God but this God incarnate and
   clothed with man's nature . . . Look on this man Jesus Christ who
   setteth Himself forth to us to be a mediator, and saith "Come unto me
   all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you,"--Matt,
   xi. 28. Thus doing, thou shalt perceive the love, goodness and
   sweetness of God; thou shalt see His wisdom, power, and majesty,
   sweetened and tempered to thy capacity. Yea thou shalt find in this
   mirror and pleasant contemplation all things according to that saying
   of Paul to the Colossians: "In Christ are hid all the treasures of
   wisdom and knowledge." . . . The world is ignorant of this, and
   therefore it searcheth out the will of God, setting aside the promise
   in Christ to his (its) great destruction, "For no man knoweth the
   Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him."--Matt. xi.
   27.'' (p. 101.)

   "Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.
   Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long with you, and yet hast thou
   not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father."--John
   xiv. 8, 9.

   I add two more quotations to the same effect. "For in Christ we see
   that God is not a cruel exactor or a judge, but a most favourable,
   loving and merciful Father, who to the end He might bless us, that is
   to say, deliver us from the law, sin, death, and all other evils, and
   might endue us with grace, righteousness, and everlasting life, spared
   not His own Son, but gave Him for us all. This is a true knowledge of
   God and a divine persuasion which deceiveth us not, but painteth God
   unto us lively (living)." (p. 389.). "For the true God speaketh thus;
   No righteousness, wisdom, nor religion pleaseth me but that only
   whereby the Father is glorified through the Son. Whosoever apprehendeth
   this Son, and me, and my promise in Him by faith, to him I am a God, to
   him I am a Father, him do I accept, justify and save. All others abide
   under wrath because they worship that thing which by nature is no God."
   (p. 390.)

   How does this language recall that of the Apostle John,--"And we know
   that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that
   we may know Him that is true; and we are in Him that is true, even in
   his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal life. Little
   children, keep yourselves from idols. Amen."--I John v. 20, 21.

   One other point remains to be noticed that we may have distinctly
   before us Luther's teaching on the subject of the atonement,--I mean
   the weight which he lays on the personal appropriation of the atonement
   as of the very essence of faith.

   Of course, teaching as the result of the victory of Christ over all our
   spiritual enemies, that Christ was made of God unto us wisdom, and
   righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, and setting forth
   this as a constitution of things established by God in His love to man,
   and revealed to be known and received by faith, he could not teach
   merely that men might appropriate Christ and His work,--that they were
   at liberty so to do, and invited so to do, and that Christ was freely
   offered to them, and would become theirs by such appropriation. He must
   needs teach that such appropriation was of the very essence of faith;
   being implied in the most simple reception of that which was revealed.
   But he has a further reason for insisting on this, viz., that in this
   personal appropriation he recognised at once the power and the
   difficulty of FAITH.

   The teaching I refer to is in his comment on the words, "who gave
   Himself for our sins,'' in which, after insisting on the power of these
   words to destroy all felse religions, "For if our sins be taken away by
   our own works, merits, and satisfactions, what needed the Son of God to
   be given for them? But seeing He was given for them, it followeth that
   we cannot put them away by our own works," (p. 104)--he adds--"But
   weigh diligently every word of Paul, and especially mark well this
   pronoun "our" for the effect altogether consisteth in the well applying
   of the pronouns, which we find very often in the Scriptures, wherein
   also there is ever some vehemency and power . . . Generally and without
   the pronoun it is an easy matter to magnify and amplify the benefit of
   Christ, viz., that Christ was given for sins, but for other men's sins
   which are worthy. But when it cometh to the putting to of this pronoun
   our there our weak nature and reason starteth back, and dare not come
   nigh unto God, nor promise to herself that so great a treasure shall be
   freely given unto her." (p. 105.)

   This is said in reference to the difficulty in believing in forgiveness
   noticed above as what comes to be felt as soon as the need of
   forgiveness begins to be realised. Of this Luther was fully aware, as
   well as of the unmeaning, and, indeed, self-righteous nature of those
   general confessions of sin which unawakened sinners so easily make;
   combining with them as easily expressed a trust in Christ:--in
   reference to which he says--"Men's reason would fain bring and present
   unto God a feigned and counterfeit sinner, which is nothing afraid, nor
   hath any feeling of sin. It would bring that is whole, and not him that
   hath need of a physician, and when it feeleth no sin, then would it
   believe that Christ was given for our sins." ''But," says he, "learn
   here of Paul, to believe that Christ was given, not for feigned or
   counterfeit sins, nor yet for small sins, but for great and large sins;
   not for one or two, but for all; not for vanquished sins (for no man,
   no, nor angel, is able to subdue the least sin that is), but for
   invincible sins. And except thou be found among those that say "our
   sins," that is which have this doctrine of faith, and both hear, love,
   and believe the same, there is no salvation for thee (p. 106.) . . . I
   speak not this without cause, for I know what moveth me to be so
   earnest that we should learn to define Christ out of the words of Paul.
   For indeed Christ is no cruel exactor, but a forever of the sins of the
   whole world . . . Learn this definition diligently, and especially so
   to exercise this pronoun our that this one syllable being believed may
   swallow up all thy sins." (p, 108.)

   I have reluctantly curtailed these quotations from

   Luther's commentary on the apostle Paul's Epistle to the
   Galatians,--into the spirit of which the great Reformer has so truly
   entered. The deep insight into our redemption, as it has taken its
   character from our being "under the law" and "'unjust," which he
   manifests;--his vivid realisation of "the grace wherein we stand,"
   being redeemed;--his true appreciation of the glory which God has in
   our faith;--his discernment of the relation in which the peace and
   confidence towards God, which are present in faith, stand to the
   perfection of the revelation of the Father in the Son; the personal
   interest in Christ, which he recognises as possessed by all men, and
   revealed to faith in the gospel; and the importance which he attaches
   to an appropriating response on our part:--these all are aspects of
   truth which I am thankful should now be present to the mind of my
   reader in Luther's strong and vivid form of speech. As to my immediate
   subject--the nature of the atonement--I have admitted that he does not
   offer much help towards a clear intellectual apprehension of it.
   Christ's identifying of Himself with us, "joining Himself to the
   company of the accursed, taking unto Him their flesh and blood," in
   order that in humanity He might encounter "our sin," and "our death,"
   and "our curse" (p. 301); and the consequent conflict between these and
   Christ's own eternal righteousness, as meeting together in Him,--and
   the triumph of that divine righteousness, issuing in our
   redemption;--these are conceptions which he may have been content to
   hold as matters of revealed fact, but still mysteries which precluded
   clear intellectual apprehension. Yet the earnestness with which he
   insists upon the presence together of these opposites in Christ, and on
   the reality of their conflict as matter of consciousness to
   Christ,--taken along with his true understanding of our participation
   in Christ and His righteousness, give, me the conviction that Luther
   was indeed contemplating spiritual realities which had a place in the
   work of redemption, when using language as to the nearness of the
   relation to us, and to our sin, into which Christ came, which has, and
   not without cause, given so much offence. In Luther's apprehension,
   Christ's bearing of our sins was not a mere imputation in the mind of
   another; it was a deep and painful reality in His own mind; and the
   victory of righteousness in Him was not such in respect of the award to
   righteousness by another, but a victory obtained by righteousness
   itself as a living divine might in Him. A legal fiction would be no
   explanation. The assumption of a delusive consciousness Luther would
   reject. What the truth of the case has been, (and which, as having
   taken place in humanity, may be expected to be utterable to men,)
   Luther's words, as he has written, do not make us to know; whatever
   spiritual truth these words have had in his own mind:--for interpreted
   according to their plain grammatical meaning, the words by which he
   expresses Christ's relation to our sins cannot be true. His use of them
   is, therefore, not to be defended. Yet shall we suffer loss if we allow
   ourselves to suppose that as used by a man of so much spiritual insight
   as Luther they had not a meaning at once true and important. Indeed, if
   there be not a true sense in which Christ did bear on His spirit the
   weight of our sins, and all our evils, and did deal with the law of God
   as so bearing them, seeking redemption for us,--and did triumph in so
   doing by the might of righteousness, Luther's marvellous teaching of
   justification by faith alone is left a superstructure without a
   foundation.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER III.

   CALVINISM, AS TAUGHT BY DR. OWEN AND PRESIDENT EDWARDS.

   IF the great Reformer's teaching had obtained and kept possession of
   the faith of the reformed Church, and that I could calculate on the
   presence in the minds of my readers of his preaching of Christ, I might
   now proceed to consider the nature of the atonement, without further
   preface or preparation. But I need not say how far the fact is
   otherwise. And as I am anxious to carry along with me the minds of
   those who not only believe in the atonement, but give it that very
   prominent place which it has in the teaching usually designated
   "evangelical,"--though my appeal is not to what is specially
   distinctive of any, but is to the consciences of all,--I shall now
   detain my readers for a little with the teaching on the subject of the
   atonement associated with the name of Calvin.

   Calvinism, as now living in our generation of men, presents to our
   attention two very distinctly marked forms:--the one, that which I
   believe those who hold it would recognise as best expounded by Dr. Owen
   and President Edwards; to whom I may add Dr. Chalmers; (whose
   recognition of Edwards as his theological teacher is known, and is
   abundantly manifest in his Institutes of Theology;) the other is that
   recent modification of Calvinism which is presented to us in the
   writings of Dr. Pye Smith, Dr. Payne, and Dr. Jenkyn, in England; and
   Dr. Wardlaw, in Scotland. I name these writers only--while I am aware
   that there are others, because my knowledge of the system is derived
   from them.

   Two centuries separate us from Dr. Owen, and one from President
   Edwards; but their theology, which is one, still lives in the present
   generation--of the Presbyterian section at least--of the Church in
   Scotland; and, I presume, has much hold on men's minds also in England
   and in America. No man can accord with these two men in their faith
   without rejoicing in them as bulwarks of that faith. Owen's clear
   intellect, and Edwards's no less unquestionable power of distinct and
   discriminating thought, combined with a calmer, and more weighty, and
   more solemn tone of spirit;--the former writing as a man whose life was
   much one of theological controversy, the latter more as living among
   religious awakenings of which he was at once a subject and the
   instrument;--justify our regarding them as having set forth the
   modification of the doctrine of the atonement which they teach to the
   greatest advantage of which it is capable;--while, wherein any may
   think it dark and repulsive, they hide nothing, gloss over nothing,
   soften nothing: for they were true men, and not ashamed of the Christ
   in whom they believed.

   Luther's anxiety to warn men "to abstain from the curious searching of
   God's majesty," has been noticed above. Not by such searching, but by
   becoming acquainted with Jesus Christ, would he teach us to expect the
   true knowledge of God: and this counsel is altogether in the spirit of
   the words, "In Him was life, and the life was the light of men." "He
   that hath seen me hath seen the Father." How sound Luther's judgment
   was in sending us to Jesus, that in Him we might see and embrace God
   manifested in the flesh; and how much was thus to be learned which
   systematic theology cannot teach, and yet which we must learn if our
   systematic thought is to be safe, may well be suggested to us by the
   history of the preparation for their high calling which the disciples
   received. Only after their Lord's resurrection were their minds opened
   to understand that "it behoved Christ to suffer, and afterwards to
   enter into His glory." Yet were they, in that ignorance, already far
   advanced in the true knowledge of God, because in the true knowledge of
   Christ--not of His work, and of its bearing, but of Himself. Luther in
   telling us "to go straight to the manger, and embrace the Virgin's
   little babe in our arms," expresses a sense of God's approachableness,
   as divested of all terrors and revealed in the simple confiding
   attraction of love, which we feel full of instruction. We can conceive
   the long self-tortured monk, who had sought God earnestly but
   ignorantly, thinking, as he tells us, of Christ as an exactor and
   judge, as now, in the light of love, contemplating the infant Jesus,
   and saying to himself, "This is God, thus does God come among
   men;"--and, while the whole life in the flesh of which that is the
   dawn, passes before him in thought, and he traces the Lord's path from
   the manger to the cross, and then on to glory, we can conceive of him
   as repeating to himself--"This is my God, in this God am I to put my
   trust;" and we can understand how, while contrasting what he is thus
   consciously learning of "the true God and eternal life" with all the
   results of men's "curious searching of God's majesty," with which he
   was not unacquainted, he would treasure up his own conscious
   experience,--to minister it to others for warning and guidance.

   Now, what, in passing from the record of Luther's thoughts on the
   atonement to that of the thinking of Owen and Edwards, has come vividly
   home to my mind, is, that it would be well that they had proceeded more
   in harmony with the spirit of Luther's warning now referred to. Not
   that I would presume to speak of their solemn weighing of the question
   "what is divine justice? and to what conclusions does it lead on the
   subject of the atonement?" as "curious searching;" but that it seems to
   me that it would have been well that they had used the life of Christ
   more as their light.

   That I say not this self-confidently, or on slight grounds, will, I
   trust, be made clear to my readers as we proceed. I do not make little
   account of philosophy, nor would I be contented to see it sharing in
   the Apostle's condemnation of "philosophy falsely so called." I believe
   that a true philosophy has often done much service to
   religion;--neither can I understand how a philosophical mind can,
   without submitting to fetters which I believe are not of God, be
   contented to hold a religion which is not to it also a philosophy, and
   the highest philosophy. But no one will doubt that the beloved disciple
   John, who attained to such high apprehensions of God, and to whom we
   listen, telling us that "God is love," as to one speaking himself in
   the light of the eternal love, had his high--and the only
   adequate--training for this divine philosophy when following the
   footsteps of Jesus, listening to His words, seeing His deeds, and, from
   time to time, favoured to lean upon His breast. "That which was from
   the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,
   which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of
   life; (For the life was manifested, and we have seen and bear witness,
   and shew unto you that eternal life which was with the Father, and was
   manifested unto us;) That which we have seen and heard declare we unto
   you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship
   is with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ."--I John 1:1-3

   I am not going to analyse the reasoning on the Divine Attributes by Dr.
   Owen and President Edwards to which I refer, and as to which I feel as
   if the recorded work of Christ were contemplated in their system in the
   light of that reasoning,--rather than that reasoning engaged in after
   the due study of the life of Christ. It has been said that Calvinism is
   a philosophy in its essence; and I do not object to it on that account,
   but, because it is not to me a true philosophy. If what I have already
   said of the hope for sinful man that should be found in the
   righteousness and holiness of God, no less than in His
   love--contemplating these divine attributes, as much as may be, in
   their distinctness,--be present to the mind of my readers, it will be
   felt by those of them that are familiar with the theological writings
   of Owen and Edwards, that, however clear their reasonings are as
   reasonings, they must appear to me open to this fundamental objection,
   that they leave out of account certain important first principles. But
   not to engage in the analysis of what in the pages of Edwards
   especially I have read with so solemn and deep an interest as listening
   to a great and holy man, while, at the same time, feeling the axiomatic
   defect to which I have referred, it will be enough for my present
   purpose to notice the results arrived at.

   I. The most palpable of these results, and that which first attracts
   attention, is the limitation of the atonement;--I mean the conceiving
   of it as having reference only to a certain elected portion of the
   human family.

   His result arose naturally, and, it seems to me, most logically, from
   the first principles from which these clear and acute thinkers have
   reasoned. The divine justice is conceived of by them as, by a necessity
   of the divine nature, awarding eternal misery to sin, and eternal
   blessedness to righteousness. That the sinner may be saved from this
   misery, and partake in this blessedness, he must, in the person of
   Christ, endure the misery thus due to sin, and fulfil the righteousness
   of which this blessedness is the due reward. But the co-relative
   position is, that, having thus, in the person of Christ, endured the
   punishment of sin, he cannot in justice be eventually punished himself;
   and that, having, in like manner, fulfilled all righteousness, he must
   in justice receive the reward of that righteousness. ''The sum of all
   is, the death and blood-shedding of Jesus Christ hath wrought, and doth
   efffectually procure for all those that are concerned in it, eternal
   redemption, consisting in grace here and glory hereafter." (Vol. X.
   159). All that is of the nature of pain and suffering in the history of
   our Lord, from what the cries of feeble infancy tell, with what
   aggravation may have been in the circumstances of the manger and the
   stable, and the lowly lot of Mary and Joseph, on to the mysterious
   agony of Gethsemane, and that which seems to them indicated, if not
   revealed, in the cry on the cross, "My God, my God, why hast thou
   forsaken me?"--all this is set down as penal suffering--the punishment
   of the sins of the elect. On the other hand, all that is of the nature
   of holiness, goodness, obedience, fulfilling of all righteousness, from
   the same dawn to the solemn close, and the submission of will uttered
   in the words, "the cup which my Father gives me to drink, shall I not
   drink it?"--''Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit"--all this is
   set down as accomplishing that perfect righteousness which is to endow
   the elect with a title to eternal blessedness.

   The grace of God according to this conception,--that is his grace to
   the elect, is,--properly speaking, manifested in the original gift of
   Christ; all the subsequent history is the just and faithful acting out
   of the details of a covenant thus graciously entered into with Christ
   for the elect. But, of course, the original grace underlies all the
   subsequent history; so that, while, in one sense, the pardon of the
   sins of the elect is a matter of simple justice, Christ having borne
   the punishment of their sins; and the bestowal of eternal blessedness
   upon them is, also, a matter of simple justice, Christ's righteousness
   having endowed them with a right to that blessedness,--still the whole
   dispensation is one grace.

   Adhering strictly to his conception of the fixed relation between sin
   and its due punishment, Owen anxiously insists upon the identity of
   that punishment which Christ endured for the elect, with what they
   would have endured themselves, and what the non-elect do eventually
   endure. ''Now from all this, thus much (to clear up the nature of the
   satisfaction made by Christ) appeareth, viz.--It was a full, valuable
   compensation made to the justice of God for all the sins of all those
   for whom He made satisfaction, by undergoing that same punishment
   which, by reason of the obligation that was upon them, they themselves
   were bound to undergo. When I say the same, I mean essentially the same
   in weight and pressure, though not in all accidents of duration and the
   like; for it was impossible that He should be detained by death." (p.
   269.) His language everywhere is in harmony with this conception; as to
   which I do not feel that it is justly liable to the treatment which it
   has received when objected to as a mercenary, and so an unworthy view
   of the subject. The mere language of commerce, viz. "purchase, ransom,"
   etc., is not Owen's, but that of the Scriptures; and as to the
   substance of his meaning it is simply, that the justice of God punishes
   sin as it deserves, and that, having in the exercise of an unerring
   judgment once determined what is deserved, God cannot be conceived of
   as acting in any way that would imply a change of mind.

   As to the difficulties that present themselves, the moment the attempt
   is made to form clear conceptions of what has thus been asserted,--that
   is to say, to conceive to ourselves, on the one hand, what the
   punishment was which the elect were bound to undergo; and, then, on the
   other hand, how Christ can have endured the punishment so conceived
   of--with these difficulties Owen does not really grapple. Edwards,
   indeed, approaches this solemn subject more nearly; and there is no
   passage in his exposition of "The Satisfaction for Sin" made by Christ
   of deeper interest than the one in which he does so. After premising
   that "Christ suffered the wrath of God for men's sins in such a way as
   He was capable of, being an infinitely holy person who knew that God
   was not angry with Him personally--knew that God did not hate Him, but
   infinitely loved Him," he goes on to specify two ways in which he
   conceives that Christ could endure the wrath of God. But the elements
   of suffering which he specifies, however connected with the sin of
   those for whom Christ died, cannot be recognised as the punishment
   which they themselves were bound to undergo,--if such sufferings can
   rightly be represented as punishment at all. But, not to enter here on
   the nature of the sufferings specified, when explanations are offered
   as to how Christ endured the punishment of the sins of those for whom
   He died, the important point is, that His sufferings are regarded as
   implying, that it would be unjust that those should themselves
   eventually suffer punishment for whom He had suffered, as in the same
   way it was held, that it would be unjust that those should not
   eventually inherit eternal blessedness for whom Christ had merited
   eternal blessedness.

   We are not to wonder that, having come to such conclusions as these
   from such axioms as that "God is just" and that "God is immutable,"
   texts of Scripture such as those who believe that the atonement was for
   all men, quote in proof of that doctrine, were, however large their
   sound, urged with little effect. Some of these might seem difficult of
   explanation on their system--others might be more easily disposed of.
   No one ever took more ingenuity to such a task than Owen did; as no one
   ever urged more perplexingly the dilemmas in which those were involved,
   who, agreeing with him as to the nature of the atonement, differed from
   him as to its reference. "To which I may add this dilemma to our
   universalists" (i.e., those who held that Christ had died for all),
   "God imposed His wrath due unto, and Christ underwent the pains of hell
   for, either all the sins of all men, or all the sins of some men, or
   some sins of all men. If the last, some sins of all men, then have all
   men some sins to answer for, and so shall no man be saved; for if God
   enter into judgment with us, though it were with all mankind for one
   sin, no flesh should be justified in His sight. "If the Lord should
   mark iniquities who should stand?" . . . If the second, that is it
   which we affirm, that Christ in their stead and room suffered for all
   the sins of all the elect in the world. If the first, why then are not
   all freed from the punishment of all their sins? You will say "Because
   of their unbelief; they will not believe." But this unbelief, is it a
   sin, or not? If not, why should they be punished for it? If it be, then
   Christ underwent the punishment due to it, or not. If so, then why must
   that hinder them more than their other sins for which He died from
   partaking of the fruit of His death? If He did not, then did He not die
   for all their sins. Let them choose which part they will." (p. 173). I
   add his winding up of a striking argument on Mark x. 45: "I shall add
   no more but this, that to affirm Christ to die for all men is the
   readiest way to prove that He died for no man in the sense Christians
   have hitherto understood." (p. 290.)--As addressed to those who agreed
   with him as to the nature of the atonement, while differing with him as
   to the extent of its reference, this seems unanswerable.

   To those who approach the subject of the atonement with the conviction
   that Christ died for all men, and who see this to be clearly revealed
   in the Scriptures, it must be an insuperable objection to any view
   taken of the nature of the atonement that it is inconsistent with this
   faith; and I have already alluded to the fact, that the force felt to
   be in such reasonings as those just quoted, assuming the truth of that
   conception of the atonement on which they proceed, has latterly led
   those who contend that Christ died for all to reconsider the nature of
   the atonement. I am thankful for this result. That cannot be the true
   conception of the nature of the atonement which implies that Christ
   died only for an election from among men.

   But, besides the scripture argument against the limitation of the
   atonement, on which I do not enter, I would notice two important
   further conclusions which that limitation involves, and which are very
   weighty objections to the doctrine to which they are ultimately
   traceable.

   1. The limitation of the atonement, and therefore the conception of the
   nature of the atonement which implies that limitation, abstracts from
   the faith of the gospel that element on which Luther lays so much
   stress in what he says of the use of the pronoun "our." This it does
   because it takes away the warrant which the universality of the
   atonement gives to every man that hears the gospel to contemplate
   Christ with the personal appropriation of the words of the apostle,
   "who loved me, and gave himself for me."

   This Owen fully admits, but he denies that any man is asked to believe,
   as the first act of faith, that Christ died for him in particular, or
   to believe anything but what he recognises as actually revealed. He
   then proceeds to state successive acts or steps of faith; in each one
   of which the believer has a clear scripture warrant for his faith; but
   the taking each successive step of which narrows the circle of those
   who come to be dealt with; some taking the first step who will not take
   the second; some taking both who will not take the third; some taking
   the first three who will not take the fourth:--while, as to those who
   take the whole four, their having taken them has become a ground for
   that personal appropriation of Christ, as their own Saviour in
   particular, which was not afforded by the revelation made in the gospel
   message, but which has thus been added by that work of grace which has
   proceeded so far in them, and has individualised them as persons for
   whom Christ died; "for certainly Christ died for every one in whose
   heart the Lord by His almighty power works effectually faith to lay
   hold on Him, and assent unto Him according to that orderly proposal
   that is held forth in the gospel." (p. 315.)

   But the difficulty of dealing with awakened sinners on this system has
   been practically felt to be very great. And the importance, with
   reference to all fruit of that faith whose nature it is to work by
   love, of being able to realise that relation to Christ which the words
   "who loved me, and gave himself for me," express, has pressed so upon
   such men as Boston and others, in the days of our fathers, that, in
   order to facilitate that "appropriating act of faith" on which so much
   depended, they introduced that doctrine of ''a deed of gift of Christ
   to all men," which they combined with the faith, still adhered to, that
   He died only for the elect:--shewing what a response Luther's teaching
   as to the use of the pronoun "our" has had, even when that broad basis
   of an atonement for all on which Luther stood has not been seen to be
   the truth of God.

   Another indication of the same response is presented in Dr. Chalmers'
   Institutes, in the chapter on "the universality of the gospel." I refer
   to the tone of the whole chapter, but quote only these words:--"The
   particular redemption of all who are saved, is made good by their right
   entertainment of those texts which are alleged in behalf of universal
   redemption; and it is the very entertainment which the advocates of
   this doctrine would have all men to bestow upon them. And so I am sure
   would we. We should like each individual of the world's population to
   assume specially for himself every passage in the Bible where Christ is
   held forth generally to men or generally to sinners, and would assure
   him that, did he only proceed upon these, he would infallibly be
   saved." I am not sure to what the concession that seems to be made in
   the words which I have marked by italics really amounts, and am fearful
   of even seeming to strain his words. I know indeed that "that
   entertainment which the advocates of universal redemption would have
   all men to bestow" upon "the texts which they allege in behalf of that
   doctrine" includes this, that each man should assume, on the authority
   of these texts, that Christ died for him,--that Christ is made of God
   unto him, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
   redemption. How far Dr. Chalmers means that any man assuming this, and
   trusting Christ accordingly, is justified in so doing, and is saved by
   so doing, I am not quite certain, considering that he insists so much
   on the word "offer;" but this much is, I think, abundantly clear, that
   he recognises the importance of the appropriating act of faith, while
   adhering to the doctrine of a limited atonement.

   But thus to use the expressions of Scripture in a vague largeness in
   connexion with the faith of an atonement for the elect only, affords no
   real basis for that personal appropriation of Christ which is
   recognised as so needful to the practical working of Christianity. And
   those who see clearly that the Apostle could not have said, "I am
   crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ
   liveth in me," unless he had first known that Christ "had loved him,
   and given Himself for him," must see that such previous knowledge in
   the Apostle implied that the gospel in which he had believed had
   imparted that knowledge. However much Owen's four steps of faith
   without this personal appropriation, followed by a fifth, in which,
   through the help of these previous four, that appropriation is
   attained, must repel us as a departure from the simplicity of faith,
   his teaching is consistent with the doctrine of a limited atonement;
   but how, without the element of an indication in the inner man of the
   individual that he is of the elect, the certainty of a personal
   interest in Christ can be reached by one believing that Christ died for
   the elect only, I cannot conceive.

   2. But a more solemn result of limiting the atonement remains to be
   noticed, viz., that, as appears to me, it makes the work of Christ to
   be no longer a revelation of the name of God, no longer a work
   revealing that God is love.

   The conception of the nature of the atonement on which the system of
   Owen and Edwards proceeds, and the reasonings in relation to the Divine
   Attributes by which they attempt to lay a deep foundation for it in the
   verity of what God is, present this,--I may surely
   say--startling--result, that, while they set forth justice as a
   necessary attribute of the divine nature, so that God must deal with
   all men according to its requirements, they represent mercy and love as
   not necessary, but arbitrary, and what, therefore, may find their
   expression in the history of only some men. For according to their
   system justice alone is expressed in the history of all men, that is to
   say, in the history of the non-elect, in their endurance of punishment;
   in the history of the elect, in Christ's enduring it for them. Mercy
   and love are expressed in the history of the elect alone. Surely, not
   to enter into the question of the absolute distinctness of the Divine
   Attributes, or their central and essential unity, if any one attribute
   might be expected to shine full orbed in a revelation which testifies
   that "God is love," that attribute is love; and, feeling this strongly,
   I have ventured to say, that it would be well that these deep reasoners
   had " used the life of Christ more as their light."

   But, not only do I object that in this system the illustration of the
   divine love by the atonement is presented in the history of the
   election alone; what I feel is, that so presented the atonement ceases
   to reveal that God is love.

   However little the thought may have received the consideration which
   its importance deserves, nothing can be clearer to me than that an
   arbitrary act cannot reveal character. We may be reconciled to an act
   of which we see not the reasons, by what we know otherwise of the
   character of him whose act it is: but an act which is strictly
   arbitrary, or, at least, so far as we are informed arbitrary,--an act
   of which he that performs it gives us no other account than that he
   wills it because he wills it,--can never, by any light in it, make the
   character of him whose act it is known to us. Now the doctrine that the
   work of Christ has had reference only to the elect, and that the grace
   which it embodies was only grace to them, and that they were elected,
   and the non-elect passed over arbitrarily, or at the least on no
   principle of choice that can be made known to us, or at all events,
   that is made known to us,--this doctrine makes the work of Christ as
   presented to the faith of human beings strictly an arbitrary act. To
   say that God does not authorise us to expect an explanation of the
   reasons of His acting--that He gives not account of His matters,--is
   not to the point. Be it so. But if it be so, it does not the less
   follow, that what He has done has left us ignorant of Himself--that so
   far as the acting of which He gives us no account is concerned, He is
   to us the unknown God.

   That the transaction has such an aspect of grace to those to whom it
   has reference,--that to the elect it is free unmerited kindness,--yea
   kindness to enemies,--this is not to the purpose, our inquiry being as
   to the name and character of God. For, if we allow our minds due
   freedom in the contemplation of this high and solemn subject, it is
   impossible for us not to feel, that however great the personal
   obligations conferred upon the elect, and however the sense of these
   may attach them to God, even they cannot intelligently venture to say
   that their experience of God--the way in which God has dealt with them,
   proves what God is--in Himself is,--essentially is,--when the way in
   which He has dealt with others--the experience of others related to Him
   exactly as they were, and whose position was, by assumption of the
   system itself in every point identically the same as theirs,--has been
   so different. That other treatment is assumed to be God's acting as
   much as this. By which are we to judge of Him? From which are we to
   conclude what God is? I am unable to see any way out here, or any
   escape from the conclusion, that the doctrine of an atonement for the
   elect only, destroys the claim of the work of Christ to be that which
   fully reveals and illustrates that great foundation of all religion,
   that God is love. I may still cling to that spiritual instinct in me
   which responds to the assertion that God is love, apart from all
   revealed justification of that assertion. But, instead of being helped
   by God's gift of Christ to the elect to cherish this instinctive faith,
   all deep consideration of that gift can only embarrass me; so that, if
   I believe in it, I must be contented to receive it as a mystery,--not a
   revelation of God;--a mystery, the explanation of which I must
   endeavour, in the strength of my instinctive faith that God is love,
   patiently to wait for.

   I know that when the doctrine of free grace as meaning absolute
   unconditional election, is presented to those who have not yet come
   under the power of God's love, it is usual to treat the repulsion they
   feel as a manifestation of carnal pride, and their objections as the
   suggestions of a self-sufficient reason, which refuses to submit itself
   to the authority of revelation. But is it fair to ask men to put their
   trust in that God of whom we cannot tell them whether He loves them or
   does not? in that Saviour of whom we cannot tell them whether He died
   for them or did not? And when they find their difficulties so treated
   by those who not only are, as it will naturally appear to them,
   reconciled to an unconditional election by having come to believe that
   that election has included themselves, but who have this strong
   inducement to limit the atonement, that they believe that to assert
   that Christ died for all men, is, in effect, to assert that He died for
   no man in the sense in which His death for themselves is their hope
   towards God,--is it strange that some degree of irritation, and even
   indignation, should be manifested? May not the appearance of such a
   special interest in limiting the atonement excusably recall the
   words--"A bribe blinds the eyes of a judge"?

   What practically goes far to neutralise all this, and to disarm the
   feeling of irritation which it awakens, even appearing an argument in
   reply, is, the loving spirit often manifested by those who urge such
   views as these,--a spirit the very opposite of what we should expect in
   the holders of a system which veils the love that is in God to every
   man.

   The fact that much of this seeming contradiction meets us is certain.
   How does it arise? Although, as I have said, their personal experience
   of God cannot warrant those, who, living in the faith of God's love in
   Christ as love to themselves, cherish that faith in connexion with the
   faith of an arbitrary election and limited atonement, in concluding as
   to what God is--that He is love; yet they may so conclude,--they may
   think of God exclusively as He appears in His acting towards
   themselves; leaving out of view the different history of others: or, if
   they think of it, regarding it rather as a mystery, with which they may
   not meddle, and which, with their convictions, they would feel it
   irreverent to trace out to logical conclusions. Thus they will be found
   extolling the love which is the plain meaning of what they are
   experiencing at the hand of God, viewed simply in itself; and, feeling
   it as love, they will respond to it with love, and living in an
   atmosphere of love, their spiritual state will have its character
   determined accordingly. And so dealing with God as a living God, and
   receiving from Him day by day forgiving love,--alive to God, and
   drawing daily for their own need out of the fulness that is in Christ,
   it comes to pass, that the living love quickened in their hearts is, if
   I may so speak, glad to find in the darkness that veils the subject of
   election an excuse for going forth freely to men, even while it is not
   doctrinally held that God's love itself, the fountain love, goes thus
   freely forth. And thus a contradiction is allowed to exist between the
   faith of the head and the love of the heart; and, in spite of their
   theology, the men "who love God much because much is forgiven them"
   love men much also, and are thankful to devote themselves, under the
   power of that love, to bringing others into the fellowship of that
   love. In all this conscience, testifying that love is the fulfilling of
   the law, helps them greatly; and also the bearing and general
   impression of the Scriptures, which even the misunderstanding of many
   important texts does not neutralise: and thus a Brainerd, holding as
   his creed that Christ died only for an unknown few, is seen yearning
   over every human being he meets, desiring that individual human being's
   salvation with an intenseness of love that we feel would be content to
   die for him that he should: for no man ever laboured for the salvation
   of others, the record of whose labours impresses us more deeply with
   this conviction.

   In Brainerd's case, indeed, as also in the case of his master Edwards,
   this contradiction between the faith of the head and the love of the
   heart, is the more remarkable, in that, that faith was not taken up
   blindly, or without much reasoning and weighing of all that it
   involved. How marvellous it appears that such reasoners did not give to
   their understandings the help that they might have found in their own
   spiritual consciousness, and make, so to speak, an axiom of the love to
   man that was in their own hearts, and reason from it, as a simple
   uneducated man did, who, when the doctrine of the universality of the
   atonement was first introduced to the attention of a prayer and
   fellowship meeting of which he was a member, when others were arguing
   against it, said, "I cannot refuse it, for I feel that when I have most
   of the spirit of Christ in me I feel most love to all men; and I cannot
   believe that the spirit of Christ would move me to love all men if
   Christ did not love all men Himself."

   II. The limitation of the reference of the atonement to an election
   from among men, and the consequences involved in that limitation, must
   be regarded as bringing into question that conception of the nature of
   the atonement, which, being consistently followed out, has such
   results. Another result of that conception of the nature of the
   atonement, not less conclusive as an argument against it, is the
   substitution of a legal standing for a filial standing as the gift of
   God to men in Christ.

   "When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth His Son, made of
   a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law,
   "that we might receive the adoption of sons." Gal. iv. 4, 5. Therefore,
   when we contemplate the Son of God, in our nature, dealing on our
   behalf with the condemnation of sin, and the demand for righteousness,
   which are in the law, we are to understand that He is not thus
   honouring in humanity the law of God for the purpose of giving us a
   perfect legal standing as under the law, but for the purpose of taking
   us from under the law, and placing us under grace,--redeeming us that
   we may receive the adoption of sons. So that not a legal standing,
   however high or perfect, but a filial standing, is that which is given
   to us in Christ. But the purpose of giving a title to a legal
   confidence, and that of quickening with a, filial confidence, are
   manifestly different; and, the latter being recognised as that in the
   contemplation of which the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the
   world, we must conclude that that conception of the nature of the
   atonement which has led to the substitution of the former in men's
   thoughts, cannot be the true conception.

   President Edwards represents the righteousness of Christ as a perfect
   obedience,--yet not perfected until rendered as obedience unto death;
   and he enters into a full detail of all the forms or aspects of law
   under which Christ came, and the demand of which He fully met; and
   God's acceptance of this perfect obedience he calls, the Father's
   justification of Christ; and this he says was in the Father's raising
   Him from the dead; and in this justification is it that the elect are
   interested, and into the communion of which they enter by faith; and
   this perfect obedience it is that is imputed to them, and to the reward
   of which they are entitled. In all this attention is fixed upon the
   obedience of Christ as the fulfilling of a law, and the life of sonship
   in which this fulfilment has taken place, is left out of view. But that
   life of sonship is, in reality, what ought to be prominent; and the
   proper value of that fulfilment of the law, besides the honour which it
   accords to the law, is, that it is a demonstration of the virtue and
   power which is in sonship. For the prospective relation of men to that
   fulfilment, is, not that they are to receive eternal blessedness as the
   reward due to it, but that God's acceptance of it as a perfect
   righteousness in humanity is a justification of humanity in the person
   of Christ, on the ground of which that life of sonship, in which this
   glory has been given to God in humanity, may be given to men in the Son
   of God.

   A work of infinite excellence performed by Christ as the representative
   of men, and men invested with its excellence, and clothed with its
   worthiness in God's eyes, and rewarded accordingly, is a thought that
   has had much acceptance. Surely to bestow on us in Christ the life that
   has taken outward form in that work, is at once a more natural, and a
   far higher result of that work;--a far higher reward to Christ, and a
   far higher gift to us: as it is also a higher glory to God in us, and
   so a higher glory to God in Christ, through whom there is that glory to
   God in us. "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through
   the flesh, God sending His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and as
   a sacrifice for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: that the righteousness
   of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but
   after the spirit,"--that is, the spirit of the Son, for the root idea
   here is that conveyed by the word " Son." "For the law of the spirit of
   the life that is in Christ Jesus;" viz. sonship--makes us "free from
   the law of sin and death."

   Dr. Chalmers dwells much on the legal standing given in Christ, as
   meeting, by its retrospective and prospective bearing, all the need of
   the awakened sinner; and, in connexion with this, has some very
   striking remarks on what he calls "natural legalism," as a source of
   difficulty to men in receiving the Gospel, in addition to natural
   pride, and one which he thinks ministers of the Gospel have not
   sufficiently considered, or recognised, in dealing with the consciences
   of men. These remarks are, I believe, just. I believe that difficulties
   have often their root in conscience, which are ignorantly and rashly
   referred to pride; and I also believe that Dr. Chalmers is historically
   justified in saying, that such a standing as he conceives we are called
   to take, in virtue of the imputation of our sins to Christ, and of His
   righteousness to us, will meet the demands of conscience to a certain
   extent awakened; yet of conscience but to a certain extent awakened
   only; not of conscience fully awakened. This is true, inasmuch as
   conscience fully awakened may be expected to demand, in relation to the
   righteousness of the law, that which God has contemplated; which we
   have just seen has been "that the righteousness of the law might be
   fulfilled in us:"--but I say this rather in reference to that other
   aspect of the fulfilment of God's purpose; viz. "that we should receive
   the adoption of sons;"--in relation to which I believe there is such a
   response in conscience that one is justified in saying, that conscience
   is not fully awakened in us who are God's offspring, until the orphan
   condition to which sin has reduced us is revealed in us, and the cry
   arises in spirit, if not in form of words, "Shew us the Father, and it
   sufficeth us.''

   In the chapter of Dr. Chalmers' Institutes, to which I am now
   referring, that "on the satisfaction that had to be rendered to the
   truth and justice of God, ere that sinners could be readmitted into
   favour," there is much important elucidation of the fact, that it is
   not as a Father, but as a Judge, that God is thought of by awakened
   sinners;--from which he justly argues, that there is both a departure
   from the truth of things, and an embarrassing result to the awakened
   sinner in not duly acknowledging that voice of conscience which causes
   so much terror, and in, as he says, "keeping the divine jurisprudence
   out of sight," and "contemplating the relation between God and man
   simply as a family relation." Those who do so, he designates as "the
   advocates of a meagre and sentimental piety." When any thus sink the
   Lawgiver in the Father, they surely err. But, on the other hand, if any
   think the idea of the Lawgiver the higher and more root idea, they also
   err. Let us take the warning given, not "to keep the divine
   jurisprudence out of sight;" but let us guard also against awakenings
   which do not reach to the depths of man's being; neither prepare for
   that Gospel which comes from the depths of the heart of the Father. It
   must ever be remembered, that, while the Gospel recognises the law, and
   honours the law, it raises us above the law; while, as to the very
   point of these two characters of God, viz. the Lawgiver and the Father,
   we know that it is only by the revelation of the Father that God
   succeeds in realising the will of the Lawgiver in men. How much more
   can He thus alone realise the longings of the Father's heart!

   And let us weigh well this question, "How much more could God thus
   alone realise in us the longings of His heart as our Father?" for that
   the atonement really contemplated the realising of these longings, and
   should be seen by us in its relation to these longings, this is what is
   not understood when the legal perfection of Christ's righteousness is
   thus abstracted from the law of the spirit of the life of sonship in
   Christ Jesus, which took outward form in that righteousness, and from
   the revelation of the Father, which, in being perfect sonship, it
   presents to faith. If that obedience were not, in its inner aspect, and
   in its nature, sonship,--if it were not a revelation of the Father, its
   legal perfection, had such perfection been in that case possible, would
   have availed little to us, who were to be redeemed from under the law
   that we might receive the adoption of sons.

   Therefore was our Lord ever careful to keep before the minds of the
   disciples, that, in that perfect obedience to the will of God which
   they saw in Him, they were contemplating the doing of the will of the
   Father by the Son. For in His Father's name was He come to them. Had it
   been otherwise, Christ could not have said, "He that hath seen me hath
   seen the Father." A servant may make us acquainted with his master; a
   subject may make us to know the lawgiver and king to whom he owes
   allegiance; the Son alone could reveal the Father. "No man knoweth the
   Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son revealeth Him."

   I have urged above, that the limitation of the atonement, renders the
   grace of God in the gift of Christ no longer a revelation of the name
   of God,--that He is love. I say now, that the righteousness of Christ
   being contemplated as what was intended to give us a legal standing as
   righteous through its imputation to us, has, if not as a necessary
   consequence, at all events as a matter of fact, marred the efficiency
   of the work of Christ as in itself a, revelation of the Father by the
   Son. I mean, that those who, in looking at Christ as fulfilling
   all righteousness, have contemplated Him as employed in providing a
   legal righteousness for us, have not been in the way of receiving that
   knowledge of God which they would have received, if their contemplation
   of Christ had been determined by the faith of that word, "He that hath
   seen me hath seen the Father." Thus it has come to pass, that our Lord
   has been contemplated by them as fulfilling the law of love towards all
   men, and yet that they have not recognised His doing so as the
   revelation of God's love to all men. Edwards, in his enumeration of the
   elements of Christ's righteousness, mentions those virtues which more
   immediately respect other men, and these under the two heads of
   meekness and love; and, in illustration of the love to men which he
   manifested, he says, "Christ's love to men that He shewed when upon
   earth, and especially in going through His last sufferings, and
   offering up His life and soul under these sufferings, which was His
   greatest act of love, was far beyond all parallel." This, as a part of
   Christ's righteousness, is clearly here love to men as men; not love to
   the elect as the elect. The specifying, as illustrating His love to
   men, those sufferings of Christ, and that offering up of His life and
   soul, which the system assumes had reference to the elect only, is
   indeed a manifest contradiction; but it seems to have arisen from his
   looking at the righteousness of Christ as the meeting of the demand for
   righteousness which the law makes on man, and not as the revelation of
   the heart of the Father by the Son. For Edwards did not doubt that the
   righteousness which Christ fulfilled, and with which, by imputation,
   believers are clothed, included love to all men;--any more than that
   the example which He left for the guidance of His followers, was that
   of love to all men. But the legal reference to man in which alone the
   atonement has been viewed, has caused that neither Christ's sufferings
   for our sins, nor His own righteousness, reveal anything of God by what
   they are in themselves beyond what the law testifies;--being, simply,
   the meeting of the demands of the law; the former an awful, the latter
   a glorious seal put to the law by the Son of God, and no more.

   Justification by faith is so closely related to that work of Christ
   which the faith that justifies apprehends, that an error in regard to
   the nature of the atonement must affect that doctrine. But there will
   be some advantage in postponing the consideration of the teaching of
   the earlier Calvinists on this subject, so far as the object of this
   volume calls for the consideration of it, until I have first directed
   attention to the great modification which Calvinism, as taught by the
   theological school to which I have referred above, has recently
   undergone.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER IV.

   CALVINISM, AS RECENTLY MODIFIED.

   CALVINISM, as recently modified, differs from the earlier Calvinism in
   these points:--First, as to the reference of the atonement, which is
   held to have been for all men, and not for the elect only. Secondly, as
   to the need be for an atonement, which is not regarded as arising out
   of the demands of distributive and individual justice, requiring that
   each man should receive his due desert, according to an eternal
   necessity in the divine nature, as maintained by Owen and Edwards; but
   is held to arise out of the demands of rectoral and public justice,
   which necessitate God, as the moral governor of the universe, if He
   extend mercy to sinners, to do so only in a way that will preserve
   inviolate the interests of His moral government. Thirdly, as to the
   nature of the atonement,--Christ's sufferings for our sins not being
   held to be the endurance, on the part of the Saviour, of the same
   punishment, or of punishment equivalent in amount of suffering, with
   that to which those for whom He suffered were exposed, but to be the
   substitution of other sufferings for the threatened punishment, which
   substituted sufferings were equivalent in reference to the result in
   relation to God's moral government;--and Christ's meritorious obedience
   not being held to be the fulfilling of the law in our room and stead,
   so as to provide us with a righteousness to be imputed to us, investing
   us with a right to the reward of righteousness,--but a moral excellence
   giving a moral virtue to the atonement whereby it is made a fit ground
   on which may be rested all acts of grace and clemency towards sinners,
   and all bestowal of favours upon them.

   Fourthly, as to the results of the atonement, that it does not of
   itself, and by its own nature, secure salvation to any, but only is an
   adequate provision for the salvation of all, free to all, effectual to
   salvation in the case of those who are disposed by the sovereign grace
   of God to avail themselves of it.

   These points of difference involve others as implied in them. Thus the
   idea of imputation of guilt and righteousness, viz. of our guilt to
   Christ, and of Christ's righteousness to us, as this imputation was
   held by Owen and Edwards, is rejected as untenable;--"Guilt and merit
   not being transferable,--but only their consequences." (Payne, 254.)
   The idea of a legal claim to salvation, which we have just seen
   commended as the full meeting of the instinctive legalism of the human
   heart, is rejected as destroying the gracious character of the gospel
   dispensation;--and, most important of all--the relation of the
   atonement to the divinity of Christ, is altogether differently
   conceived of; for whereas, in the earlier Calvinism the divinity of the
   Saviour is contemplated as making possible infinitely great sufferings
   endured in time,--the needed substitute for sufferings that would have
   been infinite in that they would have been eternal,--on this system the
   divinity of Christ is regarded as giving infinite value to any
   suffering of His; so that the value of the sufferings would be
   infinitely great though its amount were infinitely small.

   The assumed advantages of this system as a modification of the earlier
   Calvinism are chiefly these,--First, as to the extent of the atonement.
   To teach that Christ died for all is consonant with the most obvious
   meaning of the language of the inspired writers,--which cannot be
   brought to utter a limited atonement without much forcing. While,
   besides, an universal atonement is an adequate, and the only adequate
   foundation for the preaching of the Gospel as good news of salvation to
   all:--and they dwell with much force on the kind of mental reservation
   which the older system ascribes to God in inviting all to partake in
   what is only prepared for some, because the some only will accept the
   invitation. Secondly, as to the need be for atonement. A necessity for
   an atonement arising out of rectoral or public justice, is felt less
   repulsive than one that implies a demand in the divine nature for a
   certain amount of suffering as the punishment of a certain amount of
   sin. Thirdly, as to the nature of the atonement. All that men have
   revolted from in the idea of the Son of God being actually in His
   Father's eyes as a criminal through imputation of man's sin, and being
   punished accordingly, is thought to be avoided; as well as all that is
   of the nature of legal fiction in imputation of guilt to an innocent
   being, or of righteousness to a guilty being. Fourthly, as to the
   results of the atonement. They dwell largely on the manifestation of
   the divine character, and on the vindication of the divine judgment on
   sin, as well as of the divine sovereignty in the salvation of those who
   are saved,--seeing that those who perish, perish, not because a
   salvation was not provided for them, but because they would not accept
   of it. Owen had said in a passage already quoted, that "to affirm
   Christ to die for all men, is the readiest way to prove that He died
   for no man in the sense Christians have hitherto believed, and to hurry
   poor souls into the bottom of Socinian blasphemies." Here, that Christ
   died for all men is maintained; but, at the same time, "the objections
   of the Socinian" to "redemption through the merits of Christ," are held
   to be "all silenced."--"If he is not allowed for his weapons the wrath
   of a God of love,--the transfer of moral character,--the infliction of
   legal punishment on the innocent, his gauntlet can grasp no other. The
   doctrine of a substitutionary atonement not only blunts but breaks and
   shivers these favourite and long used lances of Socinianism." (Jenkyns,
   317.) But, doubtless, Owen would regard this as a victory obtained only
   by concessions;--for Owen would say, that the doctrine that Christ died
   for all men is combined with the distinct concession, "that He died for
   no man in the sense Christians have hitherto believed;"--and he would
   be entitled so to reply, at least in reference to the sense attached to
   the word atonement in the discussions between himself and Arminians.

   With much in what seems to be the mental history of this modified
   Calvinism I have full sympathy. The constraint felt in preaching Christ
   to all, while believing that He only died for some, is easily
   understood; while, doubtless, Owen's arguments for a limited atonement,
   if the atonement had been what, in the controversies between him and
   Arminians it was on both sides assumed to be, were unanswerable as
   arguments whatever scriptural difficulties they might involve. Again,
   in the concession which seems made to Socinians, on the subject of the
   untransferable nature of guilt and merit, and the difficulty of
   assuming that by a legal fiction God sees things other than as they
   really are, I concur with them, although I feel that there are
   important principles in Edwards' argument on the substitution of Christ
   for us, to which they do not seem to me to give due weight; and,
   although the even stronger language of Luther as to Christ's
   identification of Himself with us, instead of repelling me, as it does
   them, is to my mind a very near approach to truth; and I am disposed to
   think was spiritually, though not intellectually, truth in him. But I
   have much more sympathy in their difficulties than satisfaction in the
   way in which they have dealt with them.

   Believing that Christ died for all, and perceiving that the conceptions
   of the nature of the atonement from which the earlier Calvinists
   reasoned, did indeed imply, if logically followed out, that He only
   died for some, the teachers of this modified Calvinism have seemed to
   themselves to have found a solution of the difficulty, in their
   conception of rectoral or public justice as what called for an
   atonement for sin. But, surely, rectoral or public justice, if it is to
   have any moral basis--any basis other than expediency--must rest upon,
   and refer to, distributive or absolute justice. In other words, unless
   there be a rightness in connecting sin with misery, and righteousness
   with blessedness, looking at individual cases simply in themselves, I
   cannot see that there is a rightness in connecting them as a rule of
   moral government. "An English judge once said to a criminal before him,
   'You are condemned to be transported, not because you have stolen these
   goods, but that goods may not be stolen.' " (Jenkyns, 175, 176.) This
   is quoted in illustration of the position, that "the death of Christ is
   an honourable ground for remitting punishment," because "His sufferings
   answer the same ends as the punishment of the sinner." I do not
   recognise any harmony between this sentiment of the English judge and
   the voice of an awakened conscience on the subject of sin. It is just
   because he has sinned and deserves punishment, and not because he says
   to himself, that God is a moral governor, and must punish him to deter
   others, that the wrath of God against sin seems so terrible--and as
   just as terrible. As little is this sentiment in harmony with what the
   words teach, "The wages of sin is death."

   Owen and Edwards do not err in believing, that the righteousness of God
   connects sin with misery, as by a righteous reward, irrespective of
   state reasons. Their error is, I believe, twofold,--concluding as to
   that award beyond what they had light for their guidance,--and--and
   this chiefly--not seeing any hope for the sinner in the very
   righteousness of God,--as if the righteousness of God would have full
   satisfaction in reference to the unrighteous, in their being miserable.
   "Good and righteous is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners the
   way which they should choose."

   Rectoral justice so presupposes absolute justice, and so throws the
   mind back on that absolute justice, that the idea of an atonement that
   will satisfy the one, though it might not the other, must be a
   delusion.

   The recommendation of the distinction sought to be drawn has been, that
   it seemed to harmonise an atonement for all, with the ultimate
   punishment of those who do not accept of that atonement;--that is to
   say, as Calvinists pressed the point on Arminians,--the punishment of
   many whose punishment Christ had previously endured: this stronghold of
   Calvinism it seemed to overturn. But as long as Christ's sufferings are
   held to be penal, which, even when the old form of words is most
   departed from, is the expression still used, I cannot see what
   difference it makes, whether they be held as by Owen, to have been the
   same that those for whom he suffered were obnoxious to;--or as Baxter,
   with Grotius, held,--equivalent;--or as Dr. Jenkyns holds, "different
   in nature and kind,--in quantity and degree." If they were penal, then,
   that those for whom He suffered should be punished themselves, must
   still suggest the idea sought to be avoided, of sin twice punished.

   Nor is the difficulty less because, not regarding our sins as imputed
   to Christ in the sense of the elder Calvinists, objection is made to
   speaking of Christ as punished for our sins; the expression being
   substituted, that what He suffered was the punishment of our sins. This
   distinction, introduced by Andrew Fuller, is adopted by Dr. Payne, who
   would press it further than Fuller; and I suppose that it is
   contemplated by Dr. Jenkyns when he says, "Christ's sufferings were not
   a punishment." (p. 292.) But Dr. Payne recognises our sins as imputed
   to Christ in the sense of "inflicting upon Him the punishment due to
   them" (p. 260) ; and Dr. Jenkyns, while at as much pains to bring out
   the difference between what Christ suffered and what those for whom He
   suffered were exposed to suffer, as Dr. Owen is to bring out, if he
   could, an identity, (being indeed quite successful in this, while Owen
   is altogether unsuccessful), yet regards "made a sin offering for us"
   (in 2 Cor. 5 and 21) as equivalent to "made liable to punishment for
   us" (p. 287),--and enlarges on Christ's "suffering as if He had been a
   sinner." (p. 284.) If Christ was "made liable to punishment," if He was
   "treated as if He were a sinner," that is, if God so treated Him--for
   the misapprehensions of men are nothing--then, to say that He was not
   punished though the punishment of our sins was endured by Him, however
   it is a softening of expressions, is not to any real effect so to
   modify the idea of atonement as to do away with the difficulty of a
   double punishment for sin.

   This distinction between being punished, and enduring sufferings which
   are a punishment, is adopted in connexion with the denial of the
   imputation of our guilt to Christ, and in this view is held to remove
   the difficulties of one class of objectors,--although to call
   sufferings a punishment while the sufferer is not regarded as punished,
   involves new difficulties. But, the change on which most weight is
   laid, is in the view taken of the relation in which the sufferings
   endured are represented as standing to the divinity of the sufferer.
   That the personal dignity of the Saviour is the important aspect of the
   incarnation in relation to the atonement, is much insisted on. Divinity
   as a capacity for enduring infinite penal infliction, is an idea which
   is recognised as rightly offending. Divinity as giving infinite value
   to any measure of humiliation or suffering condescended to, is urged as
   what should recommend itself as a far more worthy conception. How far
   removed from either conception the truth of the case has been,--how far
   different from a capacity of enduring infinite penal infliction, or a
   giving infinite value to penal suffering, however small its amount, has
   been the relation of the divinity of Christ to His sufferings in making
   propitiation for our sins will, I trust, be made clear in the sequel.

   But there are two points in relation to the sufferings of Christ, as
   spoken of in these two forms of Calvinism severally, which appear to me
   deserving of our special attention, viz. that the language employed in
   speaking of the part of the Father in relation to these sufferings, is
   much the same;--and that, the details specified, when details of the
   elements of suffering are ventured, are much the same, or at least are
   of the same nature.

   1. The language of the later Calvinists in speaking of the part of the
   Father in relation to the sufferings of Christ, is not essentially
   different from that of those whose system they feel it necessary to
   modify.

   President Edwards is quoted by Dr. Stroud (who dedicates his book to
   Dr. Pye Smith) as representing Christ as "suffering a positive
   infliction of divine wrath," which to teach, he esteems chargeable with
   error,--"not to say absurdity." (p. 209.) These are some of the
   sentences which he quotes. "Revenging justice then spent all its force
   upon Him on account of our guilt, . . . and this was the way and means
   by which Christ stood up for the honour of God's justice, viz. by thus
   suffering its terrible executions: for when He had undertaken for
   sinners, and had substituted Himself in their room, divine justice
   could have its due honour no other way than by His suffering its
   revenges." Yet Dr. Stroud himself says, "A transition more sudden or
   violent than that which took place from the seraphic discourses and
   devotions of Christ after the paschal supper, to the horrors of
   Gethsemane, can scarcely be conceived. That He was about to suffer from
   the immediate hand of God is implied by His prediction to the apostles
   on the way. In the absence of all external infliction, the cup of
   trembling which was then presented to Him by the Father, and which He
   so earnestly petitioned might if possible be withdrawn, could have been
   no other than the cup of the wrath of God, "the poison, whereof
   drinketh up the spirit' " (p. 215): and he quotes with approbation from
   Rambach, a passage in which he speaks of our Lord as having "to suffer
   all the floods of the divine wrath to pass over Him, which would have
   overwhelmed our Saviour's human nature, had not the divinity within Him
   supported it in this terrible trial." Dr. Pye Smith says, ''Jesus
   Christ voluntarily sustained that which was the marked punishment of
   sin." (p. 35.). "The tremendous manifestations of God's displeasure
   against sin, He endured, though in Him. was no sin: and He endured them
   in a manner of which those unhappy spirits who shall drink the
   fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God will never be able to form an
   adequate idea." (p. 42.) Dr. Jenkyns says, "The most amazing
   circumstance connected with His death was, that He suffered as one
   disowned, and reprobated, and forsaken of

   6--2

   God, &c. (p. 284.) "The just is treated as if He had been unjust, the
   Son of God suffered as if He had been a transgressor." (p. 285.) Dr.
   Payne ("On the reality of the atonement") concludes, that the
   sufferings of our Lord were "dreadful beyond conception," and resulted
   from intense mental suffering, from the burden of our guilt which
   rested upon Him, from that light of His Father's countenance which then
   suffered a total eclipse," in relation to which he quotes Psalm
   lxxxviii. 4-7, concluding with the words, "Thy wrath lieth hard upon
   me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy waves."

   2. But the other point to which I would direct attention, is more
   striking still; viz. the oneness of character in the elements of
   suffering which they specify.

   What are the "revenges of divine justice," and "its terrible
   executions," which were in Edwards' contemplations when he employed
   those general expressions which have exposed him to the charge of
   error, nay, absurdity? The only direct dealing of God with Christ which
   he specifies, is purely negative;--"God forsook Christ and hid Himself
   from Him, and withheld comfortable influences, or the clear ideas of
   pleasant objects." This negative wrath, if the expression is not a
   contradiction, is indeed represented as being in order that the
   positive elements of suffering present should act with unmitigated
   power; and what were these? First, God hid Himself from Christ "that He
   might feel the full burden of our sins that was laid upon Him. But how
   laid upon Him? "His having so clear an actual view of sin and its
   hatefulness, was an idea infinitely disagreeable to the holy nature of
   Christ; and therefore, unless balanced with an equal sight of good that
   comes by that evil, must have been an immensely disagreeable sensation
   in Christ's soul, or, which is the same thing, immense suffering . . .
   Thus Christ bore our sins; God laid on Him the iniquities of us all,
   and He bare the burden of them." Secondly, God thus dealt with Christ,
   that "He might suffer God's wrath." But again, how?--"His suffering
   wrath consisted more in the sense He had of the other thing; viz: the
   dreadfulness of the punishment of sin, or the dreadfulness of God's
   wrath inflicted for it;" viz. on those on whom it is inflicted. "Thus
   Christ was tormented, not only in the fire of God's wrath, but in the
   fire of our sins; and our sins were His tormentors; the evil and
   malignant nature of sin was what Christ endured immediately," i. e. in
   being realised by Him as an object of mental contemplation,--as well as
   more remotely, in bearing the consequences of it," i. e. the sense of
   these consequences as endured by others. "Thus Christ suffered what the
   damned in hell do not suffer. For they do not see the hateful nature of
   sin; . . . and as the clear view of sin in its hatefulness necessarily
   brought great suffering on the holy soul of Christ, so also did the
   view of its punishment. For both the evil of sin and the evil of
   punishment are infinite evils, and both infinitely disagreeable to
   Christ's nature: the former to His holy nature, or His nature as
   God;--the latter to His human nature, or His nature as man . . .
   Christ's love brought His elect infinitely near to Him in that great
   act and suffering wherein He specially stood for them, and was
   substituted in their stead; and His love and pity fixed the idea of
   them in His mind, as if He had really been they; and fixed their
   calamity in His mind, as though it really was His. A very strong and
   lively pity towards the miserable, tends to make their case ours; as in
   other respects, so in this in particular, as it doth in our idea place
   us in their stead, under their misery, . . . as it were feeling it for
   them, actually suffering it in their stead by strong sympathy." On
   Satisfaction for Sin,  9, 1.

   I am quite sensible of the injustice done to the remarkable passage
   from which I quote, by thus curtailing it. But I have given enough of
   it for my purpose in quoting it; viz. to shew that, however strong or
   startling Edwards' general expressions as to Christ being, in
   consequence of the imputation of our guilt, subjected to "the revenges
   of divine justice," there is, when he explains himself, nothing of the
   nature of legal fiction in his conception of the way in which Christ
   bore the burden of our sins; as neither is there anything of the nature
   of the actual going forth of divine wrath against the holy one, because
   of His standing in the room of sinners, in what is called "His
   endurance of wrath;" but that the whole suffering conceived of, is
   resolved into a vivid perception and realisation of the hatefulness of
   sin, and of the greatness of the wrath to which it has exposed sinners;
   these two ideas affecting our Lord in the measure of His infinite
   holiness and love. So strictly has Edwards, in endeavouring to imagine
   ingredients to fill a full cup of suffering, adhered to the limits
   which he recognises in saying that ''Christ suffered the wrath of God
   for men's sins in such a way as He was capable of, being an infinitely
   holy person, who knew that God was not angry with Him personally, knew
   that God did not hate Him, but infinitely loved Him." It is, indeed, a
   great relief, to see this great and good man, while dealing so much in
   the language of what seems legal fiction in that high region in which
   fiction can have no place, when he comes to explain the facts of
   Christ's actual experience, as they were conceived of by him, saying
   nothing that implied, either that God looked on Christ in wrath, or
   that Christ felt as if He did. And, when I use the word "explain," I am
   very far indeed from intending to suggest any attempt to soften, or
   explain away. Edwards is in no way attempting to make his doctrine less
   obnoxious: on the contrary, as in the choice of general expressions he
   selects the most extreme, so in setting forth the elements of the
   Saviour's sufferings, he is making out the strongest case that he can,
   within the limit which he has recognised.

   The teaching that substitutes, "enduring the punishment of our sins,"
   for, "being punished for our sins," has still, to seek for elements of
   penal suffering;--and the same relief which is felt in interpreting the
   general expressions of Edwards in reference to the divine wrath which
   Christ suffered, by the details of Christ's actual sufferings which he
   specifies, is again experienced in passing from the general expressions
   of the modified Calvinism to the illustrations of these which are
   offered. The "wrath" or "malediction," as he more frequently expresses
   it, which Dr. Stroud contemplates, is "the loss for a time of all sense
   of God's friendship, all enjoyment of His communion" (p. 192),--which,
   the consciousness of sinlessness remaining, and there being no
   misconception assumed as to the Father's true estimate of Him as the
   holy one of God, however it would be suffering, could with no propriety
   be called malediction and wrath. Dr. Pye Smith's specification of the
   elements of suffering, is strikingly like that of President Edwards,
   both in the limit recognised. "He suffered in such a manner as a being
   perfectly holy could suffer" (p. 41), and in the moral nature assigned
   to the suffering, as arising from holiness and love realising the evil
   of sin, and intensely interested in those who were its victims, (p.
   42.) The elements which Dr. Payne finds in our Lord's sufferings, are
   also intense views of the evil of sin, combined with the withholding of
   counterbalancing support (p. 181);--and, though he speaks of the "penal
   elements" in our Lord's cup of suffering, and recognises the
   withholding of those manifestations of supreme complacency in His
   character and conduct which He had previously enjoyed, as in itself a
   most distressing testimony of the divine anger against sin, and
   probably implied in the language of the prophet, "It pleased the Father
   to bruise Him," which thought he adopts from Dr. Dwight, he proceeds to
   object to Dr. Dwight's representing the hidings of God's face as
   implying "the suffering of His hatred and contempt," saying, "No sober
   minded man can admit this. The fact of the case most unquestionably is,
   that the Father did not despise Him,--was not angry with Him when He
   hung on the cross. Never, indeed, did He regard Him with such ineffable
   complacency. How then could He manifest that displeasure which did not
   exist?" (p. 182.) Dr. Jenkyns says, as what he regards as a mitigation
   of Christ's sufferings, (as to which, he rather says what they were
   not, than what they were),--"His sufferings were not a punishment. His
   consciousness of personal rectitude, and His confidence in His Father,
   never forsook Him. In the darkest hour of His anguish, His assurance of
   God's approbation and acceptance was in the highest
   exercise,--'Father,' He said, "into thy hands I commend my spirit.' "
   (p. 292.)

   My quotations are necessarily brief, but the references will guide
   those who may be disposed to verify the correctness of the impressions
   which these quotations convey. What remains with me, after fully
   weighing all that either school of Calvinists have felt warranted to
   present to our faith in picturing the actual elements of the sufferings
   of Christ, is the conviction, that they have not ventured to assume
   anything as to the actual consciousness of Christ in suffering, or as
   to the actual mind of the Father towards Him, while it pleased the
   Father so to bruise Him, or as to His own apprehension of the light in
   which His Father saw Him, in His dealing with the Father, and the
   Father's dealing with Him in reference to our sins, which at all
   accords, either with the older idea of guilt being imputed to Him, and
   therefore wrath going forth upon Him--the wrath due to guilt--or, the
   new idea of His being treated as if He were guilty, as if He were a
   transgressor. Elements of great sufferings are specified,--by some with
   more definiteness than by others; the former writers also giving more
   prominence to the Saviour's sense of the eternal misery to which sin
   had subjected sinners;--the latter, more to His sense of the sin
   itself;--elements of suffering are specified, all of them at least
   conceivable,--of suffering, some call infinitely, others, indefinitely
   great. But however these accord, and they do, so far as they go, accord
   with the idea of sacrificial atoning suffering, they do not accord with
   the penal character ascribed to them. Yet this penal character ascribed
   to these sufferings, without necessity as respects their own nature,--I
   believe in contradiction to their own nature,--is that very thing which
   had originated the difficulty as to the universality of the atonement;
   and, as appears to me, leaves it a difficulty on the system of the
   modern, as much as of the elder Calvinists.

   But, my objection to the conception of rectoral or public justice, as
   that in which the necessity for the atonement has originated, is much
   more serious than its inadequacy to remove difficulties as to the
   universality of the atonement. My great objection is that, equally with
   the view for which it is offered as a substitute, it takes a limited,
   and,--in respect of the important elements which it leaves out of
   account,--an erroneous view of what the atonement was intended to
   accomplish.

   If my readers have entered into my objections to the mere legal
   character of the atonement, as we see it in the system of the elder
   Calvinists, they will see that, in respect of these objections, the
   modified Calvinism has no advantage. An atonement which has conferred
   on those with reference to whom it was made a legal standing of
   innocence, as having had their guilt already punished, and of
   righteousness as having a righteousness already wrought out for them;
   and an atonement whose result is merely to lay a foundation on which
   God may proceed to pardon sin, and to treat as righteous, are alike
   purely legal atonements, that is, atonements, the whole character of
   which is determined by man's relation to the divine law.

   Dr. Wardlaw asks,--man having sinned, "what is to be done? The
   unconditional absolution of the transgressor would be a flagrant
   outrage on the claims of retributive justice;--his annihilation would
   be a tacit evasion of these claims,--while, if the law has its course,
   and the demands of justice are satisfied by the infliction of its
   penalty, he is lost for ever,--eternal life forfeited, and eternal
   death endured. Here, then, is the place for atonement,--what is it?"
   (p. 10.) He then, quoting from Dr. Alexander, says,--"In its simplest
   form the problem of a religion may be expressed thus: Given a Supreme
   Deity, the Creator and Governor of all things, and an intelligent
   creature in a state of alienation and estrangement from his
   Creator;--to determine the means whereby a reconciliation may be
   effected, and the creature restored to the favour and service of God."
   This statement of the question he adopts--adding, "The problem to be
   solved is this. How may this be accomplished honourably to the
   character and government of the Supreme Ruler?" He then quotes several
   definitions of atonement, among these, this from Dr. Jenkyns,
   "Atonement is an expedient substituted in the place of the literal
   infliction of the penalty, so as to supply the government just and good
   grounds for dispensing favours to an offender;"--and this from Andrew
   Puller, "That a way was opened by the mediation of Christ, for the free
   and consistent exercise of mercy in all the ways which sovereign wisdom
   saw fit to adopt." The definitions are all to the same effect, and all
   accord with what I have said of the legal character ascribed to the
   atonement,--so that, retrospectively, it but meets a demand that
   pertains to the character of God as a Lawgiver, and prospectively, is
   related to the mercy He may manifest, only in the way of making such
   manifestation of mercy consistent with the interests of His moral
   government, and promotive of them.

   But the problem which the work of God in Christ solves, however it
   includes, goes far beyond that stated by Dr. Alexander, or recognised
   in these definitions. In the light of the Gospel we see, that our need
   of salvation, and our capacity of salvation as contemplated by the
   Father of our spirits, involved the problem,--not "how we sinners could
   be pardoned and reconciled, and mercy be extended to us;'' but, "how it
   could come to pass, that we, God's offspring, being dead, should be
   alive again, being lost, should be found." "God sent forth His Son,
   made of a woman, made under the law, that He might redeem us who were
   under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons." It was as
   employed "in bringing many sons to glory, that, it became Him, of whom
   are all things, and by whom, are all things, to make the Captain of
   their salvation perfect through sufferings."

   Nothing can illustrate the way in which this purely legal view of the
   atonement works, and what is its development, better than the
   conclusions at which Dr. Wardlaw has arrived, and which he expresses in
   commenting upon the words "to put away sin." "The expression is
   significantly general. And, for my own part, I am unable to discover
   any valid objection to our stating the design of the atonement in this
   form: That it was an atonement for sin, an atonement whose value was so
   unlimited, so strictly and properly infinite, that on the ground of its
   merits, had God willed it, fallen angels might have been saved as well
   as fallen men; nay, had there been a thousand rebel worlds, the
   inhabitants of them all." (p. 107.) Thus he concludes,--contemplating
   the atonement as simply a grand moral display, illustrative of God's
   condemnation of sin and delight in holiness. And such a display it
   undoubtedly is,--but it is much more than this--neither is it even this
   healthfully and truly, apart from those specialities in man's
   condition, and from that divine purpose concerning man, by which its
   nature and character have been determined. How different from this
   abstract atonement for sin, is the specific reference to the condition
   of human spirits in the words, "For what the law could not do, in that
   it was weak through the flesh, God sending His own Son in the likeness
   of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: that the
   righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
   the flesh, but after the spirit."

   The objection to both forms of Calvinism on the ground of the narrow
   and exclusively legal basis on which the necessity for atonement is
   placed, is instructively illustrated by the relation in which the
   atonement is represented as standing to justification by faith. We may
   here take President Edwards as the representative of the earlier
   Calvinism, and Dr. Payne as the representative of the modified
   Calvinism.

   Both Edwards and Payne regard the work of Christ as the meritorious
   ground of justification. Both regard faith as that by which the
   individual is so connected with that work as to be justified on the
   ground of it. Both are alike solicitous to exclude the faith present in
   justification from being itself in any measure included in the ground
   of that justification; while, at the same time, both regard this faith
   as what has a rightness in itself, and as what is due from man as the
   right reception of the gospel. Payne, indeed, treats faith more as an
   intellectual act that Edwards does. But, still, he objects to putting
   it on a footing with the ordinary case of belief under the power of
   evidence; in doing which he thinks some others have erred. The
   difference between their several systems is connected with the idea of
   imputation. As Edwards holds man's guilt to have been imputed to Christ
   when He suffered for sin, so he holds Christ's righteousness to be
   imputed to believers, making them personally righteous in God's
   sight,--which imputation he holds, not only to clothe their persons,
   determining the complacency with which God regards them, but also, all
   their virtues and graces, giving them a value beyond their intrinsic
   value. Payne on the other hand, as he rejects the conception of
   imputation of guilt, rejects also that of imputation of righteousness,
   and holds, "that to be in a justified state, is not either to be
   pronounced just, or to be made actually just,--for both are impossible
   in the case of a sinner,--but it is to be treated as if we were just:
   or rather, perhaps, to be in the state of those whom God declares that
   He will treat as if they were just, i. e., it is to be in the faith of
   Christ; for the divine declaration is, that believers are the persons
   who shall be treated as if they were just." (p. 333.)

   Whatever difficulty attaches to the idea of imputation, this way of
   escaping from it is to me very unsatisfactory. The idea "that guilt and
   innocence or sin and righteousness are transferable in their effects
   but untransferable in themselves,'' which underlies the whole system of
   modern Calvinism on this subject, and is the ground on which Dr. Payne,
   while rejecting the expression "imputation," continues to use "treated
   as if,'' seems to be tenable, if tenable at all, only if we exclude
   from our consideration all the more important effects of sin and
   righteousness.

   As respects the sinner's relation to God, the effect of sin which is
   most important is, the displeasure awakened in the divine mind. But,
   Christ is not held to have been really the object of the divine
   displeasure through the relation in which He stood to us and our sins,
   however, expressions have been used which, apart from the details
   offered in explanation, might seem to contain that assertion; and Dr.
   Payne has not only asserted the very opposite to have been the case,
   but has asked, and the question is unanswerable,--"How could God
   manifest that displeasure which did not exist?" Neither God's
   displeasure, nor, therefore, anything expressing God's displeasure, are
   we to conceive of as included in the alleged transferred effects of
   sin. But what in all our Lord's sufferings can be rightly spoken of as
   "transferred effects of sin"? were not these sufferings in their nature
   altogether determined by what He was who suffered? and is not the fact
   that Christ's sufferings were in reality the effects of holiness and
   love, and not transferred effects of sin,--discernible in all the
   attempts which we have seen made to specify the elements of His
   sufferings?

   But, are the effects of righteousness more transferable? It is, indeed,
   far less repulsive to think of these as transferred to us than to think
   of the effects of sin as transferred to Christ; as it is also far less
   repulsive to think of Christ's righteousness as imputed to us than to
   think of our sin as imputed to Christ,--to think of God as well pleased
   with us for Christ's sake than to think of God as contemplating Christ
   with displeasure for our sake. But are the effects of righteousness
   transferable any more than the effects of sin? The root matter here is
   God's favour, as there it was His displeasure. Is the favour of
   God--that favour which is life--thus transferable? nay, is any real
   fruit of righteousness as respects the experience of the human spirit
   in its relation to God, and intercourse with Him; or in its relation to
   man, and what man is to man through love; or in the mind's
   self-consciousness, and inward peace and harmony,--is any real fruit of
   righteousness in any of these aspects of the subject--and these are the
   fundamental and alone important aspects of it--transferable any more
   than righteousness itself? or, are any of these at all separable from
   righteousness? If, indeed, we descend to a lower region, it is at least
   intelligible how certain benefits may be conceived of as conferred for
   Christ's sake--though it would be far from correct to speak of these as
   ''effects of righteousness transferred," or, of their bestowal upon us
   as a treating us as if we were righteous. But is there place for
   anything so outward as this in the matter of justification? Surely, a
   justification which does not introduce into the divine favour, into the
   light of the divine countenance, is no justification at all.

   The strict maintenance of the idea of imputation enables Edwards to
   give to the expression, "for Christ's sake," an amplitude of meaning
   that, as respects justification, may seem to meet all the exigences of
   the subject. If God sees us as clothed with the righteousness of
   Christ, he may be conceived of as smiling on us with the smile of
   favour proper to that righteousness: and to this the faith of the elder
   Calvinists rose. But, if this idea of imputation is given up, then,
   whatever else may be supposed to be given for Christ's sake, nothing
   that is suggested by the words "the favour of God which rests upon
   Christ," can be conceived of as so given.

   Dr. Payne quotes Mr. Bennet as "having happily and satisfactorily
   shewn, that 'the practice of conferring favours upon many, from regard
   to, and as an expression of approbation of, some eminently
   distinguished individual,' may be regarded as a law of the divine
   government: while, on the other hand, the procedure supposed, viz.
   CONSIDERING a person what he really is not, and then TREATING him as if
   he HAD been what he is not, has no analogy in any part of the divine
   conduct." (p. 263.) No doubt this is true. But we must not forget the
   high region in which we now are, and that, not of secondary gifts, but
   of that life which lies in God's favour, are we speaking. This we
   receive through Christ, or we receive nothing; and in reference to
   this, any correct use of the expression, "for Christ's sake," must have
   a far higher meaning than these analogies furnish. Abraham believed
   God, and was called the friend of God, and his descendants received
   many favours for his sake;--but were they for his sake "friends of
   God," or "treated as friends of God," apart from their participation in
   that reality in respect of which he was the friend of God? "They who
   are of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham."

   Edwards ascribes the place which faith has in justification simply to
   this, that it connects the individual with Christ. Payne says, "If we
   are justified solely on the ground of the perfect work of Christ, there
   is nothing to prevent the justification of all men, without a single
   thought or act on their part, but the rectoral character and relation
   of Jehovah, which renders it necessary that some rule of justification
   should be enacted, that the justice of the Divine Being may be rendered
   apparent by His bestowing it upon those, and those only, who comply
   with that rule. Now, it is manifest that any requisition (and it must
   be a requisition on account of the rectoral character of God) would
   secure this object; it might be love, for instance." But to this, i.
   e., making it love, the objection, he says, would be, that this
   justification might appear to be by works, but faith is not liable to
   this objection, because it "cannot be confounded with fulfilling the
   law." Yet Dr. Payne has just been employed in objecting, and not
   without reason, to the idea, that faith is as it were a new law. Now
   certainly there is no conception of the relation of faith to
   justification which seems so fitted to suggest that objectionable idea
   as the conception which Dr. Payne has expressed in the words just
   quoted:--for if faith is a requisition, compliance with which is
   required that the justice of the Divine Being may be rendered apparent
   in His distinguishing of individuals in the bestowal of justification,
   then what is more natural than to feel that the new law of faith is
   that under which we are, compliance with which is righteously
   acknowledged by including us in the number who shall be treated for
   Christ's sake as if they were righteous, and non-compliance with which
   shall infer condemnation? That it seems to Dr. Payne that the moral
   Governor of the Universe was "free to adopt any rule--only it must be
   some fixed and declared rule," indicates a greater departure from the
   consideration of the nature of the case than I can well understand.
   Surely the conception of Edwards, that faith is connected with
   justification, because it connects with Christ, commends itself much
   more,--as it also is, in my apprehension, more fitted to secure the
   end--which both seek to attain, viz. that the meritorious work of
   Christ should be really the believer's felt ground of confidence
   towards God, and not his own faith. It may seem, indeed, as if this
   were secured on Dr. Payne's system by its being a part of the gospel
   believed, that the work of Christ was the meritorious ground of
   justification,--as well as on President Edwards' system, by its being a
   part of the gospel believed, that we are made righteous and are
   accepted because of the imputation of Christ's righteousness; and, no
   doubt, in strictness of thought it is a contradiction to say, that I am
   trusting to Christ's work as the ground on which God treats me as if I
   were righteous, and, at the same time, that I esteem my own faith that
   ground, as well as it is a contradiction to say, that I am trusting to
   the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and, at the same time, to my
   own faith. But I cannot in either case forget that my faith is that
   which has individualised me,--and the remembrance of this is, as it
   seems to me, less likely to produce a self-righteous feeling, if I am
   thinking of myself as clothed with the righteousness of Christ, and in
   the mind of the Father identified with Christ, than if I am thinking of
   myself as by my faith introduced into the circle of those with whom,
   according to the rule of government which He has revealed, God will,
   for Christ's sake, deal as if they were righteous. For, in proportion
   as faith is contemplated as a requisition made in order that it may be
   the basis of a judgment, and is not felt to be simply the natural and
   necessary link connecting us with Christ, there is an opening afforded
   for the coming in of self-righteousness.

   But the fear about self-righteousness arises entirely from not seeing,
   that the true protection from self-righteousness is found in the very
   nature of faith. The true faith precludes self-righteousness, because
   that which it apprehends is the Father revealed by the Son. He who
   beholds the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, is saved from
   self-righteousness by the native power on his spirit of the glory which
   he beholds. He is in the presence of the true God, truly known, and "no
   flesh shall glory in His presence." It is an error to hold the
   connexion between faith and justification to be arbitrary, but it is a
   deeper error not to see, that faith excludes boasting, not by the
   arrangements of a scheme, but by its being the knowledge of the true
   God. To take precautions that the confidence towards God which arises
   in faith shall not be self-righteous, is to me as monstrous as it would
   be to take precautions that light should not be darkness. Indeed, this
   is the very thing which, in taking such precautions, is done--done in
   reference to the highest, the absolute light--the light of eternal
   life.

   This serious error would never have been fallen into, if the atonement
   had been seen in its prospective relation to the gift of eternal life
   in Christ, and as that by which God has bridged over the gulf between
   what we were through sin, and what, in the yearnings of His Father's
   heart over us, He desired to make us. "This is the record, that God has
   given to us eternal life, and this life is in His Son." Less than our
   being alive in that eternal life which is sonship, could not satisfy
   the Father of our spirits; nor, as orphan spirits, as in our alienation
   from God we are, would less than the gift of that life have met our
   need. And the faith which apprehends this gift as given, excludes
   boasting, because it occupies the spirit, not with itself, but with the
   gift which it apprehends. For the gift is given; and he that
   understands what it is, and apprehends it as given, is altogether
   filled with the excellent grace wherein he stands, rejoicing in it, and
   conforming himself to it; and thus, seeing the Father as He is revealed
   by the Son, and apprehending the Son as the living way to the Father,
   and as the Lord of his spirit, he welcomes the Son to reign in his
   heart, and in the spirit of the Son cries, "Abba, Father." And the
   confidence towards the Father in which he so worships, is not only
   sustained by the faith of the Father's delight in the perfection of
   sonship as it is in Christ, but also belongs to the very nature of the
   spirit of sonship, as it is a response to the Fatherliness that is in
   God; for the feeblest cry of faith is a cry in Christ, and one with and
   a part of that which is in its absolute perfection in Christ; sharing
   in His preciousness to the heart of the Father. So sharing, not through
   any process of fiction or imputation--as men have spoken--but through a
   process strictly natural, and which commends itself to us as
   inevitable.

   Now, because of the very near approach to this which is in the
   conception of Edwards, though the legal light in which he has so
   exclusively seen the atonement has kept him intellectually (though I do
   not think spiritually) away from it, I would prefer the language of
   Edwards, notwithstanding the tone of legal fiction which it has, to
   what, in seeking to avoid fiction. Dr. Payne and others have
   substituted. It is really true, that he that comes to God in Christ,
   comes invested with the interest to the Father's heart of that sonship
   in which he comes, and finds that sonship a living way to the
   Father--an actual getting near to God. Therefore, rightly in his own
   thoughts, because truly in the Father's thoughts, is such a worshipper
   as one on whom that very favour rests, which rests upon Christ. So that
   I cannot help feeling, in reading President Edwards' representations of
   the way in which Christ's righteousness invests with its own dignity
   and worth, not only the persons, but the feeblest graces of those who
   are in Christ by faith, that what he says is substantially true, must
   be true, although not in the way of the fiction of an imputation; and I
   am persuaded that, if he had seen the atonement as that by which the
   Father of spirits bridges over the gulf between the condition of
   rebellious, alienated children, and the condition of reconciled
   children trusting in the Father's heart, and reposing on His love,
   instead of seeing it in the legal aspect in which he has so exclusively
   viewed it, he would have conceived truly, and spoken unobjectionally,
   of God's imputation of righteousness, and of our acceptance for
   Christ's sake,--as we have seen Luther does.

   Dr. Payne may feel that this standing of sonship given in Christ, and
   revealed for faith to apprehend and enter upon, is uable to the
   objection that he urges against the idea that the atonement confers
   legal rights; which idea, while it has had acceptance with others,
   appears to him destructive of the grace of the Gospel. And, no doubt,
   if the absoluteness with which God bestows a gift, leaving it for him
   on whom it is bestowed simply that he should receive it and use it
   according to its nature--if this takes from the free grace of God in
   bestowing, the objection lies equally against anything actually given,
   and as to which it is not merely the fact that God has put it in His
   own power to give it if it should please Him. But Dr. Payne himself is
   not able so to order his words as to escape all the objectionableness
   that he finds in the language of others. As the most guarded and
   unexceptionable statement he can offer of the relation of Faith to
   Justification, he says, "Faith justifies by bringing an individual into
   that body, to every individual of which the blessing of justification
   is secured by the promise, and covenant, and oath of God." (p. 322.)
   But wherein does the having a thing through faith "secured to me by the
   promise, and covenant, and oath of God," differ from having through
   faith a legal right conferred on me. He quotes Bishop Hopkins, as using
   the language of right in pleading with God on the ground of the work of
   Christ, and contrasts his expressions with those of David, "Have mercy
   on me, O God, according to Thy lovingkindness;" and no doubt the
   contrast is striking and instructive. But the oath of God, that if we
   comply with the required condition of faith He will treat us as if we
   were righteous, might justify, in the believer, the language of which
   Dr. Payne complains, as well as the doctrine of legal right objected
   to, David's language--the language of true faith--the language of the
   spirit of Christ in man--is, and ever must be, free from all legal
   taint, simply because it is the language of truth, expressing in him
   who is led by the spirit of truth, a confidence in harmony with the
   truth of things--a confidence in which confession of sin is combined
   with filial trust in the Father's heart.

   No part of this system presents a more instructive development of the
   working of this conception of rectoral justice,--and of rectoral
   justice, not only as distinct from fatherly love, but also from
   absolute justice as contemplated by Edwards,--than the arbitrary
   character already noticed as ascribed by Dr. Payne to the relation of
   faith to justification. For while the relation of faith to
   sanctification is recognised as a relation in the nature of things, its
   relation to justification is held to be arbitrary--and, in connexion
   with this distinction. Dr. Payne objects to Dr. Russell's saying that,
   "the whole efficacy of faith in the matter of justification arises from
   its object.'' To this Dr. Payne objects, as embodying "the error of
   forgetting that man needs a change of state as well as a change of
   character," i. e.. justification as well as sanctification. I would
   quite object to regarding such a change of state as amounts only to the
   "being treated as if we were righteous," had such a thing been
   possible, as at all filling up the words "from being unjust becoming
   just." But the truth is, that the relation of faith to justification is
   as absolutely one in the nature of things as its relation to
   sanctification. The purpose of God that He might be just, and the
   justifier of him that believeth in Christ, has a far deeper and more
   perfect fulfillment than this scheme recognises; and to understand that
   fulfilment, we must learn with Luther to conceive aright of that glory
   for Himself in man which God contemplated when He proposed to justify
   the ungodly by faith. We must discern the relation in which the human
   spirit has come to stand to the Father of spirits, when man is
   apprehending and believing the testimony of God, that He has given to
   us eternal life in His Son,--we must see the glory that God has in this
   faith--how, where it exists, God is in His true place in the heart of
   man, and man is in his true place in relation to God--how man has come
   to be nothing--how God is now all in all--how all trust in the flesh,
   all self-righteousness has ceased to be--how trust in the Father's
   heart has come into being, and is the commenced breathing of the breath
   of eternal life. Of this which faith is accomplishing in the human
   spirit, of this which is the glory which God has in our having faith in
   His Son, we must have some discernment, that we may understand how God
   is just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus. If the
   weakness and scanty measure of this faith, as it is found in those that
   believe, render what Luther calls God's imputation necessary,--if, in
   order that the righteousness of God in our acceptance may be fully
   discerned, the nature and development of faith, as these are seen in
   Christ, must be considered rather than the measure of our faith,--this
   we can understand. For we may say that the dawn of the life of Christ
   in us is to the heart of the Father but a hope and promise, as the
   infant is to the parent the promise of the future man. The illustration
   is indeed imperfect, because this dawning life is Christ in us, of
   whose fulness we are receiving. But the important point is, that the
   joy of the heart of the Father over those who are alive to Him through
   faith in the Son, is simply and purely joy in the reality of the life
   of sonship quickened in them, and is not sustained by anything of the
   nature of fiction or imputation; and that it is in this view of what in
   faith is accomplished as to the real living relation of man to God,
   that we are to see the justification of God in man's justification by
   faith. For do we not feel that, if the Eternal Father is satisfied,
   then must the Judge of all the earth be satisfied,--that the provision
   which secures the fulfilment of the longings of the Father's heart,
   must secure the highest ends of rectoral government? "My son was dead,
   and is alive again; he was lost, and is found"--answers all things.

   Dr. Payne teaches that "the judicial sentence is not revealed to the
   conscience, but contained in the Scriptures," that sentence being,
   "that all who believe in the Son of God are justified." And this he
   teaches both in opposition to the doctrine of the eternal justification
   of the elect, and to that of an act of God in reference to the
   individual taking place in time, according to the definition of the
   Assembly's Catechism, (p. 234-239.)

   It accords with his conception of the relation between faith and
   justification as being arbitrary, that the justified should have no
   other knowledge of their being justified than as an inference from
   their having complied with the arbitrary condition revealed. But if the
   faith that justifies be the faith that apprehends the gift of sonship,
   and cries, Abba, Father, then must justification be revealed in the
   conscience--even there where condemnation had been revealed, and where
   need of justification had been revealed. "If any man have not the
   spirit of Christ he is none of His." "As many as are led by the spirit
   of God they are the sons of God," and, "the spirit beareth witness with
   our spirits that we are the sons of God." This is equally remote from
   the assumption of a special personal revelation of the fact of
   justification, and from resting in an inference from the declarations
   of Scripture, that those who believe are justified; for what it amounts
   to is simply this,--that in "counting faith for righteousness" God
   recognises it as what it truly is,--and therefore, that He not only in
   His own mind pronounces this condition of faith our right condition,
   but also by His spirit utters this judgment in our own hearts.

   Let us trace one step further the different developments of the faith
   of an atonement which merely meets the demands of divine justice,
   either absolute, or rectoral; and of the faith of an atonement through
   which we have the adoption of sons.

   The faith that apprehends the gift of eternal life, is eternal life
   commenced. The faith that apprehends the gift of the Son, utters itself
   in the cry, Abba, Father: Therefore, in the deepest sense, the Son of
   God has left us an example that we should walk in His steps. In the
   highest path that our spirits are called to tread, that is to say, in
   our intercourse with the Father of spirits, the foot-prints of Jesus
   are to guide us; our confidence is to be the fellowship of His
   confidence; our worship, the fellowship of His worship:--for sonship is
   that worship, in spirit and in truth, which the Father seeketh.

   But if, according to the system of the earlier Calvinists, we draw near
   to God in the confidence of the legal standing given to us in Christ,
   and not as drawn to God and emboldened by the Fatherliness of the
   Father's heart revealed by the Son; or if, according to the system of
   the later Calvinists, we draw near, having mental reference to an
   atonement which has furnished a ground on which God may skew us mercy,
   and not in the light of an atonement by which we see ourselves redeemed
   from the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, then is our
   walk with God,--if such it can be called,--no longer a being led by the
   spirit of Christ, neither are our spiritual steps in His
   foot-prints;--for our experience is no repetition of, no fellowship in
   His experience, nor the breathing of our new life the free breathing of
   the life of sonship,

   I have given to this modified Calvinism a large space, but not larger
   than the acceptance which it has met with may justify. It has
   necessarily arisen from the purpose with which I have noticed it, that
   I have dwelt on that in it to which I object, rather than on that in it
   with which I agree;--but I cannot pass on without bearing testimony to
   the clearness and power with which its teachers expose much of that
   which is untenable in the earlier Calvinism, especially on the subject
   of the extent of the atonement. But, as I have endeavoured to shew,
   what is negative is more satisfactory than what is positive--their
   breaking down than their building up. They have shed no light on the
   nature of the atonement that renders their faith in the universality of
   the atonement more consistent than that of the Arminians, with whom Dr.
   Owen contended; still less have they done anything towards freeing the
   doctrine of the atonement from its exclusively legal character, or that
   has connected it more intelligently with the purpose of God in
   redeeming us who were under the law, that we might receive the adoption
   of sons. So that whatever foundation for a trust in God's mercy this
   system may offer, it may be said as truly of it as of the earlier
   Calvinism, that strictly adhered adhered to, and all consciousness that
   does not exactly accord with it being rejected, our walking in the
   footsteps of the Son in His intercourse with the Father,--in other
   words, our participation in the life of sonship, and all direct dealing
   on our part with the Father's heart as the Father's heart,--in other
   words, all experimental knowledge of God, would become impossible.

   I say "strictly adhered to." But in truth, in men's actual, living
   dealing with God, neither form of Calvinism, however it may have
   possession of the intellect, affects the spirit of Christ; whose
   identity as in the head and in the members abides,--whose cry, Abba,
   Father, is one and the same as to the nature of the confidence which
   that cry expresses, being alike faith in the heart of the Father,
   whether as that is perfect in the eternal Son who ever dwells in the
   bosom of the Father, or as it is quickened by Him in those to whom He
   reveals the Father, giving them power to be the sons of God.

   But a true conception of the work of Christ must be in perfect harmony
   with the nature of that eternal life--the life of sonship--which is
   given to us in Christ. The atonement by which the way into the holiest
   is opened to us, must accord with what that living way is, and with
   what it is to draw near to God in that way. The sacrifice for sin by
   which the worshippers are sanctified, must accord with the nature of
   the worship--that worship which is the response of the Spirit of the
   Son to the Father: God is a Spirit; and they that worship

   Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth,--the Father seeketh such
   to worship Him.

   The persuasion of being in some measure in that light as to the nature
   of the atonement in which this unity is seen; the desire to teach what
   I seem to myself to have been taught; the hope to be enabled of God so
   to do;--these are the feelings under the influence of which I am now
   writing.--I have dwelt so long on what others have taught, believing
   that it would appear that they have not made my present endeavour
   superfluous, and hoping so far to secure the interest of my readers,
   that they will at least feel that further light is desirable, whether a
   ray of such further light be in these pages or not.

   But that no misconception may be entertained as to the sense in which I
   use the word "desirable," I may state here first, what light I
   recognise the atonement to have shed on men's minds, even while it has
   been, as appears to me, so imperfectly understood; and further, what
   there has been in the means of grace which men have been enjoying, to
   make up for the short coming that has been in their apprehension of the
   atonement, and even to neutralise practically elements of error.

   As to the first point, it is clear that these two rays of divine light
   have been shed on the spirits of all who have believed in the
   atonement, in whichever of the forms of thought which we have been
   considering, or in whatever kindred form of thought it has been present
   to their minds,--viz. 1st, the exceeding evil and terrible nature of
   sin; and 2nd, the pure and free nature, as well as infinite greatness
   of the love of God. I mean that the human spirit that saw the atonement
   in relation to itself, has, of necessity, been filled with an awful
   sense of the evil of sin, and with an overwhelming sense of the love of
   God.

   That the atonement should tell with its full power as to the latter of
   these, (and indeed as to both), the use of the pronoun "our," which
   Luther so insists on, must be known. But with some of this power, and
   that power increasing as the approach to personal appropriation has
   been nearer, must the atonement ever have been realised by human
   spirits. Of the cords of love by which God is felt to draw us when the
   atonement is believed, Gambold has said, "When we learn, that God, the
   very Maker of heaven and earth, in compassion to us fallen and wretched
   creatures, (who did no more answer the law of our creation,) and to
   make propitiation for our sins, came down, conversed, suffered, and
   died as a real meek man in this world; that by the merit of this act we
   might be everlastingly relieved, pardoned, and exalted to greater
   privileges than we had lost: what must be the effect, but an
   overwhelming admiration, an agony of insolvent gratitude, and
   prostration of our spirit in the dust before our Benefactor?"

   Nor is the power of the atonement to impart an awful sense of the evil
   of sin less certain, and that, not only as testifying to the divine
   judgment on sin, but also as by the excellence of pure unselfish love
   which it vindicates for God, awakening in the human spirit the sense of
   the exceeding sinfulness of sin as rebellion against God.

   But further, not only have these rays of the light that is in the
   atonement been reaching men's spirits even when that doctrine has been
   most clouded; much also of that light of life which is in the
   atonement, which men from their limited or erroneous views of its
   nature have failed to receive from it directly, they have still, so to
   speak, had refracted to them from the writings of those inspired
   teachers, who themselves were in its full light. In this way, though
   not seen in the atonement itself, perceptions of God's purpose for man
   as revealed in Christ have been attained, which men have proceeded to
   add to their system, and even to connect with the atonement, though not
   as its due development and what its very nature implied.

   Thus, with the earlier Calvinists, while that legalism which was in
   their views of the work of Christ, hindered, as we have seen, their
   perceptions of the relation between the atonement and the law of the
   spirit of the life that is in Christ; viz. sonship, still,
   the purpose of God that we should be sons of God, was recognised as
   taught in the Scriptures, and adoption was both added to justification
   in the system formed, and also connected with the atonement as a part
   of what Christ's work had purchased for those for whom He had given
   Himself. So also of sanctification, and of all things, in short,
   pertaining to life and to godliness; they were all recognised as
   entering into God's gracious purpose in Christ, and as received through
   Christ,--and were also connected with the atonement as purchased by it,
   though this connexion was in an arbitrary way; the real connexion
   between the atonement and the eternal life given in Christ not being
   understood.

   So also in the modem Calvinism, although the necessity for, and nature
   of the atonement, are exclusively referred to the character of God as a
   moral governor, bound by the obligations of rectoral justice, a large
   benevolence, not to say a Fatherly heart, is recognised as availing
   itself of the removal of the legal obstacle to its outflowing.

   The history of Christianity affords many illustrations of the divine
   life that abides in the disjecta membra--the fragmentary portions of
   divine truth, and which so vindicates its divine character in spite,
   not only of men's misarrangements, but even of the admixture of error.
   This power, which is seen to belong to portions of truth put out of the
   place they have in the divine counsel, and even mixed with error, is
   mainly to be referred to conscience, and the light that is from God in
   every man; for great as are the obligations of conscience to the
   Scriptures, not less assuredly are those of the Scriptures to
   conscience, by which men's power to pervert the Scriptures has been
   partly limited and partly neutralised. But this comforting fact is also
   partly to be referred to the awe with which the Scriptures are
   regarded, and which forbids the practical contradiction of them in
   those who use them reverently as a lamp for their feet and a light for
   their path; and this even where practical conformity with the
   Scriptures is practical contradiction to men's own systems. Thus,
   however conclusive the arguments of Dr. Payne or Dr. Jenkyns appear,
   when exposing the wrong footing before God on which sinners are made to
   stand, when taught to think of all they ask as what they have a legal
   vested right to obtain, the serious and devout among those who hold the
   doctrine objected to, are not found to be in consequence less lowly, or
   humble, or less frequent in the use of the most heart-broken pleadings
   of the psalms in their actual intercourse with God. Thus also are the
   conclusions we would draw, as to the results of believing that Christ
   died only for some, seemingly practically contradicted by the love to
   all men by which many are seen animated who have adopted that error.
   Thus again are antinomian systems seen combined with tenderness of
   conscience, and the anxious desire for entire conformity with the will
   of God. These facts arise, I say, partly from the power of conscience,
   and partly from this divine excellence in the Scriptures, that, being
   pervaded by the truth of the will of God, in all variety of form, as
   doctrine, precept, example, that truth, though excluded by a wrong
   system from portions of the word, meets the human spirit at other
   points; and, so, the practical teaching of an apostle may neutralise a
   misconception on our part as to his doctrines, or an error as to one
   doctrine be counteracted by the full reception of another:--a
   misapprehension, for example, of that which is taught when it is said,
   that "God justifies the ungodly who believe,'' by the apprehension that
   "without holiness no man may see God."

   Yet are we not on this account the less earnestly to labour to attain
   to the apprehension of the unity and simplicity of truth. Therefore,
   while we should be thankful for the power which the atonement has over
   men's spirits, even when only partially understood and in part
   misconceived of, and thankful that justification, adoption, and
   sanctification are recognised in men's systems, though the relation in
   which these stand to the atonement be artificial rather than natural,
   yet should we feel it desirable to attain, if it may be, to that fuller
   apprehension of the great work of God in Christ which will render it to
   us a full-orbed revelation of God, and a manifestation, not of the
   rectitude of the moral Governor of the universe merely, but of the
   heart of the Eternal Father,---connecting itself naturally with our
   justification, adoption, and sanctification, and all that pertains to
   our participation in the eternal life which is the gift of the Father
   in the Son.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER V.

   REASON FOR NOT RESTING IN THE CONCEPTION OF THE NATURE OF THE ATONEMENT
   ON WHICH THESE SYSTEMS PROCEED.--THE ATONEMENT TO BE SEEN BY ITS OWN
   LIGHT.

   THE idea that the Divinity of our Lord was a prerequisite to the
   atonement, because it made the endurance in time of infinite penal
   sufferings--sufferings therefore commensurate with the eternal
   sufferings which were the doom of sin--possible, has, as we have seen,
   been felt repulsive; and it has been thought a worthier conception to
   regard the personal dignity of Christ as giving infinite value to His
   sufferings, without relation at all to their amount. Yet the
   immeasurably great, if not infinite amount of Christ's sufferings is
   still dwelt upon; nor is any attempt made on the ground of the dignity
   of the sufferer to weaken the impression which the sacred narrative had
   hitherto been felt to give of what was endured by the man of sorrows,
   and more especially of the awful and mysterious agony in the garden and
   on the cross. Faithfulness to the inspired record is not alone the
   explanation of this. The awful conceptions of the Saviour's sufferings
   which have from the beginning entered into men's thoughts of the
   atonement, have been so manifestly at the foundation of the
   apprehensions of the divine wrath against sin, and the divine mercy
   towards sinners, which the faith of the atonement has quickened in men,
   that it could not but be felt, that to lower these conceptions would be
   to lessen the power of the atonement on human spirits. But the truth
   is, that however much it may be felt that the dignity of the sufferer
   gave infinite value to any suffering to which He submitted, and how
   ever true it is--and it is most true--that infinitely less than we
   believe our Saviour to have suffered for us would, being believingly
   apprehended by us as expressing our preciousness to the heart of God,
   inspire in us hope towards God; and however much, on the other hand, we
   may feel repelled by that weighing in scales of the sufferings of the
   Son of God, and the sufferings of the damned, in which their
   conceptions of divine justice and of the atonement which it demanded,
   engaged the earlier Calvinists, the sufferings of Christ arose so
   naturally out of what He was, and the relation in which He stood to
   those for whose sins He suffered, that though His divine nature might
   be conceived of as giving them weight, however small in themselves,
   yet, to that very divine nature must we refer their awful intensity,
   and, to us, immeasurable amount. The necessity which has, as we have
   seen, been felt alike by earlier and later Calvinists, in attempting to
   specify the elements of the Saviour's sufferings, to keep within the
   limits indicated by who and what He was that suffered, has obliged them
   to recognise holiness and love as what in Christ made the sources of
   pain specified, sources of pain to Him; and if the sinfulness of sin,
   and the misery to which it exposed sinners, were painful to Christ
   because of His holiness and love, then must they have been painful in
   proportion to His holiness and love.

   But there is a further and a still more important thought which these
   details, on which (in much reverence of spirit, I believe, and love to
   Him who was their hope) these men of God have ventured, seem to me
   fitted to suggest. What I have felt--and the more I consider it, feel
   the more--is, surprise that the atoning element in the sufferings
   pictured, has been to their minds sufferings as sufferings, the pain
   and agony as pain and agony. It no doubt arose out of the conception
   that the sufferings endured was the punishment of our sin,--endured for
   us by our substitute,--that the pain present should as pain become the
   prominent object of attention. But my surprise is not that, believing
   the sufferings contemplated to be strictly penal--a punishment, the
   pain as pain should be the chief object of attention, being indeed that
   for which alone, on this view, a necessity existed; but my surprise is,
   that these sufferings being contemplated as an atonement for sin, the
   holiness and love seen taking the form of suffering should not be
   recognised as the atoning elements--the very essence and adequacy of
   the sacrifice for sin presented to our faith.

   President Edwards seems to have put this question to himself, "Christ
   being what He was, how could God, when imputing the sins of the elect
   to Him, lay the weight of these sins upon Him and punish Him for them,
   subjecting Him to the infinite suffering which was their due?" And he
   has answered thus:--"Christ being infinitely holy, God was able to
   cause Him to feel the awful weight of the sins of the elect by
   revealing their sins to Him in the spirit--so bringing Him under a
   weight and pressure of these sins to be measured by His holiness;--thus
   God laid the sins of the elect on Christ:--and again, Christ loving the
   elect with a perfect love, God was able,--by bearing in upon Christ's
   spirit the perfect realisation of what these objects of His love were
   exposed to suffer,--to make, through His love to them, their
   conceived-of suffering, real, infinite suffering to Him." In this way
   God is represented, not only as punishing the innocent for the guilty,
   but as, in doing so, availing Himself of a capacity of enduring pain
   which consisted in the perfection of holiness and love,

   --pain endured by holiness through being holiness, and by love through
   being love, being represented as the punishment inflicted.

   Now, while it is easy to realise that the sin of those whom He came to
   save, and the misery to which through sin they were obnoxious, being
   present to the spirit of Christ, these would press upon Him with a
   weight and affect Him with an intensity of suffering, proportioned to
   His hatred to sin and love to sinners; and while in respect of the
   suffering thus arising, the sufferer is seen to be a sacrifice,--and a
   sacrifice in which if we meditate upon it, it seems to me that we may
   see atoning virtue;--yet it seems to me impossible to contemplate the
   agony of holiness and love in the realisation of the evil of sin and of
   the misery of sinners, as penal suffering. Let my reader endeavour to
   realise the thought:--The sufferer suffers what he suffers just through
   seeing sin and sinners with God's eyes, and feeling in reference to
   them with God's heart. Is such suffering a punishment? Is God, in
   causing such a divine experience in humanity, inflicting a punishment?
   There can be but one answer.

   Reflecting on this answer, and seeing it to be impossible to regard
   suffering, of which such is the nature, as penal, I find myself forced
   to distinguish between an atoning sacrifice for sin and the enduring as
   a substitute the punishment due to sin,--being shut up to the
   conclusion, that while Christ suffered for our sins as an atoning
   sacrifice, what He suffered was not--because from its nature it could
   not be--a punishment. I say, I find myself shut up to this conclusion,
   and that I am obliged to recognise a distinction between an atonement
   for sin and substituted punishment--a distinction, the necessity of
   which might have been expected to force itself upon the attention of
   those who, in endeavouring to conceive of Christ's sufferings, have
   found themselves constrained to seek for these in the region of
   holiness and love--divine holiness and divine love,--feeling in
   humanity towards man and man's sin and man's misery through sin what in
   God they eternally feel.

   Reader, permit me to ask you to pause here and consider what the
   question is to which I have led your mind. It is not a question as to
   the fact of an atonement for sin. It is not a question as to the amount
   of the sufferings of Christ in making atonement. It is not a question
   as to the elements of these sufferings. It is not so even between me
   and those who believe in the imputation of our sin to Christ in the
   strictest sense. Even they introduce no element into His consciousness
   which amounted to His being in His own apprehension the personal object
   of divine wrath. The question to which I have led you is this: The
   sufferings of Christ in making His soul an offering for sin being what
   they were, was it the pain as pain, and as a penal infliction, or was
   it the pain as a condition and form of holiness and love under the
   pressure of our sin and its consequent misery, that is presented to our
   faith as the essence of the sacrifice and its atoning virtue?

   The distinction on which this question turns appears to me
   all-important in our inquiry into the nature of the atonement, and we
   shall be greatly helped by keeping it steadily in view; for my
   conviction is, that the larger and the more comprehensive of all its
   bearings our thoughts of the atonement become, the more clear will it
   appear to us, that it was the spiritual essence and nature of the
   sufferings of Christ, and not that these sufferings were penal, which
   constituted their value as entering into the atonement made by the Son
   of God when He put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself--making His
   soul a sacrifice for sin--through the eternal Spirit offering Himself
   without spot to God.

   It has been in the free consideration of the actual elements of the
   sufferings of Christ as these have been represented by men who had
   themselves quite another conception of the subject, that the important
   distinction between an atonement for sin, and substituted punishment,
   has now been arrived at; and so, it is in the way of studying the
   atonement by its own light, and meditation of what it is revealed to
   have been, that I propose to proceed in seeking positive conclusions as
   to its nature, its expiatory virtue, and its adequacy to all the ends
   contemplated. And surely this is the right course in order that
   untested preconceptions may not mislead us; for even as to the abstract
   question--"What is an atonement for sin?'' it is surely wise to seek
   its answer in the study of the atonement for sin actually made, and
   revealed to our faith as accepted by God.

   But before proceeding thus to consider the atonement made by Christ for
   the sins of men by the light that shines in itself, there is a ray of
   light on the nature of atonement for sin afforded to us by an incident
   in the history of the children of Israel, which claims our attention
   because of the marked way in which it is recorded, viz. the staying of
   the plague by Phinehas.

   As compared with any other light that the old testament Scriptures shed
   on the subject of atonement, this incident has the special importance
   of not being a mere instituted type, but a reality in itself Phinehas
   had no command to authorise what he did, or promise to proceed upon.
   That which he did was a spontaneous expression of feeling. But that
   feeling was so in accordance with the mind of God, that God
   acknowledged it by receiving what he did as an atonement. "And the Lord
   spake unto Moses, saying, Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of
   Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children of
   Israel, while he was zealous for my sake (margin, with my zeal) among
   them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.
   Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace: and he
   shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an
   everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an
   atonement for the children of Israel." Numbers xxv. 10-13. Here we see
   a man turning away the wrath of God, and staying the plague which was
   the manifestation of that wrath, by an act of which the essence was,
   condemnation of sin and zeal for the glory of God. This act, done in
   the sight of all Israel, ("zealous for my sake among them") was
   immediately accepted by the God of Israel--may we not say, in mercy
   taken hold of by the God of Israel?--as a justification of Himself in
   turning away His wrath from the children of Israel--an atonement for
   the children of Israel. There can be no uncertainty as to the atoning
   element here. It was not the mere death of the subjects of the act of
   Phinehas. Had they died by the plague, their death would have been no
   atonement,--the death of the twenty-four thousand who so died was none.
   But the moral element in the transaction--the mind of Phinehas--his
   zeal for God--his sympathy in God's judgment on sin, this was the
   atonement, this its essence. Surely we have here a ray of light shed on
   the distinction between making an atonement for sin and bearing the
   punishment of sin;--nor can we rightly weigh the words in which God has
   put His seal upon the atonement made by Phinehas, "Behold, I give unto
   him my covenant of peace: and he shall have it, and his seed after him,
   even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood," without feeling, that
   the contemplation of this incident is intended to be a help toward our
   understanding of the foundation laid in atonement for the covenant of
   peace, the covenant of the everlasting priesthood,--a help which
   prepares us to find in the moral and spiritual elements in the
   sufferings of Christ, the atoning power that was in them; and to see
   how, though there is nothing of an atoning nature in death, the wages
   of sin--not in the death of all who have died since death entered the
   world, nor in all death that may yet be endured--yet was the death of
   Christ, who tasted death for every man, because of the condemnation of
   sin in His spirit, an atonement for the sin of the whole world.

   When I speak of the light of the atonement itself, I mean, the
   atonement as accomplished; I do not mean the atonement as foretold
   merely and typically prefigured. For, however the typical sacrifices of
   the Mosaic institutions intimated the necessity for an atonement--and
   in some sense its form, they did not, for they could not, reveal its
   nature. After we have traced and recognised the points in which the
   types prefigured the antitype, we have still to inquire and to learn by
   the study of the antitype itself, what the reality is of which such and
   such things were the shadow. In the type all was arbitrary and of mere
   institution. The perfection required in the victim--a perfection
   according to its own physical nature--had no relation whatever to sin,
   but as the type of that moral and spiritual perfection in the antitype,
   of which sin is the negation and the opposite. In no real sense did the
   confession of the sins of the people over the victim, thus selected as
   physically perfect, connect these sins with it, or lay them upon it;
   for in no real sense could it bear them. Therefore, while that
   confession indicated and foretold the laying of men's sins on Christ,
   it shed no light upon that which these words express,--no light either
   on the capacity for bearing our sins which was in Christ because of His
   moral and His spiritual perfection, or on that reality of coming under
   their weight which was to be in His consciousness in making His soul an
   offering for sin. The shedding of the blood of the victim, declared
   that, without shedding of blood was no remission of sins; but the blood
   of bulls and of goats could not take away sins, and therefore, how
   through the shedding of blood remission of sins would be, remained to
   be learned from the knowledge of that blood which really has this
   virtue.

   It may seem superfluous to insist upon this inadequacy in the type to
   reveal that which, from the nature of things, can only be learned from
   the antitype. But how often have the points of agreement between the
   type and antitype been dwelt upon, as if to see that agreement was to
   understand the atonement, although the fullest recognition of that
   agreement leaves the questions still to be answered,--Why must He who
   is to be the atoning sacrifice for sin, be Himself the Holy One of God?
   How does His being so qualify Him for bearing our sins? In what sense
   could they be, and have they been laid upon Him? Being laid upon Him,
   how is the shedding of His blood an atonement for them? How is His
   moral and spiritual perfection so connected with, and present in His
   bearing of men's sins, and in His tasting death for every man, as that
   "we have redemption through His blood, even the forgiveness of sins,"
   because He, "through the eternal Spirit, offered Himself without spot
   to God"?

   These questions are not answered by tracing the points of agreement
   between the type and the antitype, and therefore the seeming progress
   made in the understanding of the atonement by such tracing is
   altogether illusory;--and if we are contented to remain in the darkness
   in which it leaves us, we are refusing to pass on from the type to the
   antitype, from the shadow to the reality. In the Epistle to the
   Hebrews, it is not upon the coincidence between the type and the
   antitype, but upon that in which they differ, that the Apostle
   insists;--and the antitype is recognised by him as indeed the antitype
   contemplated, because it is seen to have in it that reality of atoning
   efficacy which was not in the type. This comparing and contrasting of
   course implies, that he who engages in it is in a light in which he can
   say what is atoning efficacy. In such light he claims to be, equally in
   judging that the blood of Christ can take away sin, as in judging that
   the blood of bulls and of goats could not. Not that the Apostle knew
   beforehand what would be an adequate atonement, and so was qualified to
   judge of the claims of the sacrifice of Christ to that character;--but
   that, apprehending the atonement made by Christ as it was revealed to
   him, he, in the light of the atonement itself, had clear discernment of
   its adequacy.

   That light of the atonement itself, in which the Apostle wrote,
   pervades the whole argument of the Epistle to the Hebrews. But the
   first principle and essence of his reasoning is contained in these
   verses of the tenth chapter, 4 to 10. ''For it is not possible that the
   blood of bulls and of goats should take away sin. Wherefore when He
   cometh into the world, He saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest
   not, but a body hast thou prepared me. In burnt offerings and
   sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure. Then said I, Lo, I come
   (in the volume of the book it is written of me,) to do thy will, O God.
   Above when He said. Sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings and
   offering for sin thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure therein,
   which are offered by the law; then said He, Lo, I come to do thy will,
   O God. He taketh away the first that He may establish the second. By
   the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of
   Jesus Christ once for all." The will of God which the Son of God came
   to do and did, this was the essence and substance of the atonement,
   being that in the offering of the body of Christ once for all which
   both made it acceptable to Him who in burnt offerings and sacrifices
   for sin had had no pleasure, and made it fit to "sanctify" those whose
   sin the blood of bulls and of goats could not take away.

   Let us then receive these words, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God," as
   the great key-word on the subject of the atonement. The passage in
   full, as it is in the 40th Psalm, is, "I delight to do thy will, O my
   God: yea, thy law is within my heart. I have preached righteousness in
   the great congregation. Lo, I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou
   knowest. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have
   declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy
   lovingkindness and thy truth from the great congregation," 7-11; and I
   quote the context of the psalm because it brings out so clearly, that
   the will of God contemplated is that will which immediately connects
   itself in our thoughts with what God is, that will, the nature and
   character of which we express when we say, "God is good,"--or,
   explaining what we mean by good, say, "God is holy, God is true, God is
   just, God is love." This expression of the purpose of the Son of God in
   coming into this world, is therefore coincident with His own statement
   of His work when in the world--the way, that is, in which He fulfilled
   that purpose,--viz., "I have declared thy name, and will declare it."

   John xvii. 26. Some have understood the will of God here to mean the
   plan of redemption, and so the purpose expressed would be the purpose
   to execute that plan. So understood, of course, the words would throw
   no light on the nature of the atonement, being only the declaration of
   the intention of making it. But the mind of the Apostle is manifestly
   occupied with that in the work of Christ which caused the shedding of
   His blood to have a virtue which was not in that of bulls and goats,
   which he represents as being the will of God done, the mind of God
   manifested, the name of the Father declared by the Son.

   We have therefore to trace out the fulfilment of this purpose, Lo, I
   come to do thy will. In what relation to God and to man did it place
   the Lord as partaking in humanity?--especially, in what relation to
   men's sins and the evils consequent upon sin to which they were
   subject? How did it imply His having all men's sins laid upon Him,--His
   bearing them as an atoning sacrifice,--His being an accepted
   sacrifice,--His obtaining everlasting redemption?

   It will make our task simpler--in considering Christ's doing of the
   will of God,--if we remember the relation of the second commandment to
   the first, as being "like it;" that is to say, that the spirit of
   sonship in which is the perfect fulfilment of the first commandment, is
   one with the spirit of brotherhood which is the fulfilment of the
   second. Loving the Father with all His heart and mind and soul and
   strength, the Saviour loved His brethren as Himself. He, the perfect
   elder brother, unlike the elder brother in the parable, sympathised in
   all the yearnings of the Father's heart over His prodigal brethren; and
   the love which in the Father desired to be able to say of each of them.
   My son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found; in

   Him equally desired to be able to say, My brother was dead, and is
   alive again; he was lost, and is found. President Edwards, in tracing
   out the fitness and suitableness of the mediation of our Lord, dwells
   upon His interest in the glory of God with whom He was to intercede,
   and because of which He could propose nothing derogatory to it; and His
   love to those for whom He was to intercede, because of which He felt so
   identified with them that what touched them touched Him. There is
   something which surely commends itself to us in this recognition of
   love as that which identifies the Saviour with those to whom He is a
   Saviour, and this, as Edwards traces it out, both in His own
   consciouness and in the Father's thoughts of Him as the mediator. May
   we not go further and say, that as love was thus a fitness for the
   office, so it necessitated the undertaking of the office, moving to the
   exercise of this high function, as well as qualifying for it? And
   seeing love to all men as that law of love under which Christ was, must
   we not both wonder and regret, that his deeply interesting thoughts in
   this region did not lead Edwards to see, that by the very law of the
   spirit of the life that was in Christ Jesus He must needs come under
   the burden of the sins of all men--become the Saviour of all men, and,
   loving them as He loved Himself, seek for them that they should partake
   in His own life in the Father's favour,--that eternal life which He had
   with the Father before the world was?

   When God sent His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh to accomplish
   our redemption, the Apostle says He sent Him as "'a sacrifice for sin."
   (Romans viii. 3.) To send Him in the likeness of sinful flesh was to
   make Him a sacrifice for sin, for it was to lay the burden of our sins
   upon Him. Thus related to us, while by love identified with us, the Son
   of God necessarily came under all our burdens, and especially our great
   burden--sin, and this not merely as President Edwards represents our
   sins as being laid upon Christ, in that a vivid sense of their evil
   oppressed His Holy Spirit, nor even in that through love to us (as he
   speaks with reference to the elect) the realisation of the misery to
   which we were exposed would give Him pain; but that living the life of
   love in humanity He must needs care for all humanity, for all partaking
   in humanity even as for Himself: so being affected by the evil of the
   life of self and enmity in humanity according to His own consciousness
   of the life of love,--and at once condemning that life of self,
   desiring its destruction, and feeling Himself by love devoted to the
   work of delivering man from it, at whatever cost to Himself. Thus moved
   by love, and in the strength of love, must we conceive of the Saviour
   as taking upon Him all our burden, undertaking our cause to do and
   suffer all that was implied in obtaining for us redemption. The love
   that came into humanity had manifested its own nature even in coming
   into humanity--its self-sacrificing nature--though this we can less
   understand or measure. Being in humanity, it acts according to its own
   nature, and must needs bear our burden and work and suffer for our
   salvation, and this in ways which we who are human may understand, and
   shall understand in the measure in which the life of love becomes our
   life.

   The active outgoing of the self-sacrificing love in which the Son of
   God wrought out our redemption presents these two aspects,--first, His
   dealing with men on the part of God--and, secondly, His dealing with
   God on behalf of men. These together constitute the atonement equally
   in its retrospective and prospective bearing. Therefore it will be
   necessary to contemplate them not only severally--but also, first, in
   reference to our condition as sinners under the condemnation of a
   broken law, and then in reference to the purpose of God to bestow on us
   the adoption of sons. The unity of the life that was in Christ as love
   to God and love to men,--the unity of the ends contemplated in His
   sacrifice of Himself, viz. the glory of God and the salvation of
   men,--the unity also of the intermediate results, in that the same work
   which was an adequate ground on which to rest our being taken from
   under the law, making that consistent with the honour of the law and
   the character of the law-giver, was also the adequate preparation for
   our receiving the adoption of sons; this pervading unity, which is "the
   simplicity that is in Christ," will not be veiled by this orderly
   consideration of the different aspects of the works of Christ, while it
   will prepare us for the closer consideration of the details of the
   sacred history, at once shedding light on these details and being
   confirmed by them.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER VI.

   RETROSPECTIVE ASPECT OF THE ATONEMENT

   THE atonement considered in its retrospective aspects is--

   I. Christ's dealing with men on the part of God.

   It was in our Lord the natural outcoming of the life of love--of love
   to the Father and of love to us--to shew us the Father, to vindicate
   the Father's name, to witness for the excellence of that will of God
   against which we were rebelling, to witness for the trustworthiness of
   that Father's heart in which we were refusing to put confidence, to
   witness for the unchanging character of that love in which there was
   hope for us, though we had destroyed ourselves.

   This witness-bearing for God, and which was according to that word of
   the Prophet--"I have given him for a witness to the people," was
   accomplished in the personal perfection that was in Christ--His
   manifested perfection in humanity--that is to say, the perfection of
   His own following of the Father as a dear child, and the perfection of
   His brotherly love in His walk with men. His love and His trust towards
   His Father, His love and His longsuffering towards His brethren--the
   latter being presented to our faith in its oneness with the
   former--were together what He contemplated when He said, "He that hath
   seen me hath seen the Father."

   This witness-bearing for the Father was a part of the self-sacrifice of
   Christ. The severity of the pressure of our sins upon the Spirit of
   Christ was necessarily greatly increased through that living contact
   with the enmity of the carnal mind to God into which Christ was
   brought, in being to men a living epistle of the grace of God. His
   honouring of the Father caused men to dishonour Him,--His manifestation
   of brotherly love was repaid with hatred,--His perfect walk in the
   sight of men failed to commend either His Father or Himself,--His
   professed trust in the Father was cast up to Him, not being believed,
   and the bitter complaint was wrung from Him--"reproach hath broken my
   heart."

   Not that His task in doing the Father's will, "not hiding His
   righteousness within His heart,'' but "declaring His faithfulness and
   His salvation," was altogether cheerless: on the contrary, the Man of
   sorrows could speak to the chosen companions of His path, those who
   knew Him most nearly, of a peace which they had witnessed in Him--nay,
   of a joy, a peace and a joy as to which He could expect that they would
   receive as the intimation of a precious legacy to be told that these He
   would leave with them,--could even expect that the prospect of having
   these abiding with them would reconcile them to that tribulation which
   was to come to them through their relation to Him. That which He had
   presented to their faith would not have been a true and successful
   witnessing for the Father, had this not been so;--it would have been
   less than that of the Psalmist, ''O taste and see that God is good."
   Whatever sorrow may have been seen as borne by the Son of God in
   confessing His Father's name in our sinful world--and this could not
   have been but in sorrow--yet must a joy deeper than the sorrow have
   been present, as belonging to that oneness with the Father which that
   living confession implied; and to have hidden that joy would have been
   to have marred that confession,--leaving imperfect that condemnation of
   sin which is by the manifestation of the life that is in God's favour,
   and the shining forth of which in Christ is the light of life to man.
   Therefore the peace, the joy of which our Lord speaks as what the
   disciples had witnessed in Him, and what would be recalled to them when
   He used the expressions, "My peace," "My joy," were a most important
   element in His declaration of the Father's name.

   But not less important as an element of that declaration, not less
   essential to its perfection, were the sorrows of the Man of sorrows, of
   which also they were the chosen witnesses. It has been said, "If God
   should appear as a man on this sinful earth, how could it be but as a
   man of sorrows?" The natural outward expression of Christ's inward
   sorrow from the constant pressure of our sin and misery on His
   spirit--a pressure under which, as God in our nature, with the mind of
   God in suffering flesh He could not but be--would of itself have been
   enough to justify the appeal to those who saw Him nearly, "Look, and
   see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow?" But to the vindication
   of the name of God, and to the condemnation of the sin of man, that
   actual meeting of the eternal love with the enmity of the carnal mind,
   which took place when Christ came to men in the Father's name--in the
   fellowship of the Father's love, was necessary; and, therefore, however
   much it added to Christ's suffering as bearing our sins, it was
   permitted; and the Father ordered the path in which He led the Son so
   as to give full and perfect development and manifestation to the
   self-sacrificing life of love that was in Christ, fulness and
   perfection to His declaration of the Father's name.

   We have been prepared for recognising our Lord's honouring of the
   Father in the sight of men, as an element in the atonement in its
   retrospective aspect, by the power to arrest the course of judgment,
   and stay the plague which expressed the divine wrath, found in that
   outcoming of zeal for God, and sympathy in His condemnation of sin, by
   which Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, made atonement for the children of
   Israel. If the principle of the divine procedure in that case be
   recognised, we shall have no difficulty in seeing the place which the
   perfect zeal for the Father's honour, the living manifestation of
   perfect sympathy in the Father's condemnation of sin, the perfect
   vindication of the unselfish and righteous character of that
   condemnation as the mind of Him who is love, which were presented to
   men in the life of Christ, being perfected in His death,--we shall, I
   say, have no difficulty in seeing the place which this dealing of
   Christ with men on the part of God has in the work of redemption.

   If we at all realise the cost to Christ, we can have no difficulty in
   contemplating as included in the expression, "a sacrifice for sin,"
   what Christ endured in this witnessing for God. But I am anxious that
   the way in which the sufferings of Christ now before us entered into
   the atonement, and not the fact only that they did enter into it, may
   be distinctly understood,--that it was as being necessary to the
   perfection of His witness-bearing for the Father. For, while these
   sufferings have also received a place in the atonement, in the systems
   which have been considered above as forms of Calvinism, it has been on
   the entirely different ground that they were a part of what our Lord
   endured in bearing the punishment of our sins; and I have already urged
   the impossibility of regarding as penal the sorrows of holy love
   endured in realising our sin and misery--the impossibility of believing
   that He who said, "Rivers of water run down mine eyes, because men keep
   not thy law," could have felt the pain of the holy sorrow which caused
   His tears to flow, to have been penal suffering, seeing that that pain
   was endured in sympathy with God, and in the strength of the faith of
   the divine acceptance of that sympathy.

   But apart from the objection to our regarding the sufferings of Christ
   now contemplated as penal, presented by the very nature of these
   sufferings, is there any reason to feel, that they would be a more
   fittmg element in the atonement had they been penal, than as being,
   what we know they were, the perfecting of the Son's witnessing for the
   Father? The distinction between penal sufferings endured in meeting a
   demand of divine justice, and sufferings which are themselves the
   expression of the divine mind regarding our sins, and a manifestation
   by the Son of what our sins are to the Father's heart, is indeed very
   broad: and I know that the habit of thought which prevails on the
   subject of the atonement is such as will cause minds, under the power
   of that habit, to think it more natural to connect remission of sins
   with sufferings having the former,
   than with sufferings having the latter character. But, independent of
   the necessity which the nature of the sufferings which we are
   considering impose upon us to refuse to them the former
   character--while we know that they certainly had the latter--is not the
   habit of mind which creates any difficulty here, delusive? We are
   accustomed to hear it said, that the law which men had violated must be
   honoured, and the sincerity and consistency of the lawgiver must be
   vindicated. But what a vindicating of the divine name, and of the
   character of the lawgiver, are the sufferings now contemplated,
   considered as themselves the manifestation in humanity of what our sins
   are to God, compared to that to which they are reduced if conceived of
   as a punishment inflicted by God! No doubt, even in this view, there
   would remain to us a ray of light in the love that is contented to
   endure the infliction; but, however precious the thought of love
   willing so to suffer, the full revelation of God is not that divine
   love has been contented thus to suffer, but that the suffering is the
   suffering of divine love suffering from our sins according to its own
   nature; a suffering, therefore, in relation to which the sufferer could
   say, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father."

   II. But Christ's honouring the Father in the sight of men, which was
   His dealing with men on the part of God, is only one aspect of His
   mediatorial work. We have to consider also His dealing with God on
   behalf of men. And this, indeed, is the region in which penal suffering
   should meet us, if penal suffering had entered into the atonement. We
   cannot conceive of the Son of God as enduring a penal infliction in the
   very act of honouring His Father. But when we contemplate Him as
   approaching God on behalf of man,--when we contemplate Him as meeting
   the divine mind in its aspect towards sin and sinners, and as dealing
   with the righteous wrath of God against sin, interposing Himself
   between sinners and the consequences of that righteous wrath,--we feel,
   that here we have come to that which men have contemplated when they
   have conceived of Christ as satisfying divine justice in respect of its
   claim for vengeance upon our sins, and that here was the place for
   outcoming of wrath upon the Mediator, and penal infliction, if such
   there had been,--and, as such there has not been, that here is the
   place in which we should find that dealing of the Mediator with the
   divine wrath against sin which has had the result which men have
   referred to His assumed bearing of the punishment of sin; and which,
   being understood, will be felt to meet all that was right, and
   according to truth, in the feelings which men have expressed by the
   words, ''appeasing divine wrath,"--"expiating the guilt of sin."

   I say, "all that was according to truth in these expressions," for
   there was truth in them, though mingled with error--how much error, the
   separating of the truth will best shew. But the wrath of God against
   sin is a reality, however men have erred in their thoughts as to how
   that wrath was to be appeased. Nor is the idea that satisfaction was
   due to divine justice, a delusion, however far men have wandered from
   the true conception of what would meet its righteous demand. And if so,
   then Christ, in dealing with God on behalf of men, must be conceived of
   as dealing with the righteous wrath of God against sin, and according
   to it that which was due: and this would necessarily precede His
   intercession for us.

   It is manifest, if we consider it, that Christ's own long-suffering
   love was the revelation to those who should see the Father in the Son,
   of that forgiving love in God to which Christ's intercession for men
   would be addressed; and so also, I believe, does Christ's own
   condemnation of our sins, and His holy sorrow because of them, indicate
   that dealing with the aspect of the divine mind towards sin which
   prepared the way for intercession.

   That oneness of mind with the Father, which towards man took the form
   of condemnation of sin, would, in the Son's dealing with the Father in
   relation to our sins, take the form of a perfect confession of our
   sins. This confession, as to its own nature, must have been a perfect
   Amen in humanity to the judgment of God on the sin of man. Such an Amen
   was due in the truth of things. He who was the Truth could not be in
   humanity and not utter it,--and it was necessarily a first step in
   dealing with the Father on our behalf. He who would intercede for us
   must begin with confessing our sins. This all will at once perceive.
   But let us weigh this confession of our sins by the Son of God in
   humanity. And I do not mean in reference to the suffering it implies
   viewed as suffering. Christ's love to the Father, to whom He thus
   confessed the sin of His brethren,--His love to His brethren whose sin
   He confessed,--along with that conscious oneness of will with the
   Father in humanity, in the light of which the exceeding evil of man's
   alienation from God was realised; these must have rendered His
   confession of our sins before the Father a peculiar development of the
   holy sorrow in which He bore the burden of our sins; and which, like
   His sufferings in confessing His Father before men, had a severity and
   intensity of its own. But, apart from the question of the suffering
   present in that confession of our sins, and the depth of meaning which
   it gives to the expression, "a sacrifice for sin," let us consider this
   Amen from the depths of the humanity of Christ to the divine
   condemnation of sin. What is it in relation to God's wrath against sin?
   What place has it in Christ's dealing with that wrath? I answer: He who
   so responds to the divine wrath against sin, saying, "Thou art
   righteous, O Lord, who judgest so," is necessarily receiving the full
   apprehension and realisation of that wrath, as well as of that sin
   against which it comes forth, into His soul and spirit, into the bosom
   of the divine humanity, and, so receiving it. He responds to it with a
   perfect response,--a response from the depths of that divine
   humanity,--and in that perfect response He absorbs it. For that
   response has all the elements of a perfect repentance in humanity for
   all the sin of man,--a perfect sorrow--a perfect contrition--all the
   elements of such a repentance, and that in absolute perfection,
   all--excepting the personal consciousness of sin,--and by that perfect
   response in Amen to the mind of God in relation to sin is the wrath of
   God rightly met, and that is accorded to divine justice which is its
   due, and could alone satisfy it.

   In contending "that sin must be punished with an infinite punishment,"
   President Edwards says*, that "God could not be just to Himself without
   this vindication, unless there could be such a thing as a repentance,
   humiliation and sorrow for this (viz., sin), proportionable to the
   greatness of the majesty despised,"--for that there must needs be,
   "either an equivalent punishment or an equivalent sorrow and
   repentance"--"so," he proceeds, "sin must be punished with an infinite
   punishment," thus assuming that the alternative of "an equivalent
   sorrow and repentance" was out of the question. But, upon the
   assumption of that identification of Himself with those whom He came to
   save, on the part of the Saviour, which is the foundation of Edwards'
   whole system, it may at the least be said, that the Mediator had the
   two alternatives open to His choice,--either to endure for sinners an
   equivalent punishment, or to experience in reference to their sin, and
   present to God on their behalf, an adequate sorrow and repentance.
   Either of these courses should be regarded by Edwards as equally
   securing the vindication of the majesty and justice of God in pardoning
   sin. But the latter equivalent, which also is surely the higher and
   more excellent, being a moral and spiritual satisfaction, was, as we
   have now seen, of necessity present in Christ's dealing with the Father
   on our behalf. Therefore, to contend for the former also would be to
   contend for two equivalents. This of course Edwards had no intention of
   doing. For,

   *Satisfaction for Sin, Ch. II. 1-3. though the thought of that moral
   and spiritual atonement which would be presented to God in the adequate
   confession of sin, passed through his mind, he did not recognise the
   presence of this "equivalent repentance" in the work of Christ. He had
   set out with the assumption that Christ came to bear the punishment of
   our sins, and to work out a righteousness to be imputed to us; and, as
   we have seen that the latter part of this assumption hindered his so
   seeing the Father in the Son as to recognise that law of love to all
   men which was fulfilled in Christ, as in truth the law of God's own
   being, so here we see that, in consequence of the former part of that
   assumption, it has come to pass, that, notwithstanding all his deep and
   earnest study of the work of redemption, and notwithstanding his
   feeling constrained to recognise moral and spiritual elements as alone
   present in the sufferings of Christ, the thought of an atonement for
   sin by an equivalent repentance has suggested itself to him only in
   connexion with the manifest impossibility of such a repentance being
   presented by the sinner himself to God in expiation of his guilt. And
   in the connexion in which the idea of repentance as an expiation for
   sin presented itself to the mind of Edwards, his conclusion was just. A
   condemnation and confession of sin in humanity which should be a real
   Amen to the divine condemnation of sin, and commensurate with its evil
   and God's wrath against it, only became possible through the
   incarnation of the Son of God. But the incarnation of the Son of God
   not only made possible such a moral and spiritual expiation for sin as
   that of which the thought thus visited the mind of Edwards, though
   passing away without result, but indeed caused that it must be. Without
   the assumption of an imputation of our guilt, and in perfect harmony
   with the unbroken consciousness of personal separation from our sins,
   the Son of God, bearing us and our sins on His heart before the Father,
   must needs respond to the Father's judgment on our sins, with that
   confession of their evil and of the righteousness of the wrath of
   God against them, and holy sorrow because of them, which were due--due
   in the truth of things--due on our behalf though we could not render
   it--due from Him as in our nature and our true brother--what He must
   needs feel in Himself because of the holiness and love which were in
   Him--what He must needs utter to the Father in expiation of our sins
   when He would make intercession for us.

   I have said that in approaching the dealing of Christ with God on
   behalf of men, we approach the region in which we should have met penal
   infliction as endured by Christ for our sins, had such infliction
   entered into the atonement; and, as it has not, where we should see
   that, whatever else it was, which has been Christ's dealing with God's
   righteous wrath against our sins. What I believe that dealing to have
   been, I have, I trust, expressed with sufficient clearness,--while I
   have laboured more to illustrate the nature of this expiation by
   confession of our sins, than the intensity of suffering to the soul of
   Christ thus made an offering for sin, which it involved.

   Yet is it needful that we should, in realising the elements of these
   sufferings, endeavour to realise also their intensity,--that it was
   according to the perfection of the divine mind in the sufferer, and the
   capacity of suffering which is in suffering flesh. And this meditation,
   as I trust the reader will feel, is a very different thing from
   weighing the sufferings of Christ in scales against the sufferings of
   the damned. That belongs to the following out of the conception of the
   Son of God suffering the punishment of our sins. But what I contemplate
   is the following out of the conception of the Son of God suffering in
   suffering flesh that which is the perfect response of the divine
   holiness and divine love in humanity to the aspect of the divine mind
   in the Father towards the sins of men. No thought unworthy of the faith
   that the sufferer is God in our nature, comes through exalting our
   conceptions of the measure of the suffering endured on account of sins,
   when such exalting is thus but the raising of our apprehensions of what
   our sin is to the heart of God.

   And I may here refer to what has been urged by some as a reason for
   holding that the sufferings of Christ were penal, viz. that otherwise
   there is no explanation of the sufferings of one who was without sin,
   as endured under the righteous government of God. Do we never see
   suffering that we must explain on some other principle than this?
   Surely the tears of holy sorrow shed over the sins of others--the
   tears, for example, of a godly parent over a prodigal child, are not
   penal, nor, if shed before God in prayer, and acknowledged in the
   merciful answer of prayer in God's dealing with that prodigal, are they
   therefore to be conceived of as having been penal. But the fact is,
   that the truth that God grieves over our sins, is not so soon received
   into the heart as that God punishes sin,--and yet, the faith that He so
   grieves is infinitely more important, as having power to work holiness
   in us, than the faith that He so punishes, however important. But there
   is much less spiritual apprehension necessary to the faith that God
   punishes sin, than to the faith that our sins do truly grieve God.
   Therefore, men more easily believe that Christ's sufferings shew how
   God can punish sin, than that these sufferings are the divine feelings
   in relation to sin, made visible to us by being present in suffering
   flesh. Yet, however the former may terrify, the latter alone can
   purify, because the latter alone perfectly reveals, and in revealing
   vindicates the name and character of God, condemning us in our own
   eyes, and laying us prostrate in the dust because we have sinned
   against such a God. The entrance of sin has been the entrance of
   sorrow,--not to the sinful only, and as the punishment of sin, but also
   to the holy and the loving, and as what holiness and love must feel in
   the presence of sin. That such suffering as the suffering of Christ
   should have existed in the universe of God in connexion with innocence
   and holiness, moral and spiritual perfection, must, indeed, be felt to
   suggest a solemn question, and one which must receive an answer, if we
   are to be in a condition to glorify God in contemplating that
   suffering. The answer that it was penal, is precluded by the nature of
   the suffering itself. Yet, that it was for sin, is also implied in that
   very nature, and for the sin of others than the sufferer, for He was
   without sin; therefore was it vicarious, expiatory, an atonement,--an
   atonement for sin as distinguished from the punishment of sin.

   And with this distinction, how much light enters the mind! We are now
   able to realise that the suffering we contemplate is divine, while it
   is human; and that God is revealed in it and not merely in connexion
   with it; God's righteousness and condemnation of sin, being in the
   suffering, and not merely what demands it,--God's love also being in
   the suffering, and not merely what submits to it. Christ's suffering
   being thus to us a form which the divine life in Christ took in
   connexion with the circumstances in which He was placed, and not a
   penal infliction, coming on Him as from without, such words as, ''He
   made His soul an offering for sin"--"He put away sin by the sacrifice
   of Himself,"--"By Himself

   He purged our sins," grow full of light; and the connexion between what
   He is who makes atonement, and the atonement which He makes, reveals
   itself in a far other way than as men have spoken of the divinity of
   the Saviour, regarding it either as a strength to endure infinite penal
   suffering, or a dignity to give adequacy of value to any measure of
   penal suffering however small. Not in these ways, but in a far other
   way, is the person of Christ brought before us now as fixing attention
   upon the divine mind in humanity as that which alone could suffer, and
   which did suffer sufferings of a nature and virtue to purge our sins.
   By the word of His power all else was accomplished, by himself He
   purged our sins,--by the virtue that is in what He is; and thus is the
   atonement not only what was rendered possible by the incarnation, but
   itself a development of the incarnation.

   Luther says, that all sin of man, and the eternal righteousness of God,
   being met in Christ in mutual opposition, the one of these must
   prevail; and it must be the righteousness, for it is divine and
   eternal. His conception seems to have been:--sin being there present
   calling for judgment, and righteousness for life, the righteousness,
   being divine, must triumph. When, in explaining this presence of sin,
   he speaks of the consciousness that was in Christ in relation to man's
   sin, as if it were, with reference to all the sin of man, identical in
   nature with what in measure the perfectly awakened sinner feels as to
   his own sin, Luther certainly seems to lose the sense of the personal
   separation from sin of that Holy One of God, in whose inner being all
   the sin of humanity was thus realised. And yet I venture to think, that
   he only seems to do so, and that his meaning has not been beyond that
   sense of man's sin, and what is due to it, and of the righteousness of

   God's judgment upon it, of which I have spoken above. At all events,
   the view now taken of the way in which the Saviour met and dealt with
   the Father's wrath against sin, may be expressed in language akin to
   that of Luther, and we may say that the divine eternal righteousness in
   Christ used confession of the sinfulness of sin, as the weapon of
   righteousness in its conflict with sin calling for judgment; and so,
   that righteousness prevailed. The divine righteousness in Christ
   appearing on the part of man, and in humanity, met the divine
   righteousness in God condemning man's sin, by the true and righteous
   confession of its sinfulness uttered in humanity, and righteousness as
   in God was satisfied, and demanded no more than righteousness as in
   Christ thus presented.

   It might be too bold to assert that this was Luther's meaning. But at
   all events,--and this alone is important,--I believe this to be a
   conception according to the truth of things, and that the feelings of
   the divine mind as to sin, being present in humanity and uttering
   themselves to God as a living voice from humanity, were the true
   atonement for the sin of humanity,--the "equivalent sorrow and
   repentance" of which the idea was in the mind of Edwards, though the
   fact of its realisation in Christ he did not recognise. But, though
   Edwards saw not that the equivalent sorrow and repentance, of which the
   thought passed before his mind, was actually present in these
   sufferings of Christ which he was considering, yet am I thankful that
   the conception of such an equivalent as the alternative to infinite
   punishment has been recognised by him. For he is the great teacher of a
   demand for infinite punishment as implied in the essential and absolute
   justice of God; and, as I have said above, in his dealing with absolute
   justice and righteousness on the subject of the atonement, I have much
   more sympathy, than with the teaching that makes rectoral justice or
   public justice the foundation of its reasoning. For of this I feel
   quite certain, that no really awakened sinner into whose spirit the
   terrors of the Lord have entered, ever thinks of rectoral justice, but
   of absolute justice, and of absolute justice only. "Against thee, thee
   only have I sinned," is language, in using which the soul is alone with
   God, and thinks not of any other bearing of its sin, but its bearing on
   the individual in relation to God.

   That due repentance for sin, could such repentance indeed be, would
   expiate guilt, there is a strong testimony in the human heart, and so
   the first attempt at peace with God, is an attempt at
   repentance,--which attempt, indeed, becomes less and less hopeful, the
   longer, and the more earnestly and honestly it is persevered in,--but
   this, not because it comes to be felt that a true repentance would be
   rejected even if attained, but because its attainment is despaired
   of,--all attempts at it being found, when taken to the divine light,
   and honestly judged in the sight of God, to be mere selfish attempts at
   something that promises safety,--not evil, indeed, in so far as they
   are instinctive efforts at self-preservation, but having nothing in
   them of the nature of a true repentance, or a godly sorrow for sin, or
   pure condemnation of it because of its own evil; nothing, in short,
   that is a judging sin and a confessing it in true sympathy with the
   divine judgment upon it. So that the words of Whitefield come to be
   deeply sympathised in, "our repentance needeth to be repented of, and
   our very tears to be washed in the blood of Christ."

   That we may fully realise what manner of an equivalent to the dishonour
   done to the law and name of God by sin, an adequate repentance and
   sorrow for sin must be, and how far more truly than any penal
   infliction such repentance and confession must satisfy divine justice,
   let us suppose that all the sin of humanity has been committed by one
   human spirit, on whom is accumulated this immeasurable amount of guilt,
   and let us suppose this spirit, loaded with all this guilt, to pass out
   of sin into holiness, and to become filled with the light of God,
   becoming perfectly righteous with God's own righteousness,--such a
   change, were such a change possible, would imply in the spirit so
   changed, a perfect condemnation of the past of its own existence, and
   an absolute and perfect repentance, a confession of its sin
   commensurate with its evil. If the sense of personal identity remained,
   it must be so. Now, let us contemplate this repentance with reference
   to the guilt of such a spirit, and the question of pardon for its past
   sin, and admission now to the light of God's favour. Shall this
   repentance be accepted as an atonement, and the past sin being thus
   confessed, shall the divine favour flow out on that present perfect
   righteousness which thus condemns the past? or, shall that repentance
   be declared inadequate? shall the present perfect righteousness be
   rejected on account of the past sin, so absolutely and perfectly
   repented of? and shall divine justice still demand adequate punishment
   for the past sin, and refuse to the present righteousness adequate
   acknowledgment--the favour which, in respect of its own nature, belongs
   to it? It appears to me impossible to give any but one answer to these
   questions. We feel that such a repentance as we are supposing would, in
   such a case, be the true and proper satisfaction to offended justice,
   and that there would be more atoning worth in one tear of the true and
   perfect sorrow which the memory of the past would awaken in this now
   holy spirit, than in endless ages of penal woe. Now, with the
   difference of personal identity, the case I have supposed is the actual
   case of Christ, the holy one of God, bearing the sins of all men on His
   spirit--in Luther's words, "the one sinner"--and meeting the cry of
   these sins for judgment, and the wrath due to them, absorbing and
   exhausting that divine wrath in that adequate confession and perfect
   response on the part of man, which was possible only to the infinite
   and eternal righteousness in humanity.

   I have said that my hypothetical, and indeed impossible case, and that
   case which the history of our redemption actually presents, differ only
   in respect of the personal identity of the guilty and the righteous.
   And, to one looking at the subject with a hasty superficial glance,
   this difference may seem to involve all the difficulties connected with
   imputation of guilt and substituted punishment. Yet it can only so
   appear to a hasty and superficial glance. For, independent of the
   higher character of the moral atonement supposed, as compared with the
   enduring as a substitute a penal infliction, this adequate sorrow for
   the sin of man, and adequate confession of its evil implies no
   fiction--no imputation to the sufferer of the guilt of the sin for
   which He suffers; but only that He has taken the nature, and become the
   brother of those whose sin He confesses before the Father, and that He
   feels concerning their sins what, as the holy one of God, and perfectly
   loving God and man. He must feel.

   In contemplating our Lord as yielding up His soul to be filled with the
   sense of the Father's righteous condemnation of our sin, and as
   responding with a perfect Amen to that condemnation, we are tracing
   what was a necessary step in His path as dealing with the Father on our
   behalf. His intercession presupposes this expiatory confession, and
   cannot be conceived of apart from it. Not only so,--but it is also
   certain that we cannot rightly conceive of this confession, or be in
   the light in which it was made, without seeing that the intercession
   that accompanied it was necessary to its completeness, as a full
   response to the mind of the Father towards us and our sins.

   I have endeavoured to present Christ's expiatory confession of our sins
   to the mind of the reader as much as possible by itself, and as a
   distinct object of thought, because it most directly corresponds, in
   the place it occupies, to the penal suffering which has been assumed;
   and I have desired to place these two ways of meeting the divine wrath
   against sin, as ascribed to the Mediator, in contrast. But the
   intercession by which that confession was followed up, must be taken
   into account as a part of the full response of the mind of the Son to
   the mind of the Father,--a part of that utterance in humanity which
   propitiated the divine mercy by the righteous way in which it laid hold
   of the hope for man which was in God. "He bare the sins of many, and
   made intercession for the transgressors." In the light of that true
   knowledge of the heart of the Father in which the Son responded to the
   Father's condemnation of our sins, the nature of that condemnation was
   so understood that His love was at liberty, and was encouraged to
   accompany confession by intercession:--not an intercession which
   contemplated effecting a change in the heart of the Father, but a
   confession which combined with acknowledgment of the righteousness of
   the divine wrath against sin, hope for
   man from that love in God which is deeper than that wrath,--in truth
   originating it--determining also its nature, and justifying the
   confidence that, its righteousness being responded to, and the mind
   which it expresses shared in, that wrath must be appeased.

   Therefore, when we would conceive to ourselves that Amen to the mind of
   the Father in its aspect toward us and our sins, which, pervading the
   humanity of the Son of God, made His soul a fit offering for sin, and
   when we would understand how this sacrifice was to God a sweet-smelling
   savour, we must consider not only the response which was in that Amen
   to the divine condemnation of sin, but also the response which was in
   it to the divine love in its yearnings over us sinners. In itself, the
   intercession of Christ was the perfected expression of that forgiveness
   which He cherished toward those who were returning hatred for His love.
   But it was also the form His love must take if He would obtain
   redemption for us. Made under the pressure of the perfect sense of the
   evil of our state, this intercession was full of the Saviour's peculiar
   sorrow and suffering--a part of the sacrifice of Christ: its power as
   an element of atonement we must see, if we consider that it was the
   voice of the divine love coming from humanity, offering for man a pure
   intercession according to the will of God, offering that prayer for man
   which was alike the utterance of love to God and love to man--that
   prayer which accorded with our need and the Father's glory as seen and
   felt in the light of the Eternal love by the Son of God and our
   Brother.

   We do not understand the divine wrath against sin, unless such
   confession of its evil as we are now contemplating is felt to be the
   true and right meeting of that wrath on the part of humanity. We do not
   understand the forgiveness that is in God, unless such intercession as
   we are now contemplating is felt to be that which will lay hold of that
   forgiveness, and draw it forth. It was not in us so to confess our own
   sins; neither was there in us such knowledge of the heart of the
   Father. But, if another could in this act for us,-- if there might be a
   mediator, an intercessor,--one at once sufficiently one with us, and
   yet sufficiently separated from our sin to feel in sinless humanity
   what our sinful humanity, could it in sinlessness look back on its
   sins, would feel of Godly condemnation of them and sorrow for them, so
   confessing them before God,--one coming sufficiently near to our need
   of mercy to be able to plead for mercy for us according to that need,
   and at the same time, so abiding in the bosom of the Father, and in the
   light of His love and secret of His heart, as, in interceding for us to
   take full and perfect advantage of all that is there that is on our
   side, and wills our salvation;--if the Son of God has, in the power of
   love, come into the capacity of such mediation in taking our nature and
   becoming our brother, and in that same power of love has been contented
   to suffer all that such mediation, accomplished in suffering flesh,
   implied,--is not the suitableness and the acceptableness of the
   sacrifice of Christ, when His soul was made an offering for sin, what
   we can understand? In truth, we cannot realise the life of Christ as He
   moved on this earth in the sight of men, and contemplate His
   witness-bearing against sin, and His forgiveness towards sinners, and
   hear the Father say of Him, "This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
   pleased," and yet doubt that that mind towards sin and sinners which He
   thus manifested, and the Father thus acknowledged, would be altogether
   acceptable, and a sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling savour, in its
   atoning confession of sin and intercession for sinners.

   I know that the adequacy of the atonement to be a foundation for the
   remission of sins cannot be fully apprehended, or the righteousness of
   God in accepting it as a sacrifice for sin be fully justified, apart
   from its prospective reference to the divine purpose of making us
   through Christ partakers in eternal life. Yet I will, even at this
   point, express the hope, that the purpose of God to extend mercy to
   sinners being realised, and the considerations connected with the name
   of God and the honour of His law, which had to be taken into account,
   being present to the mind, it will be felt, that the atonement, as now
   set forth, was the suitable preparation for that contemplated
   manifestation of mercy; and I venture to express this hope here, and
   thus early, because, I am not unwilling that the atonement as now
   represented, and while considered only in its retrospective reference,
   should be compared with the conception of the atonement as Christ's
   bearing, as our substitute, the punishment of our sins,--the rather,
   that that is a retrospective conception exclusively. But, I repeat it,
   I feel that it is placing the atonement, as now set forth, under a
   disadvantage as to its power to commend itself to the conscience, to
   look at its retrospective adequacy thus apart from its prospective
   reference: to the consideration of which I now proceed.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER VII.

   PROSPECTIVE ASPECT OF THE ATONEMENT.

   I HAVE said above, that the atonement is to be regarded as that by
   which God has bridged over the gulf which separated between what sin
   had made us, and what it was the desire of the divine love that we
   should become. Therefore its character must have been determined as
   much by the latter consideration as by the former; and, on this ground,
   I have complained of the extent to which the former consideration,
   rather than the latter, has been taken into account in men's
   recognition of a need be for an atonement.

   Yet an atonement such as they contemplate, and consisting in
   substituted punishment, might allowably be so regarded, being like the
   paying of a pecuniary debt, at least as to the definite relation of the
   payment to the debt, the latter determining the former without direct
   reference to the ulterior results involved in the debt's being paid.
   But such an atonement as that which the Son of God has actually made,
   cannot be contemplated but as in its very nature pointing forward to
   the divine end in view.

   Accordingly, I have not been able now to enter freely upon the subject
   of that intercession for transgressors, which the prophet mentions as
   an element in the atonement, because that intercession cannot be
   conceived of as limited to the remission of past sins, but must
   necessarily have had reference to what Christ, in His love to us,
   loving us as He did Himself, desired for us. So also the confession of
   our sin, in response to the divine condemnation of it, must, when
   offered to God on our behalf, have contemplated prospectively our own
   participation in that confession as an element in our actual redemption
   from sin. And even the witnessing of Christ for the Father in the sight
   of men, as connected with the righteousness of God in the extension of
   the divine mercy to us rebels, must have had its place in the
   atonement, not merely as a light condemning our darkness, but as the
   intended light of life for us.

   All views of the work of Christ, of course, imply that its ultimate
   reference was prospective. Whether conceived of as securing, in virtue
   of a covenanted arrangement the salvation of an election from among
   men, or as furnishing, in reference to all men, a ground on which God
   may extend mercy to them, the work of Christ has equally been regarded
   as what would not have been but with a prospective reference. But on
   neither of these views is the justification of God's acceptance of the
   propitiation itself, bound up with the question of the results
   contemplated. On the one view, the penal infliction is complete in
   itself as a substituted punishment; the righteousness wrought out is
   complete in itself as conferring a title to eternal blessedness,
   irrespective of results to be accomplished in those in the covenant of
   grace. On the other view, a meritorious ground on which to rest
   justification by faith is furnished, which is complete in itself,
   irrespective of any effect which is anticipated from the faith of it.
   But, what I have now been representing as the true view of the
   atonement, is characterised by this, that it takes the results
   contemplated into account in considering God's acceptance of the
   atonement. Not that the moral and spiritual excellence of the work of
   Christ, could have been less than infinitely acceptable to God, viewed
   simply in itself;--but that its acceptableness in connexion with the
   remission of sins, is only to be truly and fully seen in its relation
   to the result which it has contemplated, viz. our participation in
   eternal life;--or, in other words, that the justification of God in
   "redeeming," as He has done, "us who were under the law," is only
   clearly apprehended in the light of the divine purpose, "that we should
   receive the adoption of sons."

   This direct reference to the end contemplated, which distinguishes the
   view of the atonement now taken, as compared with those other systems
   in which that reference is more remote, I lay much weight upon. It
   explains, as they cannot otherwise be explained, those expressions in
   Scripture in which the practical end of the atonement is connected so
   immediately with the making of the atonement,--as when it is said, that
   "Christ gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all
   iniquity,"--that ''we are redeemed from the vain conversation received
   by tradition from our Fathers, by the precious blood of Christ,"--that
   "Christ suffered for us, the just for the unjust, that He might bring
   us to God." Men have been reconciled by the seeming necessity of the
   case to the idea that such language is employed, because these are the
   ultimate and remote consequences of that shedding of Christ's blood,
   which, it is held, immediately contemplated delivering us from the
   punishment of sin by His enduring it for us. But I regard as a great
   scriptural argument in favour of the view now taken of the atonement,
   that it represents the connexion between these results and Christ's
   suffering for our sins as not remote, but immediate. While, as to the
   internal commendation of the doctrine itself, my conviction is, that
   the pardon of sin is seen in its true harmony with the glory of God,
   only when the work of Christ, through which we have "the remission of
   sins that are past," is contemplated in its direct relation to "the
   gift of eternal life."

   The elements of atonement, which have now been considered in relation
   to the remission of sins, contemplated in their relation to the gift of
   eternal life, teach us how to conceive of that gift. The atonement
   having been accomplished by the natural working of the life of love in
   Christ, and having been the result of His doing the Father's will, and
   declaring the Father's name in humanity, we are prepared, as to the
   prospective aspect of the atonement, to find that the perfect
   righteousness of the Son of God in humanity is itself the gift of God
   to us in Christ--to be ours as Christ is ours,--to be partaken in as He
   is partaken in,--to be our life as He is our life, instead of its
   being, as has been held, ours by imputation;--precious to us and our
   salvation, not in respect of what is inherent in it, but in respect of
   that to which it confers a legal title; or, according to the
   modification of this conception,--the transference of righteousness by
   imputation being rejected,--our salvation in respect of effects of
   righteousness transferred for Christ's sake to those who believe in
   Him.

   Abstractly considered, and viewed simply in itself, the divine
   righteousness that is in Christ must be recognised as a higher gift
   than any benefit it can be supposed to purchase. In the immediate
   contemplation of the life of Christ, seen as that on which the Father
   is fixing our attention when He says of Christ, "This is my beloved
   Son, in whom I am well pleased," it cannot be questioned, that the
   choice being offered, on the one hand, to partake in this divine
   righteousness, or, on the other, either to have it imputed to us, and
   on account of such imputation, to have a title to any supposed rewards
   of righteousness, or, to have these rewards without such imputation
   transferred to us, there could be no hesitation what choice to make.
   Apart altogether from the difficulties involved in the conception of
   the imputation of righteousness, or the transference of its effects, it
   would manifestly be a dishonour done to the divine righteousness, to
   prefer to it any good of any kind external to it, and not inherent in
   itself, but separable from it, which might be conceived of as its
   reward.

   I may be reminded, that the reward of righteousness, thus placed in
   contrast with the divine righteousness itself, and assumed to be a
   lower thing, includes spiritual benefits, includes sanctification, and
   that this in effect is a participation in the mind and life of Christ,
   and might be spoken of as substantially righteousness imparted,--the
   purchase of righteousness imputed, or, according to the modification of
   the doctrine, a part of God's gracious dealing with us on the ground of
   Christ's righteousness; and, however this is a complication altogether
   foreign to the simplicity that is in Christ, I thankfully recognise the
   degree to which the elements of righteousness,--all that God delights
   in,--holiness, truth, love, may be the objects of spiritual desire, and
   be welcomed as a part of the unsearchable riches of Christ, even in
   connexion with this system, and when not seen simply as the elements of
   the eternal life given to us in Christ our life, and in respect of
   which He is "made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
   sanctification, and redemption."

   But, a righteousness imparted as that to which a right has been
   conferred by a righteousness imputed;--divine favour and acceptance
   first resting upon us, irrespective of our true spiritual state, and
   then a spiritual state in harmony with that favour, bestowed as an
   expression of that favour;--a right and title to heaven made sure,
   irrespective of a meetness for heaven, and then that meetness--the
   holiness necessary to the enjoyment of heaven--bestowed upon us as a
   part of what we have thus become entitled to,--this is a complication
   which the testimony of God, that God has given to us eternal life, and
   that this life is in His Son, never could suggest. Its natural effect
   is to turn the mind away, in the first instance at all events, from the
   direct contemplation of eternal life as the salvation given in Christ.
   The elements of that life may come to be taken into account afterwards;
   but the evil effect of the first separation between the favour of God
   and the actual condition of the human spirit in its aspect towards God,
   never can be altogether remedied,--while this root error will always
   tend to develope itself in reducing the meaning of the words, "eternal
   life," to the conception of an unproved future endless blessedness that
   awaits us as those who trust in Christ's merits, not a spiritual state
   into which we enter in receiving the knowledge of God in Christ. Thus
   confusion and perplexity are introduced into the whole subject of
   righteousness and eternal life, when, this life being admitted to be
   given, righteousness is not recognised as simply an element in that
   gift, or rather an aspect of it.

   In tracing, in their prospective relation to the gift of eternal life,
   the elements of atonement now considered in relation to the remission
   of sins, we shall find the simplicity that is in Christ delivering us
   from all this perplexity, and confusing complication; while the
   immediate and direct occupation of our spirits with eternal life itself
   as salvation, will favour our intelligent apprehension of that gift,
   and strengthen us in the faith that God has given it, and also in the
   faith of the remission of our sins as seen in connexion with it,--the
   glory of God in the gift of eternal life in His Son, shedding back its
   light on the Father's acceptance of the Son when He made His soul an
   offering for sin.

   I would recall here the illustration which I have offered above, of the
   conception which I have sought to convey of the atoning virtue of
   Christ's expiatory confession of man's sin, viz. the supposition that
   all the sin of man had been committed by one human spirit, and that
   that spirit, preserving its personal identity, and retaining the memory
   of what it had been, should become perfectly righteous. Had such a case
   been possible, how would the righteous God deal with such a spirit? In
   the language of Luther, sin and righteousness being thus met in one
   person, which would prevail? Would the absolute repentance and sorrow
   for the past sin, which is necessarily implied in the present
   righteousness, be an atonement for that past sin, and leave the
   righteous God free to receive that present righteousness with the
   favour due to it, or would justice still call for vengeance? This would
   be a perplexing dilemma, on the assumption of the correctness of the
   theory of divine justice that represents that attribute of God as a
   necessity of the divine nature which necessitates the giving to every
   spirit that which is righteously due to it,--which, in this case, would
   imply the necessity both to punish the past sin and reward the present
   righteousness, and this forever--an impossible combination. The great
   advocate of that theory has, however, as we have been, recognised a
   principle which would extricate him from this dilemma, when he
   recognises as alternatives an infinite punishment, or an adequate
   repentance; and he therefore would have consented to the answer assumed
   above to be clearly the right answer in the case supposed.

   I go back on this illustration, because, while stating it formerly, I
   felt embarrassed, so far as the supposition was one of present
   righteousness as well as of past sin. In order to the completeness of
   the parallel between the hypothetical case and the constitution of
   things in Christ which the Gospel reveals, Christ's confession of our
   sin must be seen in connexion with our relation to the righteousness of
   Christ, and the sin confessed, and the righteousness in which it is
   confessed, be seen as if they were in the same person--being both in
   humanity; though the sin really exists only in humanity as in us, and
   used in rebellion by us rebels, and the righteousness only in humanity
   as in Christ, "who through the Eternal Spirit offered Himself without
   spot to God." But the glory of God in this constitution of things, is
   only seen when the gift of eternal life to man, in the Son of God, is
   understood;--and this gift we had not then before our minds.

   I admitted, in representing Christ's confession of our sin as accounted
   of to us, that I might, on a superficial view, seem to be stating what
   was open to the same objections that I have recognised as valid against
   the doctrine of penal infliction endured by Christ as bearing our sin
   by imputation; and I offered, in reply, the broad distinction between a
   state of mind in Christ which implied no legal fiction, no relation to
   our sins but what was necessarily the result of His being in our nature
   in the life of love,--a mind which, call it an atoning confession of
   our sin, or riot, was most certainly a confession of our sins which
   must have been present in His intercession for us,--the broad
   distinction between this and the infliction on Christ, by the Father,
   of penal suffering, because, by imputation. He was accounted guilty of
   our sins. This distinction, if clearly before the mind, is too palpable
   not to satisfy. But, still, that identifying of Christ with us, and
   that giving to us, so to speak, the benefit of what He was in humanity,
   which is implied in representing His confession of our sins as an
   element in the atonement, is not, as I have now said, folly justified
   to the mind, apart from that further identifying of Christ with us
   through which His righteousness is ours.

   Yet, thus to speak of Christ's righteousness, will as readily recall
   the doctrine of imputation of righteousness, as the place given to
   Christ's confession of our sins might that of imputation of sin. How
   wide apart the two conceptions are, and what the true vindication of
   the divine counsel in this dealing of the Father with Christ, as with
   the one man who bears the weight of all men's sins upon His spirit,
   atoning for them by confessing them before the Father in a divine
   righteousness in humanity, which the Father receives on behalf of all
   men as the righteousness of humanity; this we shall understand in the
   light of the relation of the atonement to the gift of eternal life.

   When we consider humanity in the light shed upon it by the life of
   Christ in humanity, we see together revealed to us the great evil of
   its condition as possessed by us sinners, and its great capacity of
   good as that capacity is brought out by the Son of God. Now, this is
   not the same thing with seeing the same person first sinful and then
   righteous; nor is the problem which it presents the same exactly, as in
   that hypothetical case:--but, still, what we are thus contemplating
   involves a closely analogous question for the determination of the
   righteous Lord who loveth righteousness. As the dishonour done to God
   in humanity cries out against it, so does the honour done to God plead
   in its favour,--not in the way, certainly, of an off-set in respect of
   which the honour may cover over, gild over, the dishonour,--and so
   humanity be regarded with acceptance as one whole; not thus,--although
   the honour be divine as well as human, while the dishonour is simply
   human,--but not thus, but as the revelation of an inestimable
   preciousness that was hidden in humanity, hidden from the inheritors of
   humanity themselves, but not hid from God, and now brought forth into
   manifestation by the Son of God. For the revealer of the Father is also
   the revealer of man, who was made in God's image.

   This high capacity of good pertaining to humanity, is not indeed to be
   contemplated as belonging to us apart from our relation to the Son of
   God. For though in one sense it is quite correct to speak of the
   righteousness of Christ as the revelation of the capacity of
   righteousness that was in humanity, a capacity that remained to man
   although hidden under sin;--in truth, humanity had this capacity only
   relatively, that is, as dwelt in by the Son of God,--and therefore,
   there was in the righteousness of Christ in humanity no promise for
   humanity apart from the Son of God's having power over all flesh to
   impart eternal life. We cannot, therefore, see hope for man in the
   righteousness of Christ, apart from the contemplation of this power as
   possessed by Christ. Therefore, there must be a relation between the
   Son of God and the sons of men, not according to the flesh only, but
   also according to the spirit,--the second Adam must be a quickening
   spirit, and the head of every man be Christ. But if we see this double
   relation as subsisting between Christ and men, if we see Him as the
   Lord of their spirits, as well as a partaker in their flesh,--that air
   of legal fiction, which, in contemplating the atonement, attaches to
   our identification with Christ and Christ's identification with us, so
   long as this is contemplated as matter of external arrangement, will
   pass away, and the depth and reality of the bonds which connect the
   Saviour and the saved will bear the weight of this identification, and
   fully justify to the enlightened conscience that constitution of things
   in which Christ's confession of our sins expiates them, and Christ's
   righteousness in humanity clothes us with its own interest in the sight
   of God: for thus, that divine righteousness of the Son of God is seen
   as necessarily shedding on the mind of the Father its own glory and its
   own preciousness over all humanity,--but in a way as remote from the
   imputation of righteousness as is Christ's bearing our sins, as this
   has now been illustrated, and confessing them, is from imputation to
   Him of our sins.

   And this, indeed, is infinitely far; and yet, some vague feeling,
   corresponding to this truth of things,--some vague feeling of the
   standing which the human spirit needs to find in another than
   itself--not having it in itself--and which God has given to men in
   Christ, has been present, working in men's minds, and commending to
   them the system of imputation with all its moral repulsiveness and
   intellectual contradiction;--insomuch that one truly knowing his own
   dependance on Christ, feels more sympathy and unity with those who in
   the spirit cherish that dependance,--though conceiving of it
   intellectually in the erroneous form which it has in the system of
   imputation,--than with those whose sense of the moral and intellectual
   objectionableness of that system, is connected with the taking of a
   standing of independent self-righteousness before God. For, as to all
   whose trust is truly in Christ, and in the Father's delight in Him,
   spiritually apprehended, I am assured that, however I may seem to
   them--as to many such I shall seem,--touching the apple of their
   eye,--I am not touching that which is their life.

   I proceed to consider, in relation to the gift of eternal life, the two
   aspects in which we are contemplating the life of love in the Son of
   God, in His making His soul an offering for sin.

   I. The atonement by which Phinehas stayed the plague, prepared us for
   recognising the vindication of the divine righteousness in the Son's
   honouring the Father in the sight of man as a necessary step in the
   manifestation of mercy, and we see a true element of propitiation for
   the sin of man in Christ's glorifying God in humanity. Yet, in studying
   the manner of Christ's witnessing for the Father, we have the
   conviction continually impressed upon us, that this revealing of the
   Father by the presentation to us of the life of sonship has as its
   object our participation in that life of sonship, and so our
   participation in that knowledge and enjoyment of the Father, and that
   inheriting of the Father as the Father, which fellowship in the life of
   sonship can alone bring.

   Let us mark how immediate was the relation of this hope for man to what
   Christ was suffering in making His soul an offering for sin. He knew
   that that life of love which was then in Him a light condemning the
   darkness from which He was suffering, was yet to overcome that darkness
   and take its place. His own consciousness in humanity witnessed within
   Him that humanity was capable of being filled with the life of love.
   The more perfectly He realised that these were His brethren whose
   hatred was coming forth against Him, the more did He realise also that
   hatred was not of the essence of their being,--that there was hope in
   giving Himself for them to redeem them from iniquity,--that there was
   hope in suffering for them the just for the unjust--hope that He would
   bring them to God. How manifestly has the joy of this hope underlain
   all His sorrow! It was, indeed, the joy that was set before Him, for
   which He endured the cross, despising the shame. He bore the
   contradiction of sinners against Himself, not only in the meekness and
   patience of love, and the unselfishness of love, which was more deeply
   grieved that they should offend, than that itself was offended against;
   but also, in the prophetic faith of love that looked forward to yet
   becoming itself the life of those who now rejected it. There is hope
   for the future, as well as deep sadness because of the present, in the
   words, "O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee, but I have
   known thee." If the world could continue to be the world after coming
   to know the Father, there would have been no hope for the world. But,
   in the consciousness of being in a light in which the world was not was
   there hope to His heart for the world,--therefore did He pray on the
   cross, and when the enmity had manifested itself to the utmost,
   "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do."

   I know we more frequently refer to these words, as the precious record
   of the perfection of that forgiveness of his enemies, which was in Him,
   who, by His life and death, as by His precepts, has taught us to
   forgive our enemies, to love them, to pray for them,--and in this view
   the record is precious. But, there is important light in the footing on
   which He puts His prayer for forgiveness to them, viz., "for they know
   not what they do." Had the full power of light been expended on them,
   and without result, there would have been no room to pray for them,
   because there would have been no possibility of answering the prayer.
   But, let us thankfully hear Him who knew what is in man, thus praying;
   and let us mark how to the close He was sustained in making His soul an
   offering for sin, by the consciousness in His own humanity of a
   knowledge of the Father which, being partaken in, had power to redeem
   humanity. "I have declared thy name, and will declare it, that the love
   wherewith thou hast loved me, may be in them, and I in them." I do not
   forget the words, "now they have no cloak for their sin,"--"now they
   have seen and hated both me and my Father." But, however great the
   measure of light thus recognised as received and abused, and bringing
   condemnation, the possibility of a light beyond it is clearly implied
   in the words which I have been quoting. These evil men were of the
   world, of which He says to the Father, that it hath not known Him. They
   were included in the prayer, "Father, forgive them; for they know not
   what they do." And so the apostle John teaches, "He that saith he is in
   the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now.--He
   that hateth his brother, is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and
   knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his
   eyes." This our Lord knew, and He knew also, that He had come a light
   into the world, that he that should believe in Him should not abide in
   darkness, but should have the light of eternal life. The sad, sorrowful
   work of being a light condemning the darkness, was therefore cheered by
   the consciousness of not only being light in Himself, but, "the light
   of the world," that is, a light for men, a light which His own human
   consciousness ever testified to be a light for men.

   Therefore was the consciousness of having glorified the Father on the
   earth, the foundation of the prayer, that the Father would glorify Him
   in the exercise of the power over all flesh to give eternal life to as
   many as the Father should give to Him,--to all who, having heard and
   been taught of the Father, should come to the Son; and we know that
   while walking in His sorrowful path, with the hope of being the channel
   of eternal life to those for whose sins He was making atonement, the
   comfort was granted to Him of being

   able to say of some, that the light that was in Him had in some measure
   been received by them; that in a true sense, however small the measure,
   they "were not of the world, even as He was not of the world;" that His
   revealing of the Father by being in their sight the Son honouring the
   Father, had not been in vain; that, at least, it had quickened so much
   life in them as in Philip could say, "Shew us the Father, and it
   sufficeth us;" that in truth, though they so little understood what His
   living ministry of love had accomplished in their spirits as not to
   understand Him when He bare testimony to it, still, a great result had
   been accomplished, for that He could say, "Whither I go ye know, and
   the way ye know," though they themselves were so little aware of this
   as to rejoin, ''Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we
   know the way?"

   Thus, a measure of present comfort of the nature of the joy set before
   Him, was granted to our Lord even in the time of His making His soul an
   offering for sin. Thus are we to conceive of Him as contented to be
   through suffering made perfect as the Captain of our
   salvation,--welcoming all which He was receiving fitness to be to us
   the channel of eternal life. " For their sakes I sanctify myself, that
   they also might be sanctified through the truth." For, He welcomed that
   ordering of His path by the Father, which had reference to the
   development of the life of love that was in Him, according to all the
   need of man; not withholding His face from shame and spitting, when
   opening His ear as the learner, that in Him we might have all the
   treasures of wisdom and knowledge; though a Son, yet learning obedience
   by the things which He suffered, that being made perfect. He might
   become the author of eternal salvation unto all that obey Him;
   submitting to be tempted in all points as we are tempted, that,
   sinlessly passing through such trial, He might be able, as our high
   priest, to succour us when we are tempted. In all ways of manifestation
   of the life of sonship, and at all cost to Himself, He declared the
   Father's name in life and in death, that the love wherewith the Father
   had loved Him might be in us and He in us.

   It is certain that the atonement has its right interest to us, and
   quickens in us the hope which it has been intended to quicken, only
   when that interest and that hope are one as to nature and foundation
   with what were present in the mind of Christ in making the atonement.
   We must be in the light of His honouring of His Father's name in all
   that He presented in humanity to the faith and spiritual vision of men.
   And this honouring was not only universal as to the outward form of his
   life, but went to the depth of the inner man of the heart, to the full
   extent of making His life in humanity a "serving of the living God." "I
   do nothing of myself: as I hear, I judge,"--"My works are not mine, but
   His that sent me,"--"The Father who dwelleth in me. He doeth the
   works."--"My Father worketh hitherto, and I work,"--"The Son doeth
   nothing of Himself; but whatsoever the Father doeth, the same doeth the
   Son likewise,"--"Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one,
   that is God." So deep was the honouring of the Father in humanity by
   the Son,, when "through the Eternal Spirit He offered Himself without
   spot to God."

   Nor is it by what He presented in Himself as under His Father's
   guidance alone, that the Son of God reveals to us the Father. He
   vindicates the name of the Father, and condemns our sin as rebellious
   children, by all that we see the Father to be to Him through His
   following God as a dear child walking in love. I have, in this view,
   noticed above the place which our Lord's "peace'' and "joy," of which
   He speaks to the disciples as known to them, had in His witnessing for
   the Father: for, indeed, the Son would have been an imperfect witness
   for the Father if He was not, by those who saw Him truly, seen to have
   peace and joy in the Father,--a peace and a joy to which often an
   unclouded expression would be permitted,--but which would abide in His
   spirit, however His sorrows from all else might abound; and in respect
   of which all such sorrows, though they might be what would justify the
   appeal, "Look, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow,"
   would be but the trial of faith, and the more abundant manifestation of
   what the Father was to the Son. Now, as to all by which the Son thus
   honoured the Father, we are to see that it all entered into His hope
   for us in His making His soul an offering for sin, because it was in
   humanity that He was having all this experience.

   I have said above that we are to understand that He who is the revealer
   of God to man is also the revealer of man to Himself. Apart from Christ
   we know not our God, and apart from Christ we know not ourselves: as,
   indeed, it is also true, that we are as slow to apprehend and to
   welcome the one revelation as the other,--as slow to see man in Christ,
   as to see God in Christ. We have seen how much loss even earnest, and
   deep thinking, and holy men have suffered through not looking upon the
   life of love in Christ as the revelation of the Father;--how it has
   thus come to pass that, looking upon Christ's love to men merely as the
   fulfilment for man of the law under which man was, they have dwelt on
   that fulfilment, and enlarged on the circumstances which prove how
   perfect it was, and yet have not read the heart of God--the love of God
   to all men, in that record of the life of Christ which they were
   studying. And so also, these same men, through the assumption that in
   the life of Christ they were contemplating the working out of a legal
   righteousness for man, to be his by imputation, as they were turned
   away from seeing God in Christ, so have also been turned away from
   seeing man in Christ, seeing themselves in Christ, seeing the
   capacities of their own being in Christ. Not for His own sake but for
   our sakes did the Son of God reveal the hidden capacity of good that is
   in man by putting forth in humanity the power of the law of the Spirit
   of His own life--the life of sonship. "For what the law could not do,
   in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending His own Son in the
   likeness of sinful flesh, and as a sacrifice for sin, condemned sin in
   the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us
   who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit." We, then, for
   whose sake this has been, must learn to see in this revelation of what
   humanity is when pervaded with the life of sonship, that redemption of
   which we were capable, and which we have in Christ, and set ourselves
   to the study of the twofold discovery of God and of man in Christ, with
   the conviction that in it are hid for us all the treasures of wisdom
   and knowledge.

   I have said above that the Son alone could reveal the Father--for,
   indeed, manifested sonship can alone reveal fatherliness, being that in
   which the desire of that fatherliness is fulfilled,--which therefore
   reveals that desire by fulfilling it. Thus are we to understand the
   voice of the Father saying of the Son, "This is my beloved Son, in whom
   I am well pleased"--which voice, when heard in our hearts, is that
   drawing of the Father through which we come to the Son. And in this
   light are we to receive the words, "hear ye Him," which declare the
   purpose of that drawing. For we are called to hear the Son that we may
   know the Father through knowing the Son in whom He is well pleased, and
   so may know what is the Father's desire as to ourselves, and what He
   has given to us in the Son, that that desire of His heart for us may be
   fulfilled in us. Let the reader examine his own heart as to the measure
   in which this is the ground of the interest with which he regards the
   divine righteousness in humanity, and the Father's testimony to the
   Son. For, assuredly, it ought to be so; and we ought to be jealous of
   every thought and view that divides attention with the gift of eternal
   life--jealous of our going out of the circle of the life that is in
   Christ in search of the unsearchable riches which we have in Christ;
   above all, jealous of occupying our imagination with an unknown future
   blessedness, to be bestowed on us for Christ's sake, instead of keeping
   to what is included in Christ, in the mind revealed in Christ, and so
   is addressed to the will in man, as what we are to partake in in
   yielding our will to be guided by the law of the Spirit of the life
   that is in Christ--the life of sonship: which is in itself riches,
   unsearchable infinite riches, because it, and it alone, enjoys the
   Father as the Father, making us heirs of God,--theirs of God, and joint
   heirs with Jesus Christ.

   One has spoken of difficulty in joining, in anticipation, "himself and
   glory in one thought." The greater difficulty is to join ourselves and
   eternal life in one thought now,--although God has already in Christ so
   connected us in the very truth of things. But, as I have said, we are
   alike slow of heart to receive Christ's revelation of ourselves, and to
   receive His revelation of God,--to believe that God has given to us
   eternal life in His Son, and to believe that God is love.

   I know, indeed, that the difficulty felt in believing that our humanity
   and its capacity of good in respect of the eternal life which we have
   in Christ, is what the life of Christ reveals it to be,--is what we are
   tempted to excuse on the ground of the felt sinfulness of our own
   nature. Yet, is not the deepest knowledge of that sinfulness expressed
   in the verses just before those in which the Apostle recognises the
   power of the law of the Spirit of the life that is in Christ to make us
   free from the law of sin and death? Has, in this matter, experimental
   knowledge ever gone further than what the words express,--"I find a law
   in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
   captivity to the law of sin that is in my members. O wretched man that
   I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" This was the
   question, and this the state of mind in relation to which the knowledge
   of the power of the life of sonship in humanity moved the Apostle to
   thank God through Jesus Christ. We know not the truth of humanity,--we
   know only its perversion while we are living the life of self and
   enmity, and are as gods to ourselves. What it is to be a man, what we
   possess in humanity, we never know until we see humanity in Him who
   through the eternal Spirit offered Himself without spot to God.

   Let us understand it. The difficulty of believing the revelation of man
   that is in Christ, and the difficulty of believing the revelation of
   God that is in Christ, is one difficulty. To believe that God is love,
   as this is revealed by His manifestation of love to us, is to believe
   that love, as ascribed to God in relation to man, means, that desire
   for man which is fulfilled in the humanity of Christ, and can in that
   alone be satisfied. Therefore, those general conceptions of the divine
   mercy and benevolence which are formed when God is contemplated only as
   so feeling for our misery and desiring our happiness as that He gave
   Christ to die for us that we might be saved from misery and partake in
   everlasting bliss, however they are true conceptions so far as they go,
   come altogether short of the love of God to us in Christ Jesus. For the
   element of fatherliness is wanting--what it craves for--what alone can
   satisfy it. But on fatherliness, as ascribed to God, is the attention
   kept continually fixed in the gospel. That God has a Father's heart,
   may not, indeed, be admitted as a proof that the capacity of sonship
   has remained to us. But, at least, the manifestation of that
   fatherliness by the Son as the light of life to us does prove it.

   Let us not think of Christ, therefore, simply as revealing how kind and
   compassionate God is, and how forgiving to our sins, as those who have
   broken His righteous law. Let us think of Christ as the Son who reveals
   the Father, that we may know the Father's heart against which we have
   sinned, that we may see how sin, in making us godless, has made us as
   orphans, and understand that the grace of God, which is at once the
   remission of past sin, and the gift of eternal life, restores to our
   orphan spirits their Father, and to the Father of spirits His lost
   children.

   I have dwelt above on the difference between a filial standing and a
   legal standing. I have spoken also of what Christ's being our example
   in the life of faith implies as to the footing on which we are to draw
   near to God, and the nature of the confidence which Christ desires to
   quicken in us. Yet I feel it necessary thus to insist upon the faith of
   the sonship in humanity, which is revealed in Christ, as the necessary
   supplement and complement of the faith of the fatherliness, revealed to
   be in God: and I must often recur to this because, in truth, my hope of
   helping any out of the perplexities and confusions which I feel to
   prevail on the subjects of justification and sanctification, is simply
   the hope of helping them to see the contradiction between coming to God
   in the spirit of sonship, with the confidence which the faith of the
   Father's heart sustains, and coming to God with a legal confidence as
   righteous in His sight, because clothed with a legal righteousness, or
   at least accepted on the ground of such a righteousness.

   In speaking of that which he had come to experience through knowledge
   of the eternal life which was with the Father and was manifested in the
   Son--that experience into the fellowship of which he desired to bring
   others, the Apostle says, ''And truly our fellowship is with the Father
   and with His Son Jesus Christ." "Father" and "Son" here do more than
   indicate persons: they indicate that in these persons with which the
   fellowship is experienced. Eternal life is to the Apostle a light in
   which the mind of fatherliness in the Father, and the mind of sonship
   in the Son, are apprehended and rejoiced in. This teaching as to the
   nature of salvation is the same which we receive from the Lord Himself
   when He says, "This is eternal life, to know thee the only true God,
   and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent;" as also when He says, "If a man
   love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we
   will come unto him, and make our abode with him."

   Let the reader think of this, and take his own experience to this
   light. To me it appears, that the temptation to stop short of the light
   that shines to us in the communion of the Son with the Father in
   humanity is strong, and greatly prevails. But this light is the very
   light of life to us; for this communion is the gift of the Father to us
   in the Son. In the experience of this communion in our nature and as
   our brother, did our Lord look forward to our partaking in it as what
   would be our salvation. The seventeenth chapter of the Gospel of John
   most fully declares this. Indeed the evidence abounds that it was this
   which was ever in the contemplation of Christ in glorifying the Father
   on the earth; while of anything like the consciousness of being working
   out a righteousness to be imputed to men to give them a legal ground of
   confidence towards God there is no trace.

   I have already referred to President Edwards' legal representation of
   the righteousness of Christ, assumed to be imputed in faith, as
   perfected in His obedience unto death, and that of which God manifested
   His acceptance when He raised Christ from the dead. But the testimony
   to the Saviour was deeper and higher. Christ was declared to be the Son
   of God by the resurrection from the dead. The righteousness then
   acknowledged was none other than what the Father had previously borne
   testimony to when He said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
   pleased;"--on the sonship, the life of sonship that was in Christ, was
   attention thus fixed, and not on the legal perfection of the
   righteousness which it fulfilled. How then can we think of the Father's
   testimony to the Son as other than a commending of sonship to us, or
   think of the Father's delight in the Son otherwise than as what
   justifies His imparting the life of sonship to us?

   Let us in this light regard Christ's being delivered for our offences,
   and raised again for our justification. The offences for which He made
   expiation were ours,--that expiation being the due atonement for the
   sin of man--accepted on behalf of all men. His righteousness, declared
   in His resurrection from the dead, is ours--the proper righteousness
   for man, and in Him given to all men: and that righteousness is NOT the
   past fact

   of legal obligation discharged, but the mind of sonship towards the
   Father; for in the beloved Son is the Father seen to be well pleased,
   and in our being through Him to the Father dear children will it come
   to pass that the Father will be well pleased in us.

   II. All that we thus learn as to the prospective reference of the
   atonement in considering Christ's own manifested life in humanity as
   His witnessing for the Father to men, is confirmed, and further light
   shed upon it, when we consider with the same prospective reference the
   atonement as the Son's dealing with the Father on our behalf.

   We cannot conceive of our Lord's dealing with the Father on our behalf
   without passing on to its prospective reference. We could not formerly
   speak freely of that intercession for sinners which the Prophet has
   conjoined with His bearing of their sins, because that intercession
   could not be conceived of as stopping short of the prayer for our
   participation in eternal life, to which the expiatory confession of our
   sins, and prayer for the pardon of our sins necessarily led forward,
   and in connexion with which alone they could have existed. We now
   approach the subject of this dealing of Christ with the Father in the
   light of Christ's own perfection in humanity, and connect His laying
   hold of the hope for man which was in God with the Father's testimony
   that He was well pleased in the Son. What we have thought of Christ as
   necessarily desiring for us, was the fellowship of what He Himself was
   in humanity. This, therefore, was that which He would ask for us; and
   we can now understand that He would do so with a confidence connected
   with His own consciousness that in humanity He abode in His Father's
   love and in the light of His countenance. Thus would His own
   righteousness be presented along with the confession of our sins when
   He asked for us remission of sins and eternal life.

   And this is the right conception of Christ pleading His own merits on
   our behalf. Our capacity of that which He asked for us was so implied
   in these merits, and the Father's delight in these merits so implied
   His delight in their reproduction in us, that the prayer which proceeds
   on these grounds is manifestly according to the will of the Father--to
   offer it is a part of the doing of the Father's will--to offer it in
   the faith and hope of an answer is a part of the trust in the Father by
   which He declared the Father's name, and is to be contemplated as
   completing that response to the mind of the Father towards us in our
   sin and misery, which was present but in part in the retrospective
   confession of our sin.

   And these--the confession and the intercession--so harmonise, are so
   truly each the complement of the other, that we feel in passing from
   the one to the other our faith in the Father's acceptance of each
   confirmed by seeing it in connexion with the other; that is to say, we
   more easily believe in the Father's acceptance of Christ's expiatory
   confession of our sins when we see that confession as contemplating our
   yet living to God--our partaking in eternal life; and we more easily
   believe in the gift of eternal life to those who have sinned, when we
   see it in connexion with that due and perfect expiation for their past
   sin.

   It is in the dealing of the Son with the Father on our behalf, thus in
   all its aspects before us, that the full light of the atonement shines
   to us. In the life of Christ, as the revelation of the Father by the
   Son, we see the love of God to man--the will of God for man--the
   eternal life which the Father has given to us in the Son--that
   salvation which the gospel reveals as the

   Apostle knew it when he invited men to the fellowship of it as
   fellowship with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ. Proceeding
   from this contemplation of the light of eternal life as shining in
   Christ's own life on earth, to consider the Son in His dealing with the
   Father on our behalf, and contemplating Him now as bearing us and our
   sins and miseries on His heart before the Father, and uttering all that
   in love to the Father and to us He feels regarding us--all His divine
   sorrow--all His desire--all His hope--all that He admits and confesses
   as against us--all that, notwithstanding. He asks for us, with that in
   His own human consciousness, in His following the Father as a dear
   child walking in love, which justifies His hope in making
   intercession--enabling Him to intercede in conscious righteousness as
   well as conscious compassion and love,--we have the elements of the
   atonement before us as presented by the Son and accepted by the Father,
   and see the grounds of the divine procedure in granting to us remission
   of our sins and the gift of eternal life. We are contemplating what the
   Son, who dwells in the bosom of the Father, and whom the Father heareth
   always, offers to the Father as what He knows to be according to the
   Father's will, which, receiving the Father's acknowledgment as accepted
   by Him, is sealed to us as the true and perfect response of the Son to
   the Father's heart and mind in relation to man, the perfect doing of
   His will--the perfect declaring of His name.

   In the light of what God thus accepted when Christ through the eternal
   Spirit offered Himself without spot to God, we see the ultimate
   ground--the ultimate foundation in God--for that peace with God which
   we have in Christ. I say the ultimate ground in God for that peace with
   God which we have in our Lord Jesus

   Christ; for, while the immediate ground is the atonement thus present
   to our faith, that is to say, the purpose as fulfilled which our Lord
   expressed, when coming to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself, He
   said, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God;" yet clearly it is that
   eternal will itself which He thus came to do, and which by doing it the
   Son has revealed, even that name of God which the Son has declared,
   which is itself the ultimate peace and rest of our spirits.

   In this full light of the atonement our first conviction is, that in
   this divine transaction in humanity, through which we have the
   remission of our sins and the gift of eternal life, there has been
   nothing arbitrary. We see a righteous and necessary relation between
   the remission of our sins and Christ's expiatory confession as the due
   and adequate confession of them--a perfect expiation in that it was
   divine,--perfect in relation to us in that it was human. We see a
   righteous and necessary relation between the gift of eternal life and
   Christ's righteousness; God's delight in that righteousness in humanity
   justifying to us the Son's offering it, and the Father's accepting it
   on behalf of man to be the righteousness of man.

   We see further that what is thus offered on our behalf is so offered by
   the Son and so accepted by the Father, entirely with the prospective
   purpose that it is to be reproduced in us. The expiatory confession of
   our sins which we have been contemplating is to be shared in by
   ourselves: to accept it on our behalf was to accept it as that mind in
   relation to sin in the fellowship of which we are to come to God. The
   righteous trust in the Father, that following Him as a dear child
   walking in love, which we have been contemplating as Christ's
   righteousness, is to be shared in by us: to accept it on our behalf as
   the righteousness of man, was to accept it as what pleases God in
   man,--what alone can please God in man,--therefore as that in the
   fellowship of which we are to draw near and live that life which is in
   God's favour.

   In the light of the atonement this is seen clearly; and the light, as
   our eyes become able to bear it, reconciles us to itself. We soon are
   thankful that what God has accepted for us in Christ, is also what God
   has given to us in Christ. As to our past sins, we not only see that
   the atonement presented to our faith is far more honouring to the
   righteous law of God against which we had sinned, than any penal
   infliction for our sins, whether endured by another for us, or endured
   by ourselves in abiding misery, could have been; but are further able
   to accept, as a most welcome part of the gift of God in Christ, the
   power to confess our sins with an Amen to Christ's confession of them,
   true and deep in the measure in which we partake in His Spirit. We are
   contented and thankful to begin our new life with partaking in the mind
   of Christ concerning our old life, and feel the confession of our sins
   to be the side on which the life of holiness is nearest to us, the form
   in which it naturally becomes ours, and in which it must first be
   tasted by us: for holiness, truth, righteousness, love, must first dawn
   in us as confessions of sin. So we welcome the fellowship of the mind
   in which Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man, as
   the first breathing of that life which comes to us through His death.
   As to our interest in the righteousness of Christ, we not only soon see
   that the acceptance of that righteousness on behalf of man, with the
   purpose of imparting it to man, is more glorifying to the divine
   delight in righteousness than any other conception that has been
   entertained, but also feel the confidence toward the Father which we
   cherish in receiving Christ as our life, what, by our own experience in
   cherishing it, we know to be the only confidence towards God which can
   meet alike the desires of His heart for us, and the need of our own
   spirits as God's offspring.

   And thus we are in a light in which all drawing of us by the Father to
   the Son,--that is to say, all testifying to our spirits by the Father
   of our spirits that He has given to us eternal life in His Son,--comes
   to us as the personal application to ourselves of that eternal will of
   God which we have seen revealed in Christ's dealing with the Father on
   our behalf. This drawing is felt to accord with, and to be interpreted
   by, the offering of the Son, and the acceptance of that offering by the
   Father; and as our faith realises the work of atonement,--Christ's
   confession of our sins, Christ's presentation of His own righteousness
   in humanity in relation to us, and the Father's acceptance of both on
   our behalf,--we are more and more able to understand and to believe the
   testimony of God in the Spirit, that God has given to us eternal life,
   and that this life is in His Son.

   In proportion as the light of the divine counsel thus strengthens to
   us, and in proportion to the growing awakenedness of our spirits to the
   proper consciousness of God's offspring and realisation of what the
   divine fatherliness must be,--what it must desire,--what alone can be
   satisfying to it,--we come to see the work of redemption in the light
   of our ultimate and root relation to God as the Father of spirits, with
   whom abides the fountain of life. We see that, however we had departed
   from God, our true well-being continued to be, and must ever continue
   to be, so bound up in what God is to us in Himself, and what the aspect
   of our mind is towards Him, as that nothing external to this,--nothing
   in God's outward dealing with us,--nothing that He can give or we can
   receive,--nothing that is not included in the state of our own spirits
   towards God, and the response in our own hearts to that which is in His
   heart towards us,--can be our salvation.

   I have noticed above how much we may deceive ourselves if we expect
   that light from the typical sacrifices under the law which can only be
   shed upon us by the antitype itself. But there is an error from which
   these services might have saved men, which yet has been fallen into.
   What these services present to us as the picture of God's spiritual
   kingdom, is, a temple and a worship, --the participation in that
   worship being the good set forth,--disqualification for that worship
   the evil,--and sacrifices, and participation in these sacrifices, the
   means of deliverance from that evil and participation in that good. Not
   to deliver from punishment, but to cleanse and purify for worship, was
   the blood of the victim shed. Not the receiving of any manner of reward
   for righteousness, but the being holy and accepted worshippers, was the
   benefit received through being sprinkled with the victim's blood. In
   the light of this centre idea of worship, therefore, are we to see the
   sprinkling of all things with blood, and the remission of sins to which
   this related.

   Accordingly, when we pass from the type to the antitype, we find
   worship the great good set forth to us--that worship in spirit and in
   truth which the heart of the Father craves for,--that worship which is
   sonship,--the response of the heart of the Son to the heart of the
   Father. We find the disqualification for worship to be not a mere fact
   of guilt, but the carnal mind which is enmity against God,--the law in
   man's members warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him
   into captivity to the law of sin that is in his members. We find that
   when the Son of God came to be the needed victim, and to put away sin
   by the sacrifice of Himself, He indicated the nature and virtue of His
   contemplated sacrifice by the words, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O
   God;" so that by this will it is that we are sanctified through the
   offering of the body of Christ,--the blood shed for the remission of
   sins being the blood of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit,
   offered himself without spot to God, which purges the conscience from
   dead works to serve the living God.

   Thus we are taught the strictly moral and spiritual relation of the
   sacrifice to the worship,--we see the fitness of the blood shed to fit
   the spirits which shall be washed in it to partake in that worship,--we
   see the mind of Christ, which is in that blood, to be that mind in the
   light of which and in the fellowship of which the worshipper will cry,
   Abba, Father. Finally, we see why the High Priest and head of this
   worship is the Son of God; and why His relation to the worshippers is
   not "the law of a carnal commandment,"--not a mere institution or
   arrangement, but a spiritual relation, viz., "the power of an endless
   life,"--so that He is their High Priest in that He is their life.

   All this, while it accords with the place of sacrifices under the law,
   is to us, when we see it in the light of our relation to God as the
   Father of our spirits, of the nature of necessary truth, that is to
   say, we see that that access to God which shall indeed be to us a way
   into the holiest, must accord with the spiritual constitution of our
   being, with the nature of holiness, and with the nature of the
   separation from God which sin causes; therefore, that no permission or
   authority to come to God can be of any avail to us, apart from the mind
   in which alone he who has sinned can in truth draw near to God; and
   this mind we see is just that into which the sinner enters in the Amen
   of faith to the voice that is in the blood of Christ, viz., Christ's
   confession of our sins. In the faith of God's acceptance of that
   confession on our behalf, we receive strength to say Amen to it,--to
   join in it--and, joining in it, we find it a living way to God; and at
   the same time we feel certain that there is no other way,--that we get
   near to God just in the measure in which in the Spirit of Christ we
   thus livingly adopt His confession of our sins,--in this measure and no
   further.

   Permission to draw near to God, seen thus in the light of the mind in
   which to draw near,--that is to say, the remission of our sins seen in
   connexion with Christ's confession of our sins,--this is the way of
   life open before us; yet is that way to our faith altogether a part of
   the gift of eternal life. Though the right feelings for us to
   cherish,--though the only suitable feelings in which to approach to
   God,--though, in truth, the only feelings in which the consciousness of
   having sinned can coexist with the experience of communion with
   God,--these feelings altogether belong to the Son of God,--to the
   Spirit of sonship,--and are possible to us only in the fellowship of
   the Son's confidence in the Father's fatherly forgiveness, being
   quickened in us by the faith of that fatherly forgiveness, as uttered
   in God's acceptance of Christ's confession and intercession on our
   behalf.

   I have above insisted upon the importance of the difference between a
   legal standing and a filial standing, and on the necessity, in
   considering the nature of the atonement, of keeping continually in
   view, that in redeeming us who were under the law the divine purpose
   was that we should receive the adoption of sons. This necessity is
   becoming, I trust, more and more clear as we proceed. The virtue
   required in the blood of Christ is seen to be necessarily spiritual--a
   power to influence the spirits washed in it by faith, when our need is
   seen as the need of those whose life lies in God's favour, whose
   well-being must consist in communion with God, whose salvation is
   joining in that worship of God which is in spirit and in truth. And the
   spiritual virtue needed is determined to be the law of the Spirit of
   the life that is in Christ,--the life of sonship, when it is understood
   that the worship in spirit and in truth is that which the Father
   seeketh as the Father,--the worship which is sonship, that of which the
   Son is High Priest and head. But it further appears to me, that this
   conception of the worship for which the blood of Christ is to qualify,
   sheds back a light on the atonement, in which we are justified in
   saying that Christ's confession of our sin was not only the expiation
   due to the righteous law of God, but also the expiation due to the
   fatherly heart of God.

   To speak of an atonement as due to the fatherly heart of God is foreign
   to our habits of mind on the subject of atonement. Yet I believe, that
   in proportion as we see the expiation that is in Christ's confession of
   man's sin to be that which has truly met the demand of the divine
   righteousness, we must see that the filial spirit that was in that
   confession, and which necessarily took into account what our being
   rebellious children was to the Father's heart, constituted the
   perfection of the expiation. This is no uncalled for refinement of
   thought. The pardon which we need is the pardon of the Father of our
   spirits,--the way into the holiest which we need is the way into our
   Father's heart; and therefore, the blood of Christ which hath
   consecrated such a way for us, must have power to cleanse our spirits
   from that spiritual pollution which defiles rebellious children, that
   is to say, must contain the new mind in which it pertains to rebellious
   children to return to the Father.

   And this consideration manifestly confirms the view now taken of the
   atonement. In proportion as it is seen that that which expiates sin
   must be something that meets a demand of the divine righteousness, the
   superiority of a moral and spiritual atonement, consisting in the right
   response from humanity to the divine mind in relation to sin, becomes
   clear. But that superiority is surely rendered still more unequivocal
   when, from the conception of God as the righteous ruler, we ascend to
   that of God as the Father of spirits. It is then that we fully realise
   that there is no real fitness to atone for sin in penal sufferings,
   whether endured by ourselves or by another for us. Most clearly to the
   Father's feelings such sufferings would be no atonement; and yet are
   not these the feelings which call for an atonement,--is it not to them
   that expiation is most righteously due?

   And I would ask some attention to this question, because I know that
   weakness has been supposed to be introduced into our conceptions of the
   divine requirements, by giving prominence to the idea that God is our
   Father. Those who have this impression, and who fear the weakening of
   our sense of the divine authority, through giving the root place in our
   system to our relation to God as the Father of our spirits, would say,
   "It is the righteous ruler and judge who calls for an atonement, not
   the Father; the Father would receive us without an atonement."
   Certainly, such an atonement as they have before their minds, in saying
   this, would be no response to any demand that we can ascribe to the
   Father's heart,--as neither, indeed, I believe would it be to any
   demand which, in the light of the divine righteousness, we can ascribe
   to the Judge of all the earth.

   But this associating of moral weakness, and, as it were, easiness, with
   the idea of the fatherliness that is in God, is altogether an error;
   neither should any place be given to it. "If ye call on the Father,
   who, without respect of persons, judgeth according to every man's work,
   pass the time of your sojourning here in fear." The Father's heart did
   demand an atoning sacrifice. Is not this clear, if the worship in
   relation to which the victim's blood was shed, is, indeed, sonship? The
   Father's heart did demand the shedding of blood in order to the
   remission of sins, because it demanded blood in which justice would be
   rendered to the fatherliness which had been sinned against, and which,
   therefore, would have virtue in it to purge our spirits from their
   unfilial state, and to purify us in respect of the pollution that
   attaches to us as rebellious children.

   We might, indeed, say, that the Father's heart asked for an atonement
   for our sin, simply on the ground that it desired us back to itself,
   and therefore, desired a living way of return for us, and one related
   in its nature to the nature of our departure, in order that our return
   might be--a real return; and that such a way could only be that which
   was opened by the Son of God, when He confessed the sins of God's
   rebellious children as the Son, who abides ever in the bosom of the
   Father, alone could: for He, indeed, alone could know the exceeding
   sinfulness of our sins, and feel regarding them in that mind, the
   fellowship of which would be to us our purgation from them. But this
   moral and spiritual impossibility of our returning to the Father of our
   spirits, except on such a path as this which Christ has opened for us
   through the rent veil of His flesh, and in the power of that endless
   life in which He is related to us as our High Priest over the house of
   God,--this impossibility in respect of the very constitution of our
   spiritual being, can only be the counterpart of a necessity in the
   divine nature, in respect of which, the right feelings of the Father of
   spirits must be conceived of as demanding that expiation which we are
   now contemplating, rendering it impossible that He should receive us
   with welcome and acknowledgement, if coming by any other path than the
   fellowship of that expiation. God's righteous glory in us, no less than
   our special and peculiar blessedness in God as redeemed sinners,
   implies that in our consciousness in drawing near to God, our future
   shall not be cut off from our past. Therefore, that is not to be in
   time or in eternity; nor is our life of sonship in its highest
   development to be without the element of the remembrance, that we did
   not from the first cry Abba, Father; "Unto Him that loved us, and
   washed us from our sins in His own blood, and hath made us kings and
   priests unto God and His Father; to Him be glory and dominion, for ever
   and ever. Amen." We may say, that without the shedding of the blood of
   Christ, the Father of spirits could not receive back to the bosom of
   His love His rebellious children, as well as that without the shedding
   of the blood of Christ, it was morally and spiritually impossible for
   them to return. For these, indeed, are but two aspects of one spiritual
   truth.

   What I thus labour to impress on the mind of my reader is, that the
   necessity for the atonement which we are contemplating, was moral and
   spiritual, arising out of our relation to God as the Father of spirits;
   and not merely legal, arising out of our being under the law. In truth,
   its existence as a legal necessity, arose out of its existence as a
   moral and spiritual necessity: therefore, the legal difficulty is to be
   contemplated as what could be, and has been, removed only in connexion
   with, and because of, the removal of the spiritual difficulty. In other
   words, we have remission of our sins in the blood of Christ, only
   because that blood has consecrated for us a way into the holiest, and
   in this relation, and in this alone, can remission of sins be
   understood.

   Therefore, it is altogether an error to associate weakness and easiness
   with the fatherliness of God, and severity and stern demand with His
   character as a moral governor. What severity, what fixedness of
   righteous demand has to be calculated upon, is to be seen as first in
   the Father, and then in the moral governor, because in the Father. And,
   although there had been in the universe but one moral being related to
   God as each of us is, and though God should be contemplated in His
   dealing with that individual being as acting exclusively as the Father
   of that spirit, seeking to realise the yearning of His fatherly heart
   in relation to that spirit,--the necessity for the atonement would, as
   respected that individual, have been still what it has been; nor could
   the fulfilment of the Father's desire for that one man have been
   possible, otherwise than through the opening of that fountain for sin
   and for uncleanness which is presented to our faith in the shedding of
   Christ's blood. And I never expect to see the real righteous severity
   of God truly and healthfully realised, and the unchangeable and
   essential conditions of salvation apprehended, and hope cherished only
   in being conformed to them, until the blood of Christ is thus seen in
   its direct relation to our participation in eternal life.

   So far is it from being the case, that giving the root place to our
   relation to God as the fountain of life and the Father of spirits, and
   subordinating the relation in which we stand to Him as a Lawgiver and
   as a Sovereign,--so far is this from introducing weakness into our
   conceptions of the moral and spiritual laws of the kingdom of God, that
   it is the seeing the Father in the Son, and the desire of the Father
   for us realised in the Son, which ultimately and absolutely shuts us up
   to the faith, that there is for us but one path of life, because but
   one path to the Father. "I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man
   cometh unto the Father, but by me." These words of the Son, who
   dwelleth in the bosom of the Father, heard as shedding light on the
   kingdom of God, reveal a fixed and immutable constitution of things. No
   words can be more exclusive, more unbending, more remote from all
   opening of a door to the hope of being easily dealt with,--the hope of
   experiencing a soft, accommodating indulgence, that in weak tenderness
   would bend the divine requirement to what we are.

   "No man cometh unto the Father but by me,"--these words raise us up to
   a region in which there is, there can be, nothing arbitrary. A
   sovereign Lord and moral governor, appointing laws and enforcing them
   by the administration of a system of rewards and punishments, may be
   contemplated as severe and uncompromising in the exercise of his
   righteous rule,--but he may also be thought of as merciful and
   considerate of individual cases; and the outward and arbitrary nature
   of the rewards and punishments which he is believed to dispense makes
   his awarding the former on easier terms, and withholding or mitigating
   the latter according to circumstances,--and, it may be, under the
   influence of mercy,--what can be supposed, and what, in thinking of God
   as such a governor and Lord, and of ourselves as the subjects of His
   rule, we can turn to the thought of with a vague hope. And such a
   governor and Lord God is in the ordinary thoughts of men, and such a
   vague hope towards God is the ordinary hope of men. And on such a
   conception of their relation to God have men ignorantly engrafted the
   gospel,--conceiving of it as giving a special and definite form to the
   indefinite combination of judgment and mercy, which has sustained that
   vague hope of salvation which they had cherished. But the gospel, truly
   apprehended, raises us into another and a higher region,-a region,
   indeed, in which divine mercy or clemency, as previously conceived of,
   is felt to have been but as the dimmest twilight of kindness and
   goodwill towards men, in comparison of the noonday light of the love of
   the Father of spirits to His offspring,--but a region also in which no
   arbitrary dealing with us can find a place. In the light that shines in
   that region, it is clear to us, that the relation between the
   blessedness that is seen there, and the rightness that is recognised
   there, is fixed and immutable. So that the liberty which, in the lower
   region, we ascribed to mercy, is here found not to belong to love; nor
   the discretion which we ventured to attribute to the righteous
   governor, found to pertain to the loving Father; but, on the contrary,
   the law of the Father--the principle on which happiness is dispensed,
   by Him to His offspring as His offspring--is found to be fixed and
   altogether unbending, incapable of accommodation in a way of pity, or
   indulgence, or consideration of circumstances. "No man cometh unto the
   Father but by the Son." All modification of this law is impossible; for
   sonship and fatherliness are mutually related in an eternal relation.
   The Father, as the Father, can only receive His offspring to Himself as
   coming to Him in the spirit of sonship;--neither otherwise than as
   coming in the spirit of sonship can they in spirit and in truth draw
   near to Him.

   I have spoken of a way into the holiest as what must have its nature
   determined by the nature of holiness; so a way to the Father must have
   its nature determined by the nature of fatherliness. These are two
   aspects of one spiritual reality; a reality, reader, which we must
   steadfastly contemplate, to the certainty and fixedness of which we
   must be reconciled,--a reality in the light of which we must see the
   free pardon of sin and redeeming love, and all the divine mercy to us
   sinners which the gospel reveals. In that lower moral region to which I
   have referred, in which men are not dealing with the Father of spirits,
   but with the moral governor of the universe, (but whose moral
   government, while thus not illumined by the light of His fatherliness,
   is never understood,) we may be occupied with the punishment of sin and
   the rewards of righteousness, in a way that permits us to connect the
   atonement directly with the idea of punishment and reward, and invests
   it simply with the interest of that desire to escape punishment and to
   be assured of happiness, which may, even in the lowest spiritual state,
   be strong and lively in us. But if we will come to the atonement, not
   venturing in our darkness to predetermine anything as to its nature,
   but expecting light to shine upon our spirits from it, even the light
   of eternal life; if we will suffer it to inform us by its own light why
   we needed it, and what its true value to us is, the punishment of sin
   will fall into its proper place, as testifying to the existence of an
   evil greater than itself, even sin; from which greater evil it is the
   direct object of the atonement to deliver us,--deliverance from
   punishment being but a secondary result. And the reward of
   righteousness will be raised in our conceptions from the character of
   something that can be ours by the adjudication of the judge on
   arbitrary grounds which mercy may recommend, to its true dignity as
   that blessedness which is essentially inherent in righteousness, and in
   that glorifying and enjoying of God of which righteousness alone is the
   capacity, and which no name, nor title, nor arbitrary arrangement, can
   confer.

   The atonement, thus seen by its own light, is not what in our darkness
   we desired; but it soon reconciles us to itself, for it sets us right
   as to the true secret of well being. A spiritual constitution of things
   that would have been more accommodating to what we were through sin, we
   soon see as precluded alike by the nature of God, and the nature of man
   in its relation to the nature of God,--a relation, to violate which
   would not be the salvation, but the destruction of man. We, indeed, see
   ourselves encompassed by necessities, instead of flexible,
   compromising; weak tendernesses; but they are necessities to which we
   are altogether reconciled, for we are reconciled to God. One has said,
   "It is a profitable sweet necessity to be forced on the naked arm of
   Jehovah." That "no man cometh to the Father but by the Son" is the
   great and all-including necessity that is revealed to us by the
   atonement. But, as combined with the gift of the Son to us as the
   living way to the Father, we rejoice to find ourselves shut up to "so
   great salvation."
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER VIII.

   FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OF THE FIXED AND NECESSARY CHARACTER OF SALVATION
   AS DETERMINING THE NATURE OF THE ATONEMENT AND THE FORM OF THE GRACE OF
   GOD TO MAN.

   I HAVE said that the character of the Mosaic institutions, as commented
   upon in the Epistle to the Hebrews, ought to have saved us from the
   direct connecting of the atonement with the subject of rewards and
   punishments, and more especially from that direct connecting of
   forgiveness through the blood of Christ with exemption from punishment
   which has so prevailed, seeing that the blood of the victim was
   intended to purify and cleanse for participation in worship. In this
   light as to the relation of the sacrifice to worship, and seeing the
   worship typified to be that worship which is sonship, we see how
   perfectly that which our Lord taught in saying, "No man cometh unto the
   Father but by me"--meaning to fix the attention of His disciples on
   what He Himself was in their sight, as the revealer of the Father by
   the manifested life of sonship,--accords with the elements of
   confidence in drawing near to God, which the Apostle enumerates in
   exhorting men to "draw near in the full assurance of faith, having
   their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and their bodies washed
   with pure water." That our Lord and the Apostle must have contemplated
   the same thing as the due and accepted worship we cannot doubt. But it
   is only when we understand, that the shedding of the blood of Christ
   had direct reference to our relation to God as the Father of our
   spirits, and to the opening of a way in which we as rebellious children
   can return to the bosom of the Father's love, according to the truth of
   what the Father is, and what sonship is, that we see that, "having
   boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and
   living way which He hath consecrated for us through the veil, that is
   to say His flesh, and having an High Priest over the house of God," is
   the same thing with the Son of God being to us a living way to the
   Father.

   The doctrinal form of thought which the language of the Apostle
   presents, would probably have been more difficult of apprehension to
   the disciples, who had yet to learn that "it behoved Christ first to
   suffer and afterwards to enter into His glory," than even their Lord's
   language as to their own favoured position as the chosen companions of
   the path of Him who could say, "He that hath seen me hath seen the
   Father." Yet, afterwards, they could look back and see the identity of
   what they subsequently learned, with what had been presented to their
   faith in their personal acquaintance with Christ. These disciples,
   indeed, knew not then the form which the work of redemption must take
   in being perfected, but they had received under the Lord's personal
   ministry that spiritual teaching, for the want of which, no familiarity
   with the full record of the finished work of Christ can compensate, and
   in the absence of which, our study of that record never is safe; for
   already they were fit subjects for that high testimony from their Lord,
   "They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world;" they had
   received the Son as coming to them in the Father's name, and that was
   quickened in them which was according to the truth of our relation to
   God as the Father of our spirits. Their attraction to their Master was,
   that they felt that He "had the words of eternal life;"--their cry was,
   "Shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us;" and so, when the true
   worship, of which their temple service had been a type, was
   subsequently clearly revealed to them as that worship which is sonship,
   and when they learned distinctly to contemplate the heart of the Father
   as the Holy of Holies, they were prepared to know the Son of God as
   both the sacrifice and the High Priest.

   This unity of their recollections of the Lord as they knew Him so
   nearly, with the light that afterwards shone to them in His blood shed
   for the remission of sins, and in His relation to them as the High
   Priest over the house of God, is illustrated to us by that opening of
   the first Epistle of John which has already engaged our attention. The
   fellowship with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ, which the
   Apostle had entered into in receiving the knowledge of eternal life, we
   have already noticed. This divine fellowship he proceeds at the 5th
   verse to speak of as calling Him to declare to men as the divine
   message--the Gospel--"that God is light, and in Him is no darkness at
   all." This statement in the connexion in which it is made has clearly
   the same fixedness of character, as respects the terms of grace and the
   way of salvation, which we have seen in the Saviour's own words, "No
   man cometh unto the Father but by me." For, he adds, "If we say that we
   have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the
   truth: but if we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have
   fellowship one with another." This is, indeed, but the same spiritual
   law or necessity elsewhere declared in the words, "there is no
   communion between light and darkness." But the experimental character
   of the. Apostle's language as used by one claiming to have the
   fellowship with God of which he speaks--fellowship with the Father and
   with His Son Jesus

   Christ, claiming through knowledge of Christ both to know that God is
   light, and to be walking in that light, and making His own experience
   in this spiritual region known to us with the purpose and hope of our
   coming into the fellowship of it, and so being saved;--this brings the
   truth that "there is no communion between light and darkness"--very
   near to us--very home to us: the felt unity of what the disciples came
   to know, when they came to understand that 'it behoved Christ to
   suffer, and afterwards to enter into His glory,' with what had been
   presented to their faith in the life of Christ, and what their Lord had
   commended to them as the light of life when He said, "I am the way, the
   truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me," coming
   fully out in the words which follow, ''If we walk in the light, as He
   is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
   Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin." Not surely--what I
   fear these words too often suggest--a cleansing having reference to our
   exposure to the punishment of sin, but a cleansing having reference to
   the pollution of sin itself. Not, therefore, a cleansing spoken of in a
   legal sense, and as something over and above the spiritual cleansing
   implied in walking in the light of God and having fellowship with God,
   but a cleansing having effect in that fellowship, and which is referred
   to as explaining that fellowship, explaining how it comes to pass in a
   way that gives the glory of that fellowship to the blood of Christ in
   which such cleansing power is found. For we cannot doubt that the power
   to cleanse which here the words, "the blood of Jesus Christ His Son
   cleanseth from all sin," declare, is the same that is contemplated
   where it is said, "If the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of
   an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the
   flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
   Spirit offered Himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from
   dead works to serve the living God?" To say that the blood of Christ
   "cleanseth us from all sin," and to say that it "purges the conscience
   from dead works, to serve the living God," are but different ways of
   declaring the spiritual power of the atonement when apprehended by
   faith,--asserting its fitness for being partaken in by us as the mind
   of Christ in relation to our sin. And so the words are added in
   relation to our own participation in Christ's expiatory confession of
   our sin, "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
   truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to
   forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness."

   So he proceeds to speak of Christ as our advocate with the Father, and
   the propitiation for our sins: "My little children, these things write
   I unto you, that ye sin not," for he has been shutting them up to a
   salvation which is walking in the light of God, and is fellowship with
   God. And, that they may feel the reasonableness of proposing to them
   "that they sin not," he reminds them that "if any man sin, we have an
   Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous;" and that "He is
   the propitiation for our sins." Of course, if any man sin and then find
   comfort in remembering that he has an advocate with the Father, this
   implies, that with the thought of that advocate will rise the thought
   of the pardon of sin; but it is clear that the pardon of sin is here
   rather implied than expressed, for the value and use of the advocate
   directly contemplated is His value to those who are called "not to
   sin;" therefore is the "righteousness" of the advocate that on which
   attention is fixed: for He is made of God unto us righteousness, and
   righteousness is in Him for us as the sap is in the vine for the
   branch. On the ground of the sap that is in the vine, therefore, are
   the branches here exhorted to bear fruit; which also determines the
   light in which the Saviour is contemplated when it is added, "He is the
   propitiation for our sins;" and that this is spoken in direct reference
   to Christ's righteousness, and the fitness of that righteousness to
   meet the need of the sinner as being deliverance from sin. In other
   words, Christ is the propitiation for our sins as He is the way into
   the holiest,--the living way to the Father.

   And He is the propitiation: for propitiation is not a thing which He
   has accomplished and on which we are thrown back as on a past fact. He
   is the propitiation. Propitiation for us sinners,--reconciliation to
   God,--oneness with God abides in Christ. When we sin, and so separate
   ourselves from God, if we would return and not continue in sin we must
   remember this. For it is in this view that the Apostle, writing to us
   "that we sin not," reminds us of the propitiation--not a work of
   Christ, but the living Christ Himself; and so he proceeds--"Hereby we
   do know that we know Him, if we keep His commandments;" the direct
   effect of knowing Christ the propitiation for sin being keeping
   Christ's commandments. And because of the power to keep Christ's
   commandments, which is ours in Christ as the propitiation for our sins,
   the Apostle, in words similar to those which he had just used with
   reference to the claim to fellowship with God who is light, adds, "He
   that saith I know Him," that is Christ the propitiation for our sins,
   "and keepeth not His commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in
   him. But whoso keepeth His word, in him verily is the love of God
   perfected,"--the end of this gift of love accomplished. "Hereby know we
   that we are in Him. He that saith he

   abideth in Him ought himself also to walk even as He walked."

   We need not then be uncertain what the reference is in which the
   "righteousness" of the Advocate with the Father is here contemplated,
   or doubt that, by abiding in Christ is here meant, that abiding in
   which the branch receives the sap of the vine, that it may bear fruit.
   And yet I know that this directness of relation between knowing Christ
   as the propitiation for our sins, and walking as He walked, some may
   deny, and that, retaining that meaning for the word "propitiation"
   which the conception of an atonement as substituted penal suffering has
   given to it, it may be said that it is as a motive to gratitude,
   because of the deliverance from punishment through the sufferings of
   Christ, that a moral power is here ascribed to Christ's being the
   propitiation for our sins. The impression of directness in this matter,
   that is, of direct dealing with sin itself as the evil, and of
   recognition of Christ as the deliverer from sin, which not only the
   verses I have quoted, but the whole Epistle gives, is, however, so
   strong that I cannot but hope that, in spite of associations of old
   standing, I may not in vain have directed the reader's attention to it.

   And, with a similar hope, though with the same knowledge that
   deep-rooted associations stand in the way, I would now take the reader
   to a parallel passage in the Epistle to the Hebrews. I refer to the 2nd
   chapter, verses 17, 18, "Wherefore in all things it behoved Him to be
   made like unto His brethren, that He might be a merciful and faithful
   High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the
   sins of the people. For in that He Himself hath suffered being tempted.
   He is able to succour them that are tempted." To succour us when we are
   tempted, is manifestly to do for us that very service which I have just
   represented the Apostle John as leading those to whom he writes "that
   they sin not," to expect from that righteous advocate with the Father,
   who is the propitiation for our sins. For this service of love, Christ
   is here represented as fitted, in that He Himself hath suffered, being
   tempted--as there by being righteous. Both thoughts are combined when
   it is said, that "He was tempted in all points like as we are, yet
   without sin." Now, going back from the 18th verse to the 17th (the
   18th, "For," &c., being given as the justification of the comfort
   offered in the 17th), it is clear, that "making reconciliation for the
   sins of the people," is the same thing with "succouring us when we are
   tempted,"-- in other words, is a dealing with our spirits as
   worshipping God--calling Him Father, in a way of merciful and faithful
   aid, such as the High Priest, who is related to us according to the
   power of an endless life--the Son of God, in whom we have eternal
   life,--has been qualified for ministering to us through having "been
   made in all things like unto His brethren."

   I know that this view of making reconciliation for our sins as being
   the ministering to us a present help, according to our spiritual
   need,--enabling us to be at peace with God spiritually, and therefore,
   truly,--enabling us to worship God, who is a spirit, in spirit and in
   truth--is not that usually taken. And that thus to interpret Christ's
   making reconciliation by the reference made to His experience of our
   conditions as what has qualified Him for this office of an High Priest,
   is as great a departure from prevailing associations with the sacred
   language, as there is in the view just taken of what is taught when
   Christ is said to be the propitiation for our sins. Yet there is no
   case in which there is to my mind a more painful illustration of the
   power of system, than in the way in which the 18th verse has seemed to
   have been lost sight of in fixing the meaning of the 17th, and in
   which, indeed, I may say the tone of the 17th itself, as a whole, has
   been misunderstood.

   If the interpretation of the expressions, "propitiation" and
   "reconciliation," now adopted in harmony with the view taken of the
   nature of the atonement, commends itself to the reader, he will be
   prepared to receive a corresponding interpretation of the expression
   "peace," as applied to Christ, when He is said to be "our
   peace,"--making it equivalent to His claim to being the only "way to
   the Father." Eph. 2:14.

   In the teaching by which the Saviour comforted the disciples in the
   near prospect of His being taken from them, we find Him, in words
   referred to already, encouraging them by the prospect of passing
   through the trials that awaited them in the fellowship of the inward
   consolation by which they had seen their Lord Himself sustained in all
   they had seen Him pass through. "Peace," says He, "I leave with you, my
   peace I give unto you." That He could speak to them of His own peace,
   has been already noticed, as a part of the perfection of His witnessing
   for the Father. That He could promise to them the fellowship of that
   peace which He thus claims as His own, has been also already noticed as
   one of the forms in which He made them to know that the life of sonship
   which they witnessed in Him, was in Him the Father's gift to them. If
   they were to be sons of God in spirit and in truth, the peace of the
   Son in following the Father as a dear child, would be their portion
   also. Further, as they were to live the life of sonship, not as
   independent beings, following the example of the Son of God, but as
   abiding in the Son of God, as branches in the true vine, this peace
   which He bequeathed to them they were not to have apart from Himself.
   In abiding in Him were they to have it as a part of the fulness that
   was in Him for them--a part of the all things pertaining to life and to
   godliness. ''In me ye shall have peace." Thus are we to understand the
   word ''peace" in the promises of the Lord to the disciples before His
   departure; thus are we to understand it when, on those occasions on
   which He appeared to them between His resurrection and ascension, still
   further to comfort their hearts and to strengthen them for what was
   before them, He stood in the midst of them and said, "Peace be unto
   you; as the Father hath sent me, even so send I you." Doubtless, thus
   also are we to understand the ''peace" intended in the apostolic prayer
   and benediction, "Grace be unto you, and peace from God the Father, and
   from the Lord Jesus Christ." Nor has the word any other meaning than
   this in the song of the heavenly host at the nativity, ''Glory to God
   in the highest; on earth peace, and good-will toward men." Now the
   reader is prepared to understand that in accordance with the nature of
   the atonement as now represented, it is the same peace, the peace of
   sonship, the peace that is "from God the Father and the Lord Jesus
   Christ;" being peace "in fellowship with the Father and with His Son
   Jesus Christ,"--it is this same peace that I understand to be the peace
   spoken of when it is said that Christ "is our peace."

   The parallelism of the 2nd chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians,
   with the portion of the 10th chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
   considered above, is obvious. The language of the temple service is not
   so closely adhered to, nor is salvation so exclusively contemplated as
   the condition of true and accepted worship; for with the idea of "a
   holy temple," is united that of "citizenship," and a "household,''
   verses 19, 20, 21, 22; but the summing up of the evil of the state in
   which the gospel had found the Ephesians, in the words "without God in
   the world," verse 12--the setting forth, as the grace revealed to them,
   their being "made nigh by the blood of Christ"--the purpose ascribed to
   Christ, to reconcile us to God, by slaying the enmity,--all express the
   same conception of the evil of man's state as a sinner as consisting in
   his spiritual distance from God, and of the salvation revealed in the
   gospel as consisting in spiritual nearness to God. In this connexion
   the peace which Christ is said to be, and which is said to be preached
   to men, can only be understood to be a spiritual peace with God--a
   spiritual destruction of the previous enmity--a spiritual reality
   present in the humanity of Christ, and proclaimed to men as the gift of
   God to them in Christ,--one with the way into the holiest, which He has
   opened up for us,--the way to the Father, which He is to us. And this
   spiritual conception of the peace spoken of, suggested by the tone of
   the whole passage as what alone accords with the spiritual realities of
   distance from God and nearness to God, is sealed to us as the true
   conception by the explanatory words of the 18th verse. "For through Him
   we both have access by one spirit unto the Father." "For," that is to
   say, because of this condition of things, viz., our having, both Jew
   and Gentile, through Christ, access by one spirit unto the
   Father,--therefore, is peace preached to us, for in this is peace for
   us.

   Looking more closely into the passage, there is a complication foreign
   to our present purpose introduced by the mention of Jew and Gentile.
   This has arisen from its being an Epistle to Gentiles. But we see that
   the Apostle is taking us deeper than the distinction between Jew and
   Gentile. He is taking us down to our common humanity, and presenting to
   our faith the Son of God by one work doing away with the separation
   between Jew and Gentile, and reconciling both Jew and Gentile--all
   humanity--unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity
   thereby. Paul says to the Galatians, "We who are Jews by nature, and
   not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by the
   works of the law but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have
   believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
   Christ, and not by the works of the law; for by the works of the law
   shall no flesh be justified." So here he takes the Ephesians to the
   contemplation of that dealing of the Son with the Father on behalf of
   all humanity, in which Jew and Gentile were alike interested, and in
   which they must alike see their interest if they would see the veil
   rent that separated them from each other, and separated them from God;
   for, indeed, the veil is one and the same that separates man from God,
   and that separates man from man.

   I will not anticipate that tracing of the atonement in connexion with
   the actual history of our Lord's work to its close on the cross which I
   contemplate, and by which, I hope, the view I am presenting of the
   nature of the atonement will be felt to be illustrated and confirmed.
   In no view of the atonement can the crucifixion be separated from the
   previous life of which it was the close. Yet, it is only the view now
   taken that identifies the peace to which our Lord was conscious
   throughout His own life on earth, and which He promised to His
   disciples, with the peace which He fully accomplished and vindicated
   for humanity in that death on the cross, which was the perfecting of
   the Lord's work of redemption, the perfected fulfilling of the purpose,
   "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God," the perfecting of His declaration
   of the Father's name. But the gospel does not proclaim two manners of
   peace with God: one legal, the result of Christ's bearing the penalty
   of our sins; the other spiritual, to be known in our participation in
   Christ's spirit. That oneness of mind with the Father in the aspect of
   the divine mind towards man, which was fully developed and perfected in
   humanity in the Son of God when His confession of the Father before
   men, and His dealing with the Father on behalf of men, were perfected
   on the cross,--this was that divine and spiritual peace for man in His
   relation to God, which is to be contemplated, first, as in its own
   nature and essence spiritual; and then, because spiritual, also
   legal,--a perfect answer to all the demands of the law of God,--a
   perfect justification of God in regard to the grace in which we stand.

   And thus was the atonement adequate to whatever victory of Christ on
   our behalf is implied in His leading our captivity captive, when
   "through death destroying him that had the power of death, that is, the
   devil; and delivering them who through fear of death were all their
   lifetime subject to bondage," Hebrews 2:14, 15. The power of evil
   adverse to us to which this language refers we imperfectly understand.
   Definite conceptions of the manner of our bondage we have not beyond
   this, that ''the strength of sin was the law.'' But, if the honour
   regarded as done to the law by the death of Christ conceived of as
   implying the enduring of penal infliction for our sins, have seemed a
   sufficient explanation of the power thus ascribed to Christ's cross,
   how infinitely more adequate to the results accomplished, because
   infinitely more honouring to the law of God, and a real living dealing
   with that in the heart of the Father of spirits to which the law
   refers, is the moral and spiritual atonement of which the cross was the
   perfecting! Christ said to Pilate, "Thou couldest have no power at all
   against me, except it were given thee from above;" and this we know of
   all subordinate power, wherever present, for "power belongeth to God
   alone." Therefore has the power ascribed to the accuser of the
   brethren--our adversary the devil--been always, and rightly regarded,
   as what could only rest upon the fixedness of that moral constitution
   of things of which the law is the formal expression, and our rebellion
   against which had given him advantage over us. But the root of that
   constitution of things is the Fatherliness of the Father of our
   spirits: nothing, therefore, could truly honour that constitution which
   did not do due honour to that Fatherliness in which it has its root;
   while that Fatherliness being duly honoured, the law must of necessity
   have been therein honoured, and with the highest honour.

   While, therefore, that formal literal meeting of the demands of the law
   which men have seen in Christ has been to them the spoiling of the
   power of the devil, because it was a meeting of the law seen simply as
   the law; in the light in which we are now contemplating the work of
   redemption, it is the Son's dealing in humanity directly with the
   Fatherliness that is in God--and so dealing with the violation of the
   law in relation to the ultimate desire of the heart of the Father, who
   gave the law--by which we see ourselves, who were under the law,
   redeemed, that we might receive the adoption of sons; this true doing
   of the Father's will by the Son, and not a mere literal fulfilling of
   the law, being the spiritual might by which our captivity is seen to be
   led captive.

   This deliverance wrought out for all humanity,--the peace accomplished
   on the cross,--is, in respect of its being first spiritual, and then,
   as a consequence, legal, in striking accordance with the order that is
   observed in our individual participation in it. "Verily, verily, I say
   unto you. He that heareth my word, and believeth on Him that sent me,
   hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is
   passed from death unto life." John v. 24.

   But to this order men do not easily conform. There is a state of mind
   in which it will be asked, "If the relation of the atonement to our
   participation in the life of Christ be thus direct and immediate,--if
   it be such as necessitates our giving a moral, a spiritual meaning, as
   distinguished from a mere legal meaning, to the expressions, 'peace
   with God,' 'reconciliation with God,' 'propitiation for sin,'--if the
   immediate and only natural reflection in seeing the pardon of our sins
   as the gospel reveals it, be, that we are free to draw near to God, to
   join in the services of the true sanctuary, and in the spirit of
   sonship to have communion with our heavenly Father,--if Christ's
   suffering for us, the just for the unjust, thus simply suggest the
   purpose of bringing us to God,--then is the gospel to us sinners the
   good news which it claims to be? The wrath of God has been revealed
   against all unrighteousness of men; we are sinners under
   condemnation,--our first need is pardon, as a discharge from the
   sentence upon us. Granting that our true well-being is to be ultimately
   found in peace and reconciliation in the spiritual sense of the words,
   have we not at first need of peace and reconciliation in a legal sense?
   Our fears of wrath may not be holy feelings, or what pertain to the
   divine life in man; but are they not natural, allowable, nay, right
   feelings in us sinners? And if they are, are they not to be taken
   account of and must not this be done in the first place?"

   I have said above, that what of severity is in the moral governor of
   the universe, has its root in the heart of the Father of spirits. We
   cannot, therefore, believe in an atonement that satisfies the heart of
   the Father,--we cannot believe in blood shed for the remission of our
   sins, which has power to purge our spirits for that worship which is
   sonship,--and yet be uncertain whether, partaking in the fruit of such
   an atonement, and joining in this worship, we are still exposed to the
   righteous wrath of God. If an atonement be adequate morally and
   spiritually, it will of necessity be legally adequate. If it be
   sufficient in relation to our receiving the adoption of sons, it must
   be sufficient for our redemption as under the law. To think otherwise
   would be to subordinate the gospel to the law, and the love of the
   Father of spirits to His offspring to that moral government which has
   its origin in that love. We are not under the law, but under grace. Let
   us receive this gracious constitution of things in the light of the
   love that has ordained it. Let us understand that He was made sin for
   us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
   Him. Let us conform to this purpose of God,--let us receive the
   righteousness of God in Christ, and be the righteousness of God in
   Him,--let us be reconciled to God, and we shall find all questions as
   to our exposure to the wrath of God to have been fully taken into
   account in that divine counsel which we have welcomed, for we shall
   understand the experience of the Apostle,--"Herein is our love made
   perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment; because as
   He is, so are we in this world." Surely Philip was right when he said,
   "Shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us." Surely we do not know to
   what we are listening when we are listening to the testimony of God
   concerning

   His Son, viz., that ''God has given to us eternal life, and that this
   life is in His Son," if we can answer, "But if we receive this life to
   be our life, will that be enough for us; shall we not need something
   besides, to save us from the wrath to come?" Oh, my brother, "there is
   no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear." If you are
   "reconciled to God by the death of His Son," how shall you not be
   "saved from wrath through Him?" It is, indeed, unbelievable--no man can
   believe--that receiving Christ as our life, we can feel that His blood
   does indeed cleanse from all sin, in relation to that worship of God
   which is in spirit and in truth; but that we cannot feel secure as
   engaged in this worship, unless that blood of Christ, under the power
   of which our spirits have come by faith, speak to our consciences of
   penal sufferings, endured for us, and so assure us that the law has no
   claim against us.

   But the difficulty felt is not that of persons seeing the subject from
   this point of view. One once said to me, when urging on him the
   evidence for the universality of the atonement, in opposition to his
   own faith of an atonement for an election only,--"Were I to believe
   that Christ died for all, it would destroy the peace which I have in
   the faith of the atonement, for this is my peace,--He suffered,
   therefore I shall not suffer." This was the same idea which we have
   seen urged on Arminians by Dr. Owen, in that dilemma which appears
   unanswerable, on the assumption that the atonement was the enduring of
   penal suffering by Christ as our substitute. Yet, however
   inconsistently, and though not in the strong form,--"He suffered,
   therefore I shall not suffer,"--many feel as if they were less
   obnoxious to suffering, because of the penal suffering which they
   assume to have been endured by Christ, even when their faith in the
   universality of the atonement necessarily qualifies their comfort from
   this source. I do not now recur to the inconsistency which Dr. Owen has
   so well exposed, but will deal directly with the state of mind which
   desires, if it does not quite venture to cherish, the peace of saying,
   "He suffered, therefore I shall not suffer."

   This state of mind only exists through not seeing our relation to God
   as a moral governor, in its true subordination to our relation to Him
   as the Father of our spirits. I have asked, "Can the moral governor
   remain unsatisfied if the Father of spirits is satisfied?" The converse
   of this question is, "Can the moral governor be satisfied while the
   Father of spirits is not?" To suppose that peace can ever be
   justifiable on the ground, "He suffered, therefore I shall not suffer,"
   is to answer this question in the affirmative,--it is to suppose that
   when Christ suffered, the just for the unjust, the direct end was that
   the unjust should not suffer. Now, we cannot doubt the pain which the
   exposure of the unjust to suffering was to God, or the desire of His
   heart to save them from suffering; but we must not forget that the
   original reason for connecting sin and misery still continued,--that
   that connexion was not arbitrary,--that the wrath of God revealed
   against all unrighteousness of men was not a feeling that has passed,
   or could pass away,--no revelation of the unchanging God could.
   Therefore, when the just suffered for the unjust, it was with the
   direct purpose of bringing the unjust to God,--that is, bringing the
   unjust to the obedience of the just, leaving the connexion between
   suffering and injustice, or sin, undissolved, the righteousness of that
   connexion being unchanged.

   Here we are met by another necessity, corresponding to that already
   dwelt on as declared in the words, "No man cometh unto the Father, but
   by me." But how could it be otherwise? If departure from the Father be
   the ultimate root evil, which it was righteousness--the righteousness
   of love--to visit with wrath, how should deliverance from wrath be
   experienced otherwise than in returning to the Father, or mercy to
   those who had departed, take any other form than opening for them the
   way of return?

   I have said that the atonement reconciles us to the spiritual
   necessities, the laws of the kingdom of God which it reveals. We should
   in our darkness be willing to lose the Father in the moral governor, if
   we could think of the moral governor in a way that would permit to us
   the feeling of security under His government; and all the demand that
   we should make on the fatherliness of the Father of our spirits, would
   be for such mercy as would qualify His moral government and modify it
   in accommodation to what we feel ourselves to be. But in the light of
   the atonement which reveals the Father to us in the Son, we bless God
   that not our wishes in our darkness, but God's own fatherliness and our
   capacity of sonship have determined the nature of the grace extended to
   us. Nor would we now desire to see one terror that is connected with
   sin separated from it, or one token of the divine displeasure against
   it withdrawn. For Christ's sufferings have revealed to us the nature,
   and the depth, and the righteousness of God's wrath against sin,--what
   our sins are to His heart, and what that mind in relation to sin is to
   which it is His sole desire in the matter to bring us, and which mind
   is His gift to us in Christ, in whom it is revealed. Therefore, the
   pardon of sin in any other sense than the revealing, and the opening to
   us of the path of life, is now to us as undesirable as, in relation to
   the moral government of the Father of spirits, it is inconceivable.

   To some whose serious thoughts are occupied with the punishment of sin
   as an object of terror, rather than with the sin itself on which it is
   God's mark, this tone may seem high, and, it may be, even presumptuous,
   and in relation to themselves, unfeeling; more like the
   self-congratulation of the pharisee, than the humility of the publican,
   and sounding like self-righteousness, however it may be but that
   "giving of thanks at the remembrance of God's holiness" of which the
   psalmist speaks. Others again, entirely occupied with their own
   newly-discovered and dimly-apprehended exposure to divine wrath, will
   not venture to judge those on whom they look as more in the light of
   God than themselves, or to doubt that their professed sympathy in the
   mind of God towards sin, may be genuine, and consistent with humility,
   but they are still disposed to say, "Shew us something more suited to
   our present position, some ground of safety to rest upon--to trust to
   at once; and then teach us to worship, and direct us to the provision
   for doing so in spirit and in truth; for doubtless such worship belongs
   to Christianity."

   As to the first of these states of mind, the misconstruction of
   confounding the righteousness of faith with self-righteousness, is not
   strange to those who are the subjects of it; nor, as to the second, is
   the temptation to seek a ground of peace in relation to God's
   law,--thinking only of the lawgiver, and not thinking of the Father of
   spirits, what any one can have difficulty in understanding, who knows
   how much religious earnestness exists which has no deeper root than the
   sense of our dependence on God as our sovereign Lord, the judge of all
   the earth. But whether judging the spirits of those who preach the true
   gospel of peace to them, or withholding from judging, the feeling of
   awakened sinners "that the ground taken is too high for them," is
   altogether a misconception on their part. We beseech men by the
   meekness and gentleness of Christ; we are ambassadors for Him who would
   not break the bruised reed nor quench the smoking flax: but our word,
   the word which He has put into our mouth is, "Be ye reconciled to God."
   Is this a hard saying, too high a demand to make on the awakened,
   self-condemned spirit? It is not made but in connexion with that which
   God has done to make such a demand reasonable,--yea hopeful, as
   addressed to the chief of sinners, viz. the peace for man in his
   relation to God which is in the blood of Christ: but in connexion with
   this prepared and revealed peace it is made, and we may not change or
   modify this demand, or in any way accommodate ourselves to a state of
   mind in which alienation from God is not felt to be the great, the
   all-embracing evil of our state as sinners, and reconciliation to God
   the very first dawn of light, and breathing of the breath of a new
   life.

   So that however awful our sense of all secondary evils that come in the
   train of men's alienation, or high our conception of the secondary good
   that will follow on their being reconciled to God, we must forbid all
   direct dealing with wrath and judgment as if these might be first
   disposed of, and then attention turned to other considerations. We have
   here to do with PERSONS,--the Father of spirits and His offspring.
   These are to each other more than all things and all circumstances. We
   know that the desire of the Father's heart is toward His
   offspring,--that it goes forth to them directly,--that it is not a
   simple mercy pitying their misery,--that it seeks to possess them as
   dear children. We know that to be restored to Him, and to possess Him
   as their Father, is to these alienated children themselves not merely a
   great thing, but every

   14--2 thing. He, the Father, has done all towards their reconciliation
   in perfect fatherliness, and all the provisions of His love have been
   dictated, and have had their character determined by His fatherliness.
   They therefore must hear nothing, be occupied with nothing, but what
   pertains to their charter as His offspring. They must see His grace as
   that outcoming of fatherliness which it is,--they must see its
   provisions for them as what belong to the adoption of sons which He
   contemplates for them. And so they must hear the call addressed to them
   in the words, "Be ye reconciled to God," as not only a reasonable call
   in respect of the grace manifested, but as, indeed, the gracious
   invitation to the benefit of that grace,--as equivalent to, "Be saved,
   receive salvation." As to wrath--terror--these they have not directly
   to do with; they are to think of them as connected with the region of
   distance from God, of alienation from God, back from which they are
   called:--they will cease as to them in their being reconciled to God.
   They belong to that which is without: but the invitation to be
   reconciled to God is the invitation to return and enter into their
   Father's house, into their Father's heart. This is what is put before
   them, freely, unconditionally. Does the word "unconditionally" cause
   difficulty? Is it said--"Is not to be reconciled to comply with a
   condition?" Yes, such a condition as drinking of the water of life is
   in relation to living. Not in any other sense a condition,--not
   assuredly as giving the right to drink, for that is the grace revealed,
   the grace wherein we stand. But as to wrath, and safety from wrath, if
   questions arise, it is a proof that what is presented is not
   understood. "He that believeth shall not come into condemnation, but
   hath passed from death unto life."

   The peace-speaking power of the blood of Christ is to be conceived of
   as a direct power on the spirit in its personal relation to the Father
   of spirits, revealing at once the heart of the Father, and the way into
   the heart of the Father, even the Son. The blood that reveals this much
   imparts peace, makes perfect as pertains to the conscience,--yea,
   purges it from dead works to serve the living God. Indeed, that the
   relation of that blood to God's law, and the honour it rendered to that
   law, have had, as we have seen, a direct reference to our receiving the
   adoption of sons, implies that it has not come directly between man and
   judgment, or taken him, by the fact of its being shed, from beneath the
   righteous rule of God; and, therefore, that it ministers no peace,
   being rejected--but, on the contrary, only a fearful looking for of
   judgment, so assuredly giving no place for the direct confidence, "He
   suffered, therefore I shall not suffer."

   But, apart from the fact that the shedding of the blood of Christ had
   its direct reference to the perfecting of the conscience, and the
   reconciling us to God truly and spiritually as the Father of our
   spirits, is not the idea of a direct immunity from judgment, the idea
   of a ground of peace in the thought of judgment which may be
   contemplated by us as ours, so to speak, antecedent to our being
   reconciled,--a legal reconciliation to be rested on antecedent to a
   spiritual reconciliation,--inconsistent with giving our alienation from
   God its true place as the great evil and what must be directly dealt
   with?--And is there not, however terrible the thought, yet is there not
   in the very sense of gratitude for the mercy which is believed to be in
   such a direct deliverance from wrath to come, a source of delusion as
   to our true interest, our true well-being? Does it not tend to confirm
   in us the tendency to lose the Father of our spirits in the moral
   governor, and so to misunderstand, as in that case we must do, the ends
   of His moral government? Does it not tend to smother in us the cry of
   the orphan spirit for its long lost Father? Does it not take from God
   the attribute that life lies in His favour,--making Him important to us
   because of what He has to bestow, and not because of what He feels
   towards us viewed in itself, and as the feeling of the Father to His
   offspring?

   Nor is there any room for feeling as if some lower ground should be
   taken at first, and in tenderness to newly-awakened sinners. We cannot
   too soon present the Father to them. We cannot too soon lay their
   weakness on the everlasting arms of the Eternal Love. To furnish them,
   in accommodation to their darkness, with any ground of confidence
   towards God, other than what the Son has revealed as the heart of the
   Father, would be to seal them in that darkness, and to counter act the
   end of that revelation. No doubt the words, "No man cometh unto the
   Father but by me," which reveal that fixed constitution of things to
   which our vague hope of salvation must conform, or cease, were spoken
   to the chosen companions of our Lord's path, and towards the close of
   His personal ministry, but they express the manner of Gospel which had
   breathed from His life all along. And so these gracious words to all
   the "weary and heavy laden"--"Come unto me, and I will give you rest,"
   are both spoken in immediate reference to what He had just declared,
   "No man knoweth the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
   shall reveal Him,"--clearly teaching that the promised rest would be
   found in knowledge of the Father; and, more, are followed by the clear
   intimation that in their participation of Himself as their life,
   participating in what He was, was the Son to be to men the channel of
   this rest-giving knowledge of the Father

   --"Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in
   heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls."

   The nature of that hope which was in God for man, and which the
   atonement has brought within the reach of our spirits, has indeed been
   necessarily determined by our ultimate and primary relation to God as
   the Father of our spirits. And we must take all our preconceptions to
   this light, and more especially those thoughts of God as the moral
   governor of the universe, in which the divine fatherliness has been
   left out of account, and to which is to be referred men's listening to
   the gospel simply as those who were under the law, and not as God's
   offspring. When the Apostle argues, Gal. 3:17, that "the covenant which
   was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law, which was four hundred
   and thirty years after, cannot disannul," he deals with the legalism
   with which he was contending on a principle which may guide us here. If
   we recognise in the words, "by the deeds of the law shall no flesh
   living be justified," a reference to that universal law under which all
   men are, and in relation to which God has concluded both Jew and
   Gentile alike as all under sin; if we take this universal ground in
   teaching justification by faith, then must we in vindicating the
   superiority of the gospel ascend to our original relation to the Father
   of our spirits, whose law it is that we have broken, and see that
   gospel in the Father's heart--that promise for man--that hope abiding
   for man in God--which the law could not disannul. Is it not thus that
   we are to understand the Apostle Peter when in the full light of
   redeeming love he says, "Wherefore let them that suffer according to
   the will of God commit the keeping of their souls to Him in well doing,
   as unto a faithful Creator"? We are justified in the ground we take in
   teaching justification by faith, only because in faith the hope which
   remained in God for man is apprehended, and, being apprehended, becomes
   in man a living hope towards God.

   I formerly complained of a subordinating of the gospel to the law. I am
   now contending for the due subordinating of the law to the gospel. When
   the Apostle says, "If there had been a law given which could have given
   life, verily righteousness should have, been by the law," it seems to
   me that he is speaking in the light of the subordination of the law to
   the gospel, for he is recognising the giving of life as what must be
   the end of God; and, therefore, that our being taken from under the
   law, and placed under grace, has been in order that we should be alive
   to God. Therefore righteousness would not have been by faith any more
   than by the deeds of the law, had it not been because of the life which
   in faith is quickened in us. "He that believeth hath passed from death
   unto life." It is in this view of faith that God the Father of spirits
   is just in justifying the ungodly who believe. These words I have
   considered before; but, at the point at which we now stand, it seems to
   me that we are contemplating, as the justifying element in faith, not
   only not an imputation, but that which is the most absolute opposite of
   an imputation, viz., life from the dead.

   Although the expression "justification by faith" be associated in our
   mind with all preaching of the atonement, the teaching of Luther is
   that alone of all the forms of thought on this subject considered above
   with which that expression really harmonises, for he alone have we
   found teaching that it is faith itself which God recognises as
   righteousness: and how excellent a manner of righteousness faith is in
   Luther's apprehension, and how righteous it is in God to count it
   righteousness, has been sufficiently illustrated, even by the
   quotations to which I have limited myself. In what he so writes, the
   words of the Apostle, "was strong in faith, giving glory to God," are
   the text--the axiom, I should rather say--from which Luther reasons.
   That condition of the human spirit in which most glory is given to God
   he regards as self-evidently the highest righteousness, and that
   condition is faith.

   But the glory given to God in faith must be in proportion to the depth
   and fulness of the apprehension of what God is which faith embraces,
   and to which it responds. In proportion, therefore, as God is revealed
   by the atonement, and as, in consequence, he that believes is in the
   light of what God is, and by his faith trusts and glorifies God as He
   is, in that proportion is the righteousness of faith enhanced and
   exalted. "No man hath seen God at any time. The only-begotten Son, who
   dwelleth in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him." He that
   hath seen the Son hath seen the Father, and he who, seeing the Father
   in the revelation of Him by the Son, hath faith in Him as the Father,
   attains the highest form of faith,--a faith which is the fellowship of
   the Son's apprehension of the Father--indeed, is sonship,--and utters
   itself in the cry, Abba, Father. This is its nature; this, whatever its
   measure.

   But, when the subject of justification by faith takes this form in our
   thoughts, we have no longer any difficulty in recognising faith as
   ''the highest righteousness;" for how can we otherwise conceive of that
   which is the fellowship of Christ's own righteousness, the
   righteousness given to us in the gift of Christ, who is "made of God
   unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption"?

   I have intentionally kept before the reader's mind longer than was
   necessary for the simple expression of it, the distinction between
   contemplating the blood of Christ as shed with direct reference to the
   purging of our consciences from dead works to serve the living God, and
   contemplating it as shed with direct reference to our deliverance from
   the punishment of sin. In addition to the character of the whole
   Epistle to the Hebrews, as setting forth the well-being of man as
   standing in his being an accepted worshipper, and, therefore, the
   atonement for sin needed as the shedding of blood that would make
   perfect as pertains to the conscience, I may recall to the reader the
   relation to righteous judgment in which the typical and the antitypical
   shedding of blood are both represented in the words, "He that despised
   Moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: of how much
   sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath
   trodden underfoot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the
   covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done
   despite unto the Spirit of grace?" But in dwelling as I have done upon
   the distinction between a man's not coming into condemnation, because
   the blood of Christ is known by him as a living way into the holiest,
   and, through the faith of it, he has passed from death unto life; and a
   man's not coming into condemnation because the blood of Christ was shed
   for him, and the punishment of his sins borne by Christ,--my great
   anxiety has been to get to the right point of view in considering man's
   well-being,--that point from which God is seen as the fountain of life,
   in whose favour is life; and, therefore, the question of salvation is
   seen to be simply the question of participation in that favour as it is
   the outgoing of a living love, the love of the Father's heart, and not
   as the mere favourable sentence of a judge and ruler, setting the mind
   at ease in reference to the demands of the law of His moral government.

   With this same purpose have I above entered as I have done into the
   questions connected with justification; and if I have appeared to
   forget, as I have not for a moment done, the distinction made between
   justification and sanctification, it is that I have hoped that the real
   spiritual truth that is in justification being once seen, the subject
   would take its right form in the mind of itself. That "righteousness"
   as a part of what Christ is said to be "made of God unto us," has come
   to be dealt with on a principle entirely distinct from that on which
   men have dealt with "wisdom," and "sanctification," and "redemption,"
   has been owing to the exigencies of a legal system; but such an error
   has been possible only because it has not been seen that these are all
   alike elements of the eternal life which we have in Christ. For Christ
   is all these to us just in that He is our life, nor otherwise than as
   living by Him are we "righteous" any more than we can otherwise be
   "wise," "holy," "redeemed," that is, free men,--free with the liberty
   wherewith the Son of God maketh free.

   Nothing, indeed, has done more to confirm the mind in that tendency to
   seek in the atonement what will come directly between us and the
   punishment of sin, instead of seeking in it the secret and the power of
   returning to God,--recognising sin and all misery as what are together
   left behind in returning to God,--than the distinction made between
   justification and sanctification, when justification is connected with
   a demand in the mind of our judge which may be met in an arbitrary way,
   as by imputation or imagined transferred fruits of righteousness, while
   sanctification is recognised as having its necessity in the truth of
   things, in that without holiness no man shall see God: as if
   righteousness in man had no such relation to righteousness in God, as
   holiness in man has to holiness in God.

   As to the supposed necessity for God's imputing righteousness, that He
   may see us as perfectly righteous, why must our participation in
   Christ's righteousness be the meeting of a demand for perfection, any
   more than our participation in His holiness, or His wisdom, or the
   freedom that is in Him? All is perfect in Him, and He, and His
   perfection, belong to us; but all in the same sense. But, when the
   righteousness contemplated is understood to be the righteousness of
   faith, of faith in the Father's heart as revealed by the Son,--of the
   faith, therefore, by which the life of sonship is quickened and
   sustained,--this demand for a legal perfection is seen to be altogether
   foreign to that with which we are occupied. The feeblest cry of the
   spirit of sonship is sure of a response in the Father's heart, being
   welcome from its own very nature, as well as for that of which it is
   the promise, as it is also the fruit: for it both comes from and grows
   into the perfect sonship which is in Christ. Confidence is of the
   essence of this cry,--hope in the fatherliness towards which is its
   outgoing. Reader, say, does it not jar with this cry, does it not mar
   its simplicity, its truth, to be required to pause and say, "I would
   cry to my Father,--I see His heart towards me, the Son reveals it, but
   I must remember that, to be justified in drawing near with confidence,
   I must think of myself as clothed by imputation with a perfect
   righteousness, because the Father of my spirit must see me as so
   clothed in order that He may be justified in receiving me to His
   fatherly heart?" Would not this thought mar the simplicity of the
   child's cry--would it not indeed altogether change the essence of the
   confidence cherished? But the thought of the righteousness which God
   has accepted in accepting Christ, the righteousness to which the words,
   "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye Him," turn
   the mind, altogether encourages the child's cry in us,--indeed, is its
   source; for to cherish, to utter that cry, is the spiritual obedience
   of the word, "hear ye Him." But I almost repeat what I said before.
   Only, I hope that, in that light of the elements of the atonement in
   which justification is now before us, the oneness of the confidence
   which the faith of Christ's work quickens in us with the confidence in
   which He went before us in that path of life which He has opened up for
   us, and which He Himself is to us, will be more clearly recognised.

   I have now asked, why should the divine demand for righteousness in
   men, which God has Himself met and provided for by the gift of Christ,
   giving us in Him all things pertaining to life and to godliness, making
   us complete in Him,--why should this demand of the divine mind for
   righteousness be seen as met on another principle than that on which
   the demand for holiness is met? All these demands are truly, fully met.
   Christ came not to destroy the law, but to fulfil. But if, in connexion
   with all that varied perfection in humanity which is in the Son of God,
   all humanity may be dealt with, and is dealt with, by God, the
   preciousness of that perfection shedding its own glory over all
   humanity, and being ever to the heart of the Father a promise for all
   humanity, and if the heart of the Father waits in hope for our "growing
   up into Him in all things, which is the head even Christ," (Ephesians
   iv.15,) why should a fiction be introduced to give a character of
   perfection to our individual righteousness before God, which has no
   place in relation to our part in the other elements of the perfection
   that is in Christ? I have already expressed my conviction that that in
   us which in full light welcomes this ordination of a kingdom in the
   hands of a mediator, is what has, in part at least, made the reception
   of this doctrine of the imputation of Christ's perfection to those who
   believe, possible. But in the light of the atonement the heart feels no
   need of any fiction for its peace. The confidence in the Father, which
   the revelation of the Father by the Son quickens, has its witness in
   itself,--its sanction in its own nature. Its spiritual relation to that
   in God towards which it goes forth, justifies it to the conscience.
   For, in truth, it is but the due response to the Father testifying to
   us that He has given to us eternal life in the Son,--that testimony of
   God in the spirit, which being heard by us in the spirit, effectually
   calls us to the confidence of sonship. Therefore does one Apostle say,
   "if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence towards God,"
   and another Apostle, "the Spirit beareth witness with our spirit that
   we are the sons of God." And such expressions accord with what I have
   urged above, viz., that our knowledge that we are justified should be
   of the same spiritual nature with the true knowledge that we are
   sinners, and not be sought in that way of inference from the fact that
   we believe, combined with the doctrine that those that believe are
   justified, to which men have had recourse, and on which, indeed, they
   have necessarily been thrown when artificial conceptions of
   justification by faith have been adopted.

   That nothing artificial, but something the deep reality of which is
   proved in the consciousness of the individual justified, is
   contemplated in the beginning of the 8th chapter of the Epistle to the
   Romans, it is impossible to doubt. The misery recorded in the close of
   the 7th chapter is not more real, more a matter of consciousness, than
   the salvation for which thanks are rendered; nor is the law of sin in
   the members causing that misery more a thing known by the individual
   than "the law of the Spirit of life in Christ, which makes free from
   the law of sin and death." Therefore, the freedom from condemnation, in
   other words, the justification through being in Christ Jesus, spoken
   of, is clearly one with that cleansing by the blood of Christ, that
   purging of the conscience, on which I have dwelt so much; nor can it be
   at all separated from that "fulfilment of the righteousness of the law"
   in those "who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit," which
   the Apostle goes on to mention as the direct end which God has
   contemplated in sending His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and as
   a sacrifice for sin, and so condemning sin in the flesh. The subjective
   character of this passage,--that is to say, the relation between
   freedom from condemnation and the condition of a man's own spirit which
   it recognises,-and the place which it ascribes to the law of the Spirit
   of the life that is in Christ in connexion with this freedom, that is,
   in connexion with justification, is too broadly marked to permit its
   being quoted in favour of the doctrine of justification by an
   imputation of righteousness.

   But the conditions of true peace of conscience must always be the same;
   and therefore, although the first verse of the fifth chapter is so
   quoted, we must believe that that in Christ, in respect of which thanks
   are rendered that "there is no condemnation to them who are in Christ
   Jesus," is present to the mind of the Apostle when he speaks of "peace
   with God through our Lord Jesus Christ" in connexion with "being
   justified by faith." This language, indeed, occurs in immediate
   connexion with that reference to the glory given to God in the faith of
   Abraham, which sheds such clear light on the righteousness of God in
   recognising faith as righteousness: while, in saying that faith shall
   be imputed to us for righteousness, "if we believe on Him that raised
   up our Lord Jesus from the dead, who was delivered for our offences,
   and raised again for our justification,'' the Apostle has brought
   before us that in God which the faith by which we are to glorify God
   must apprehend and trust. For justifying faith, in trusting God, does
   so in response to that mind of God in relation to man which is revealed
   to us in our being, by the grace of God, embraced in Christ's expiatory
   confession of our sins, when, by the grace of God, He tasted death for
   every man; and embraced in that perfect righteousness of sonship in
   humanity which Christ presented to the Father on behalf of all humanity
   as the true righteousness of man, and which, in raising Him from the
   dead, the Father has sealed to us as our true righteousness. This
   gracious mind of God in relation to us it is that our faith accepts and
   responds to; for our faith is, in truth, the Amen of our individual
   spirits to that deep, multiform, all-embracing, harmonious Amen of
   humanity, in the person of the Son of God, to the mind and heart of the
   Father in relation to man,--the divine wrath and the divine mercy,
   which is the atonement. This Amen of the individual, in which faith
   utters itself towards God, gives glory to God according to the glory
   which He has in Christ; therefore does faith justify: and this
   justification is not only pronounced in the mind of God, who accepts
   the confidence towards Himself, which the faith of His grace in Christ
   has quickened in us, imputing it to us as righteousness, but is also
   testified to by the Spirit of truth in the conscience of him in whom
   this Amen is a living voice--a spiritual mind--the fellowship of that
   mind in the Son of God by the faith of which it is quickened. The Amen
   of the individual human spirit to the Amen of the Son to the mind of
   the Father in relation to man, is saving faith--true
   righteousness,--being the living action, and true and right movement of
   the spirit of the individual man in the light of eternal life. And the
   certainty that God has accepted that perfect and divine Amen as uttered
   by Christ in humanity, is necessarily accompanied by the peaceful
   assurance that in uttering, in whatever feebleness, a true Amen to that
   high Amen, the individual who is yielding himself to the spirit of
   Christ to have it uttered in him, is accepted of God. This Amen in man
   is the due response to that word, "Be ye reconciled to God;" for the
   gracious and gospel character of which word, as the tenderest pleading
   that can be addressed to the most sin-burdened spirit, I have contended
   above. This Amen is sonship; for the gospel-call, ''Be ye reconciled to
   God," when heard in the light of the knowledge that ''God made Him to
   be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness
   of God in Him," is understood to be the call to each one of us on the
   part of the Father of our spirits,--"My son, give me thine
   heart,"--addressed to us on the ground of that work by which the Son
   has declared the Father's Name, that the love wherewith the Father hath
   loved Him may be in us, and He in us. In the light itself of that Amen
   to the mind of the Father in relation to man which shines to us in the
   atonement, we see the righteousness of God in accepting the atonement,
   and in that same light the Amen of the individual human spirit to that
   divine Amen of the Son of God, is seen to be what the divine
   righteousness will necessarily acknowledge as the end of the atonement
   accomplished.

   I have illustrated above the distinction between the righteousness of
   faith and self-righteousness, and the way in which faith excludes
   boasting, while introducing us into the light of God's favour, and have
   anticipated what would have been urged with advantage here as the
   justification of God in accounting faith righteousness. I only add now,
   that, as in illustrating the elements of the atonement, I have desired
   that the reader should see by its own light the suitableness and
   adequacy of the moral and spiritual expiation for sin which Christ has
   made, and should see all such expressions as "A way into the
   holiest,"--"Propitiation,"--"Reconciliation,"--"Peace with God,"--in
   that light of our spiritual relation to the Father of our spirits which
   demands for them a spiritual, as distinguished from a mere legal
   meaning;--so, now, I have sought for "Justification by faith," also, a
   spiritual and self-evidencing character, and that the attitude towards
   God of a human spirit in the light of that will of God which the Son of
   God came to do and has done, and cherishing a confidence towards God in
   harmony with that light, shall be felt to be the right attitude towards
   God of the spirit of man,--that in which are combined, God's glory in
   man and man's salvation in God.

   I have sought for justification by faith this self-evidencing
   character, not fearing by this to open the door for a self-righteous
   and presumptuous confidence,--believing that the true confidence alone
   can preclude the false in all its measures and forms. The Amen of
   faith,--the being reconciled to God,--peace with God through our Lord
   Jesus Christ,--these, in meekness and lowliness, are known in the light
   of the atonement. For that light of eternal life harmonises us with
   itself, and so with God,--and in it, it is impossible to trust in
   self,--it is impossible not to trust in God,--it is impossible to doubt
   that this trust in God is true righteousness,--it is impossible to
   doubt that God is just in being the justifier of him that believeth in
   Jesus.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER IX.

   THE INTERCESSION WHICH WAS AN ELEMENT IN THE ATONEMENT CONSIDERED AS
   PRAYER.

   IN recognising at the outset a need-be for the atonement, I sought to
   separate between what is sound and true in the feelings of awakened
   sinners, and what is to be referred to their remaining spiritual
   darkness. At the same time I have desired that we should be in the
   position of learning from the atonement itself why it was needed, as
   well as how it has accomplished that for which it was needed. The error
   which in its grossest form has amounted to representing the Son as by
   the atonement exercising an influence over the Father to make Him
   gracious towards us, (but which, even when such a thought as this would
   be disclaimed, has still led to seeking in the atonement a ground of
   confidence towards God distinct from what it has revealed as the mind
   of God towards man,) has become very manifest in the light of the
   nature of the atonement as a fulfilling of the purpose of the Son, "Lo,
   I come to do thy will, O God,"--His ''declaring of the Father's Name."
   In the light of that will as fulfilled,--that Name as declared, our
   faith has been raised to the Eternal Will itself thus revealed, to the
   Unchanging Name thus declared: as the Apostle speaks of those that
   believe in Christ as those ''who by Him do believe in God, who raised
   Him from the dead, and gave Him glory; that our faith and hope might be
   in God." I Peter 1:21. Yet it seems to me that in this high spiritual
   region some of the difficulties which we experience in all our deeper
   meditations on the ways of God, are more realised when we are fully
   delivered from the error to which I have now referred than they were
   before. I say this, contemplating especially the aspect of the
   atonement as a dealing of the Son with the Father on our behalf--a
   mediation, an intercession. I have spoken of the nature and ground of
   this intercession--its combination with the confession of our sins, and
   its relation to our Lord's own consciousness in humanity--His
   experience of sonship in humanity--His experience of abiding in
   humanity in the Father's favour. But a more close consideration of what
   is implied in intercession as intercession seems called for--a more
   close consideration, that is, of the hope for man in which the Son of
   God made His soul an offering for sin, as that hope was a hope in God,
   sustained by faith and prayer.

   We are so much in the way of looking on the work of Christ as the
   acting out of a pre-arranged plan, that its character as a natural
   progress and development, in which one thing arises out of another, and
   is really caused by that other, is with difficulty realised. Yet we
   must get deliverance from this temptation,--the painful temptation to
   think of Christ's work as almost a scenic representation,--otherwise we
   never can have the consciousness of getting the true knowledge of
   eternal realities from the atonement. All light of life for us
   disappears from the life of Christ unless that life be to us a life
   indeed, and not the mere acting of an assigned part. Unless we realise
   that in very truth Christ loved us as He did Himself, we cannot
   understand how near an approach to a personal feeling there has been in
   His feeling of our sins, and of our misery as sinners. Unless we
   realise that His love to Himself and to us was the love of one who
   loved the Father with all His heart, and mind, and soul, and strength,
   we cannot understand the nature of the burden which our sins were to

   Him, what it was to His heart that we were to the Father rebellious
   children, or how certainly nothing could satisfy His heart as a
   redemption for us, but that we should come to follow God as dear
   children in the fellowship of His own sonship. Unless we contemplate
   His sense of our sin, and His desire to accomplish for us this great
   salvation, as livingly working in Him and practically influencing Him,
   we cannot understand how truly He made His soul an offering for sin,
   when, receiving into Himself the full sense of the divine condemnation
   of sin. He dealt on behalf of man with the ultimate and absolute root
   of judgment in God, presenting the expiation of the due confession of
   sin, and in so doing at once opening for the divine forgiveness a
   channel in which it could freely flow to us,--and for us a way in which
   we could approach God. And, finally, unless we apprehend the
   encouraging considerations by which the love of Christ was sustained in
   making this expiatory offering,--unless we have present to our minds
   His faith in the deep yearnings of the Father's heart over men His
   offspring, joined with His own conscious experience in humanity, which
   testified that these yearnings could be satisfied--unless we conceive
   to ourselves how naturally and necessarily these thoughts took the form
   of prayer, laying hold of that hope for man which was in God,--unless,
   as it were, we hear the intercession thus made for man, and see the
   grounds on which it proceeds, we cannot understand what is made known
   to us of the Name of God by the success of this pleading on our
   behalf,--we cannot see how this appeal to the heart of the Father
   becomes in being responded to the full revelation of the Father to us,
   and that in proportion as we apprehend the nature and grounds of that
   intercession, and realise that it has been perfectly responded to, we
   know the grace wherein we stand;--what that faith in God is to which we
   are called, what the grounds are on which we are to put our trust in
   Him. Faith must make us present to the work of our redemption, in its
   progress as well as in its result, so that the love which is working
   for us--the difficulties which that love encounters--the way in which
   it deals with them--the salvation which it accomplishes--all may shed
   their light on our spirits and be to us the light of life.

   But the faith that makes this history a reality to our spirits, while
   difficult as to every part of this realisation, is most difficult when
   we are occupied with that intercession of Christ which is the
   perfecting element in the atonement,--making it literally an offering.
   It is not so difficult to realise how to the perfect holiness and love
   which were in Christ our sins should be so heavy a burden,--nor is it
   difficult to realise His intercourse with the Father while He bore our
   sins on His spirit, as that response to the Father's mind concerning
   them which has now been represented as an expiatory confession of our
   guilt. We also easily see how the Saviour's own conscious experience in
   humanity, doing His Father's commandments, and abiding in His love,
   would both determine the character of the redemption which He would
   seek for us, and be an element in His hope towards God for us,--a hope
   which He would cherish in conscious oneness with His Father. But when
   we consider Christ's hope for man as taking the form of
   intercession,--and see that His knowledge of the Father's will is so
   far from suggesting an inactive waiting in the expectation that all
   will necessarily be as the Father wills, that on the contrary, that
   knowledge only moves to earnest pleading and entreaty,--the hope
   cherished seeking to realise itself by laying hold in a way of
   prayerful trust on that in the heart of the Father by which it is
   encouraged,--then the difficulty that always haunts us as to the
   ordinance of prayer--the difficulty, I mean, of the idea of God's
   interposing prayer between His own loving desire for us and the
   fulfilment of that desire, instead of fulfilling that desire without
   waiting to be entreated--this difficulty is felt to be present with our
   minds in this highest region in which the Son is represented as by
   prayer, and intense and earnest and agonising prayer, obtaining for us
   from the Father what the Father has infinitely desired to give--what He
   has given in giving Him to us as our Redeemer, to whose intercession it
   is yielded. Here we have the divine love in Christ pleading with the
   divine love in the Father, and thus obtaining for us that eternal life,
   which yet in giving the Son to be our Saviour, the Father is truly said
   to have given. The difficulty is that which haunts us in our own
   prayers, but it is the same, and no other; and if we are enabled to
   deal rightly with it as it meets us here, it will be an increase of
   practical freedom to us in our individual walk with God.

   What I have now been attempting has been to see and trace the atonement
   by its own light, viz., the light of the life which was taking form in
   it according to the words, "In Him was life, and the life was the light
   of men." Proceeding in this way the intercession of Christ has
   presented itself as a form which His love must naturally take. That it
   would take the form of desiring for us what His intercession asked for
   us, was quite clear. But we could not conceive of that desire as
   cherished in conscious weakness and dependence on the Father, and yet
   in conscious oneness with the Father, without conceiving of it as
   uttering itself to the Father in prayer. With all the weight of all our
   need upon His spirit--bearing our burden--that He should cast this
   burden upon the Father, appeared the perfection of sonship towards the
   Father, and brotherhood towards us. And as this intercession seemed a
   natural form for the love of Christ to take, so did it seem what must
   be to the Father a sacrifice of a sweet-smelling savour--and we felt
   that no aspect of the perfect sonship in humanity which the life of
   Christ presented to the Father, could be more welcome to the heart of
   the Father than that of love to men. His brethren, as thus perfected in
   intercession; especially as being intercession for brethren who also
   were enemies, making the intercession to be the perfection of forgiving
   love. This indeed was to God, who is love, a sacrifice of a sweet
   smelling savour from humanity, which must have been infinitely grateful
   in itself; while as part of the perfection that was in Christ, this
   intercession was a most excellent part of that promise for humanity in
   respect of which Christ's perfection is to be contemplated as pleading
   for humanity. Any father who has ever been privileged to have one child
   pleading for forgiveness to another child, for an offence which has
   been unkindness to the interceding child himself, has here some help to
   his faith in his own experience.

   But though all this is felt by us to be natural, and what arises out of
   the life of love which was in Christ, yet, approaching it not by this
   path, but by the path of meditation on Christ as the gift of the
   Father,--meditation on all that interest in us which Christ's love is
   feeling, and under the power of which it is interceding, as already in
   the Father and already desiring to impart all that Christ is asking for
   us--nay, as having really be stowed it in the gift of Christ--the
   difficulty of which I have spoken suggests itself. We ask, how has this
   intercession been necessary? We ask, how Christ should have felt it
   necessary? A Christian philosopher of our own time has said that
   whereas once he had thought of prayer as the expression of a want of
   faith in God's goodness, he afterwards came to understand that prayer
   was the highest expression of faith in God's goodness. Assuredly He who
   came to make known the goodness of God, and that towards us men it is
   the highest form of goodness, even fatherliness,--that which on a
   superficial view might seem most to supersede all asking--all
   prayer,--leaving room only for thanksgiving and praise--He has been as
   distinguished by the depth and intensity of His praying to the Father
   as of His faith in the Father's fatherliness: nor is there any part of
   His testimony for the Father as He was the witness for God, more marked
   than His testimony, that God is the hearer and answerer of prayer. In
   Him we see that knowledge of the Father's will, and confidence in His
   love, supersede not prayer, but, on the contrary, only move to prayer,
   giving strength for it--making it the prayer of faith and hope and
   love--love perfected in thus flowing back to its own fountain. The fact
   of Christ's "intercession for the transgressors" accords with and
   confirms what we feel in meditating on the life of love that was in
   Him, viz., that such intercession was the fitting form for His bearing
   of our burdens to take, what in the light of the knowledge of the hope
   that was for us in God it must take; while to give place to the thought
   of anything dramatic--the acting out of a pre-arranged part, in regard
   to that recorded intercession (and of which the measure indicated is
   infinitely beyond what is recorded), would be to lose all sense of life
   and reality in Christ.

   But let us try to approach this great and fundamental fact in the
   history of our redemption really from God's side. Let us try to realise
   what we are contemplating when we are rising to the contemplation of
   that hope for man which was in God antecedent to the atonement; and
   which the atonement has brought within the reach of our spirits. Let us
   see the love that man needs as in God before it has come forth in the
   atonement. Let us see the Fatherly heart as yet unrevealed--waiting to
   be revealed. Let us contemplate the Son as coming forth to reveal it.
   Let us distinguish between the purpose to reveal the Father's heart and
   a purpose to realise any predetermined train of events. Let us see, as
   that which is to be brought to pass, not certain facts, events, or
   circumstances thought of merely as such, but a knowledge of the heart
   of the Father brought within reach of us His offspring,--destroyed by
   the lack of this knowledge, but to whom this knowledge will be
   salvation. Let us consider in this view the Son of God in humanity
   bearing upon His spirit our burden, and dealing with the Father
   concerning it; let us see all our need made visible to us in Christ's
   feeling of it, and let us listen to the cry of this need as ascending
   to the Father from Christ addressing itself to what the Father feels in
   relation to that need, and let us ask ourselves how but as the answer
   to that cry could that in the Father which answers that cry have been
   made known, or our need and that in the Father which meets our need
   have been revealed to us together? It is the cry of the child that
   reveals the mother's heart. It is the cry of Sonship in humanity
   bearing the burden of humanity, confessing its sin, asking for it the
   good of which the capacity still remained to it, which being responded
   to by the Father has revealed the Father's heart. Without taking the
   form of that cry, the mind that was in Christ would have failed by all
   its other outgoings to declare the Father's name.

   There is nothing scenic or dramatic in this. Were such its nature it
   would be valueless. It would be nothing, and could reveal nothing. But
   no feeling in the Son, no desire, no prayer, is other than what is
   natural and inevitable to holy love so placed. The response of the
   Father is in like manner a real response, and therefore the nature and
   character of the heart that responds is seen in the nature and
   character of that to which it responds. As that confession of man's sin
   is justly due, so the demand for it in God is real as well as His
   acceptance of it is gracious. As that intercession is a natural form of
   love in Him that intercedes, the response to that intercession is a
   natural form for the love addressed to take--its living and real
   outcoming. To say that what ascends to God from humanity has come from
   God, that God has Himself in the person of the Son furnished humanity
   with the pleading that would prevail with Him, that the life of Sonship
   is already in humanity antecedent to the atonement which it makes--this
   in no way affects the truth of the atonement as indeed the due and true
   expiation for sin, nor the truth of the grounds of the Intercessor's
   pleading as really the grounds on which the grace of God is extended to
   men.

   We may indeed go further back: we may contemplate the mere capacity of
   redemption that was in humanity as a cry,--a mute cry, but which still
   entered into the ear and heart of God; we may contemplate the gift of
   Christ as the divine answer to this cry,--but it is not the less true
   that when Christ, under our burden and working out our redemption,
   confesses before the Father the sin of man, and presents to the Father
   His own righteousness as the divine righteousness for man, and the
   Father in response grants to men remission of sins and eternal life,
   that confession which humanity could not have originated but which the
   Son of God has made in it and for it, and that righteousness which
   humanity could not itself present, but which the Son of God has
   presented in it and for it, are the grounds on which God really puts
   His own acting in the whole history of redemption.

   It is the tendency to deal with God as a fate, and with the
   accomplishment of the high designs of His grace for man simply as the
   coming to pass of predetermined events, which is the real source of our
   difficulty in regard to prayer as a law and power in the kingdom of
   God, whether we think of it contemplating its place in the history of
   our redemption as the intercession of Christ, or as an element in our
   own life of sonship through Christ. In consequence of that tendency,
   "asking things according to the will of God" comes to sound like asking
   God to do what He intended to do,--a manner of prayer for which we have
   no light,--as it is a manner of prayer, indeed, which would be felt to
   be superseded by that very light as to the future which would make it
   possible. But God is not revealed to our faith as a fate, neither is
   His will set before us as a decree of destiny. God is revealed to us as
   the living God, and His will as the desire and choice of a living
   heart, which presents to us, not the image or picture of a
   predetermined course of events, to the predestined flow of which our
   prayer is to be an Amen, but a moral and spiritual choice in relation
   to us His offspring, to which our prayer is to respond in what will be
   in us the cry of a moral and spiritual choice. That knowledge of the
   Father which the prayer of Christ implied,--the knowledge of the Son
   who dwelleth in the bosom of the Father, was not the knowledge of a
   certain future, predestined and sure to be accomplished, but was the
   knowledge of the unchanging will of the Father concerning man,--a will
   which in all rebellion is resisted, in all obedience of love is
   fulfilled. If we are able to see and realise this distinction, we shall
   see the dealing of the Son with the Father on our behalf as that
   response to the mind of the Father in relation to us, which in our
   participation in the spirit of the Son is to be continued and
   perpetuated in our own prayers. And, it seems to me, that these things
   mutually illustrate each other to us, I mean our own prayers in the
   spirit of sonship, and the great original intercession of the Son on
   behalf of all humanity which was to spread itself through humanity, and
   which we partake in as a part of the eternal life which we have in the
   Son of God. For that cry for things according to the Father's
   will,--that cry for holiness, and truth, and love, which is the cry of
   Christ's spirit in us, and which is not repressed or discouraged by the
   knowledge that it is according to the will of God, as if therefore it
   was superfluous, nay, is only quickened and sustained by that
   knowledge, may throw light to us upon the infinite intensity of that
   cry as in Christ on behalf of all humanity,--enabling us to understand
   that in Him it was infinitely intense just because of His perfect
   oneness of mind with the Father in regard to what He asked, and perfect
   knowledge of that will of the Father according to which the cry was.
   While, on the other hand, nothing is such a help against all temptation
   to deal with the living God as with a fate, and with His will as a
   decree,--which we are passively to allow to take its course, instead of
   putting forth that prayerful trust which is the necessary link between
   His will for us and its fulfilment in us,--as the believing meditation
   of the place which prayer had in the work of Christ in accomplishing
   our redemption.

   And it is not merely in order that we may not come short in our
   realisation of the large place which prayer must have in our personal
   religion, if, when we attempt to follow God as dear children, we would
   really walk in the footsteps of the Son of God, that it is so important
   that we should realise the part which the intercession of Christ has in
   the atonement. Our doing so is, I would venture to say, even more
   needed in reference to the nature of our prayers, and that we may be
   found really praying according to the will of God,--according to the
   light of the gospel,--according to the knowledge that the true
   worshippers worship in spirit and in truth, for that the Father seeketh
   such to worship Him. Small as the amount of prayer is, its usual
   character is a still sadder subject of thought than its small amount. I
   mean its being so much a dealing with God simply as a Sovereign Lord, a
   Governor, and Judge, and so little a dealing with Him as the Father of
   our spirits. There is much feeling that ''power belongeth to God
   alone," combined with the encouraging persuasion that ''to Him also
   belongeth mercy" moving to prayer, and sustaining prayer, which yet is
   not enlightened and exalted by the knowledge of God as a Father, and
   the apprehension of our true well being as all embraced in the sonship
   which we have in Christ. Reader, let me ask you, do you pray as a child
   of God whose first and nearest relationship is to God your
   Father,--whose most deeply felt interests are bound up in that
   relation,--in what lies within the circle of that relation contemplated
   in itself? do you pray as one to whom the mind of God towards you and
   your own mind towards Him are the most important elements of existence,
   and whose other interests in existence are as outer circles around this
   central interest,--so that you see yourself, and your family, and your
   friends, and your country, and your race, with the eyes, because with
   the heart, of one who "loves the Lord his God with all his heart, and
   mind, and soul, and strength?" Is this at least your ideal for
   yourself, what you are seeking to realise,--to realise for its own
   sake,--not for any consequences of it in time or eternity? for whatever
   the blessed consequences of its realisation will be, they shall be far,
   and for ever inferior and secondary to itself.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER X.

   THE ATONEMENT, AS ILLUSTRATED BY THE DETAIL OF THE SACRED NARRATIVE.

   REGARDING the atonement as the development of the life that was in
   Christ, I have now considered its nature in the light of that
   life,--and the unity of a life has, I trust, been felt to belong to the
   exposition offered. But the life of Christ had an external history, and
   took an outward form, from the successive circumstances in which our
   Lord was placed, from the manger to the cross, according to the divine
   ordering of his path. And while this history can only be understood in
   the light of that inward life of which it has been the outward form,
   the contemplation of the outward form must help our understanding of
   the inward life; and if the view taken of the nature of the atonement
   be the true view, must both confirm it and illustrate it.

   We are thus prepared to find the outward course of life appointed for
   the Son of God, as that in which He was to fulfil the purpose of doing
   the Father's will, determined by the divine wisdom with special
   reference to that purpose. Another condition, also, we expect to find
   fulfilled in the circumstances in which the Son is seen witnessing for
   the Father, viz., that they shall accord with the testimony of the
   Father to the Son. The witnessing of the Son for the Father would have
   manifestly been incomplete as to us without the Father's seal to it.
   But this sealing was an essential part of the divine counsel,--not only
   that outward testimony, however solemn and authoritative, which was in
   the words of the angel to Mary, the voice from heaven at the Lord's
   baptism by John, and again on the mount, but that also to which these
   special testimonies of the Father to the Son in humanity direct our
   minds, viz., that testimony of the Father to the Son in the Spirit
   which always is, and out of which all responsibility for faith in the
   Son of God arises, being that on which such faith must ultimately rest.
   With this testimony of the Father to the Son, as well as with the
   witnessing of the Son for the Father, the divine ordering of our Lord's
   path would necessarily accord; so that, however the aspect of that
   path, judged according to the flesh, might seem in contradiction to the
   words, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased," seen in the
   light of God it would be known to harmonise with that acknowledgment.
   What would accord with the Father's testimony to the Son must
   manifestly be one with what would accord with the Son's honouring of
   the Father in our sight; so that we have not really here two conditions
   to be fulfilled, but one only; nor does the need-be that there should
   be fitting scope for the manifestation of brotherhood in relation to
   men, add any new element, seeing the unity of sonship towards God and
   brotherhood towards men. But it is important that we approach the
   consideration of the course of our Lord's life, realising that we are
   to contemplate it in relation equally to the Father's acknowledgment of
   the Son, and to the Son's witnessing for the Father,--"No man knoweth
   who the Son is but the Father, and who the Father is but the Son, and
   he to whom the Son will reveal Him."

   This, therefore, is the aspect in which we are to contemplate the
   actual history of the work of redemption. We are to contemplate it as
   the Son's witnessing for the Father by the manifestation of sonship
   towards

   God and brotherhood towards men, in circumstances which divine wisdom
   ordained with reference to the perfection of that manifestation, and
   which we are to see in the light of the Father's testimony to the Son.

   As our Lord "increased in wisdom and in stature," so the elements of
   the atonement gradually developed themselves with the gradual
   development of His humanity, and corresponding development of the
   eternal life in His humanity. The sonship in Him was always perfect
   sonship. At no one moment could He have said more truly than at
   another, "The Son doeth nothing of Himself; but whatsoever things the
   Father doeth, the same doeth the Son likewise." But submitting at once,
   both to the Father's inward guidance, "opening His ear as the learner,
   morning by morning," and to His outward guidance, "not hiding His face
   from shame and spitting," Christ's inward life of love to His Father
   and love to His brethren was constantly acted upon by the circumstances
   appointed for Him, receiving its perfect development through them: so
   that, tracing our Lord's life as thus a visible contact with men, while
   an invisible abiding in the bosom of the Father, and endeavouring to
   realise the bearing and operation of outward things upon His inward
   life, we may expect the light of the atonement to shine forth to us
   with increased clearness, as the light of that life which is the light
   of men.

   We are not told much of the course of our Lord's life before He entered
   on His public ministry; we may say we have its general character in the
   words. He "increased in wisdom and in stature, and in favour with God
   and man." His doing of the Father's will, His following God as a dear
   child, had then that attraction in the eyes of men, which goodness
   often has, while it commends itself to men's consciences without making
   any positive demand upon themselves. And this record concerning our
   Lord,--that at this time, and while His life was to men's eyes the
   simple filling of His place in relation to Joseph and Mary, and His
   kindred and neighbours, according to the perfect form of childhood and
   youth in a young Hebrew, He had the acknowledgment of human
   favour,--should put us on our guard against hastily concluding that the
   favour of men may not even now, in certain circumstances, follow the
   favour of God.

   When, however, our Lord entered on His public ministry, and the words
   which He spake, and the miracles which He wrought, constrained men to
   attend to and consider the demand which He made for His Father, and the
   condemnation on men which that righteous demand implied,--we see the
   darkness soon disturbed by the light, and beginning to manifest its
   enmity to the light. Yet neither was this universal--and not only did
   some attach themselves to Him as immediate disciples and followers, but
   many more rejoiced in His teaching; and the response which His
   testimony had in their hearts, commanded an outward acknowledgment of
   Him, which indeed was so general and so strong, that those in whom
   enmity was most moved, were restrained as to the manifestation of their
   ill will by "the fear of the people." How superficial the hearing was
   with which the great multitudes that followed Him listened to His
   words, we know, both from His own care to warn them of the cost of
   discipleship, (Luke xiv. 25-33,) which He saw they were not counting,
   and from the subsequent history of that favour, when the cry "Hosannah
   to the Son of David" so soon gave place to the cry, "Crucify Him,
   crucify Him." But doubtless between those who, as Peter says of himself
   and the rest, "forsook all and followed Him," and those who early set
   themselves against Him, knowing that His word condemned them, and that
   the acceptance of His teaching with the people would be the subverting
   of their own consequence and influence, there were many shades of
   feeling,--the internal witness in men's hearts to the outward word of
   Him who spake as never man spake, being dealt with in many different
   measures of reverence and rebellion. On the whole, however, for a time,
   the power of evil came forth but in measure; and though He could early
   say, "I honour my Father, and ye dishonour me," and though so much of
   even what was of another character was to Him who knew what was in man,
   but a shew of good which did not deceive Him, yet it was but gradually
   and towards the close, that He had to taste in all its bitterness that
   enmity to God to which He was exposing Himself in coming to men in His
   Father's name. The public ministry of the Lord, with its mixed
   character of favour and dishonour, of loud acclamations of those who at
   the least believed Him to be a teacher sent from God, and secret
   machinations of enemies whose malice could not calculate enough on
   sympathy to make its expression safe, was ordered of God to continue
   for a time; and "no man could lay hands on Him, for His hour was not
   yet come."

   It was however but a brief time, much briefer than the previous period
   of private life, in which the favour of men was conjoined with the
   favour of God; and it was followed by another distinctly marked period,
   of which the character is the patient endurance of all the full and
   perfected development of the enmity, which the faithfulness of the
   previous testimony for the Father's name had awakened. This last is
   much the briefest division of our Lord's life on earth; and its darkest
   portion is to be measured by days, or rather by hours: as if He who
   spared not His own Son, but gave Him to the death for us, yet spared
   Him as much as possible, making the bitterest portion the briefest.

   We cannot doubt the importance of that portion of the fulfilment of the
   purpose, "Lo I come to do thy will," which constitutes the private life
   of our Lord, antecedent to His entering upon His public ministry. The
   scantiness of the record is no reason for doing so. We know how that
   scantiness has been attempted to be compensated by fictitious
   narratives, intended to meet the natural desire to know more of what
   was so large a proportion of our Lord's whole life on earth. But this
   has been a part of the error, of not seeing that that life itself, and
   that life as it abides in His being who lived it, and not the mere
   written record of that life, is our unsearchable riches which we have
   in Christ. When the promise is fulfilled to us, that the Comforter
   would take of that which is Christ's, and shew it unto us, this acting
   of the Comforter is not limited to what is recorded. He takes from the
   treasures of wisdom and knowledge, stored up for all humanity in the
   humanity of the Son of God,--revealing the life of Him who "was in all
   points tempted like as we are, yet without sin," in its relation to our
   individual need, with that minuteness of application of which that
   life, thus revealed to us in the Spirit, is capable, but of which no
   written record could be capable. How many a little child, remembering
   that Jesus was once a little child, and grew in wisdom, and in stature,
   and in favour with God and man, and looking to Him for help according
   to the need felt in seeking to follow God as a dear child, and be in
   obedience to those related to him as Joseph and Mary were to the child
   Jesus, has found his trust met, and felt no want of "a gospel of the
   infancy of Jesus." Let the divine favour, testified as resting upon
   that first portion of our Lord's life, sanctify to our hopes private
   life,--the large proportion of the life of all, the whole of the life
   of most; and let us see that on which that favour rested, as a part of
   the eternal life given to us in the Son of God, which is to be God's
   glory in us in private life, a store from which to receive all that
   pertains to life and godliness as we are individual Christians,--as
   truly as His life as a preacher of the kingdom of God, is that to a
   special participation in which those who are called in this to walk in
   His steps, are to look,--as truly as His witnessing before Pontius
   Pilate a good confession, is for strength according to their need, to
   those who are called to suffer as martyrs for His name.

   As to our Lord's personal ministry, its distinguishing character is to
   be seen in this, that that ministry was the outcoming of the life of
   sonship. By this character of a life was His ministry distinguished
   from that of all who were only "teachers sent from God." In this
   respect was it that He spake as never man spake. What He spake, as what
   He did, was a part of what He was. His words were spirit and life, and
   not a mere testimony concerning life. As now in the inner man of our
   being, when the Son of God is known as present in us claiming lordship
   over our spirits, there is a testimony of the Father to the Son in the
   Spirit, which in calling Jesus Lord we are welcoming, so we cannot
   doubt that then in Judea the man Jesus, in His living witnessing as the
   Son for the Father, had a testimony of the Father borne to Him, which
   men heard according as they welcomed the teaching of God. This
   testimony was a testimony to what He was, to the life that was shining
   forth in His deeds and words. And the unconscious sense of this has
   manifestly gone beyond the intelligent recognition of it; so that we
   find men unable to resist the authority and power with which He spake,
   even though not beholding, as the disciple did, ''His glory as the
   glory of the Only-begotten of the Father."

   Unless we realise this, and that that was presented to men's faith, if
   they could receive it, which pertained to one who could say, in
   reference to His own conscious life, "I am the light of the world," we
   cannot enter into that immediate presenting to men of what He Himself
   was as the Gospel, which we have seen in the words, "Come unto me, all
   ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest . . .
   Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest
   unto your souls." And in that testimony as to who are "blessed," with
   which the discourse which we call the Sermon on the Mount opens, we are
   to recognise the same thing. All these declarations as to the
   blessedness of the several conditions of spirit which our Lord there
   specifies, are rays of the light of the life that was in Him; and will
   be such to us, being heard as utterances of that life,--utterances of
   Christ's own consciousness in humanity, a part of His confessing the
   Father before men, being testimonies in humanity to the blessedness of
   sonship in doing the Father's will.

   Accordingly the whole discourse keeps the Father before us. The
   foundation of every counsel is our filial relation to God. All is in
   harmony with the prayer which He teaches, putting the words, ''Our
   Father," in our lips, and adding, as the first petitions which we are
   to present, the expression of an interest in the Father's "name" and
   "kingdom" and "will,"--an interest which, if these petitions are to
   proceed from unfeigned lips, must imply our participation in that life
   of sonship which is presented to us in Him who teaches us so to pray.

   Nor are we to leave out of accont in contemplating our Lord's ministry
   as giving glory to the

   Father in being manifested sonship, that not only was this in our
   nature and in our circumstances, but that the consciousness of its
   being so, and the full knowledge of the amount of the demand made on us
   when called to learn of Him, is distinctly expressed,--the knowledge
   that to call on us to follow Him, is to call upon us to take up the
   cross. When we in very truth betake ourselves to Him as to that
   high-priest who is "touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and
   was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin," and who "in
   that He Himself hath suffered, being tempted, is able to succour us
   when we are tempted," we then learn to value the tone of full conscious
   entering into the amount of the demand which He makes upon men in
   calling upon them to hate their life in this world, which pervades our
   Lord's teaching equally with the consciousness of being Himself living
   that life in the Father's favour which He is commending.

   But that life of which our Lord's ministry was thus the living
   outcoming, in the consciousness of which He testified who are blessed,
   in the consciousness of which He declared to the weary and heavy laden
   what is the true rest,--speaking to us also in all this as our very
   brother,--that life needed, in order to its perfect development, as the
   light of life to us, to have the depth of its root in God--its power to
   overcome the world--the nature of its strength and victory--the weight
   of the cross which it bore in suffering flesh--revealed, as even the
   living teaching of the Lord's ministry did not reveal it. Therefore was
   that hour and power of darkness permitted which the closing period of
   our Lord's course presents, in which sonship towards the Father and
   brotherhood towards man have had their nature manifested and their
   power displayed to the utmost.

   As the time drew near, the Lord prepared the disciples for this hour
   and power of darkness. "And Jesus, going up to Jerusalem, took the
   twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them, Behold, we go up
   to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief
   priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn Him to death, and
   shall deliver Him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to
   crucify Him; and the third day He shall rise again." (Matt. xx. 17, 18,
   19.) His own feelings in looking forward to what, as to its outward
   form, He thus foretold, were such as to impress their minds with the
   most solemn anticipations, and His words then, so far as they are
   recorded, remain to us a portion of Scripture on which we meditate as
   bringing us near to a region of feeling into which we scarcely dare to
   venture: and yet these expressions of mental agony are recorded for our
   instruction as belonging to that life of Christ which is the light of
   life to us.

   "I have a baptism to be baptised with; and how am I straitened till it
   be accomplished," Luke xii. 50. "Now is my soul troubled; save me from
   this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify
   thy name," John xii. 27. And even after the conclusion which the words
   "For this cause came I to this hour" seem to express, when the awful
   hour was close at hand, it again became the subject of earnest pleading
   with the Father,--pleading, the earnestness of which, while it reveals
   to us the measure of the apprehended bitterness of the cup, and terror
   of the hour to which it refers, makes a demand upon our faith as to the
   reality of life which was in our Lord's prayers, and how truly, in
   dealing with the Father, He dealt with a living will and heart, and not
   with a fate, which blessed are those who are able truly and fully to
   respond to. "And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane: and
   He saith to His disciples, Sit ye. here, while I shall pray. And He
   taketh with Him Peter and James and John, and began to be sore amazed,
   and to be very heavy; and saith unto them. My soul is exceeding
   sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here, and watch. And He went forward a
   little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible,
   the hour might pass from Him. And He said, Abba, Father, all things are
   possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I
   will, but what thou wilt." Mark xiv. 33-36. ''And being in an agony He
   prayed more earnestly: and His sweat was as it were great drops of
   blood falling down to the ground." Luke xxii. 44.

   In this awfully intense prayer we have to mark its alternative nature,
   and that the latter part was as truly prayer as the former: the former
   uttering the true and natural desire to which He was conscious as
   contemplating that which was before Him in the weakness and capacity of
   suffering proper to suffering flesh; the latter uttering the desire of
   the spirit of sonship, being that which was deepest, and to which the
   other, while consciously realised, was perfectly subordinated.

   After being offered the third time, our Lord's prayer was answered, and
   the mind of the Father, which was the response to His cry, was revealed
   to Him in the Spirit, He was not to be spared the dreaded hour. The cup
   was not to pass from Him; and therefore, in that truth of sonship in
   which He had said, ''Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt," the
   Father's will was welcomed, the bitter cup was received from the
   Father's hand as the Father's hand, and in the strength of sonship the
   Lord drank it. "And He cometh the third time, and saith unto them,
   Sleep on now, and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come;
   behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. And
   immediately, while He yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and
   with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief
   priests and the scribes and the elders." Mark xiv. 41, 43. "Then Simon
   Peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high priest's servant, and
   cut off his right ear. Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword
   into the sheath: the cup which my Father hath given me to drink, shall
   I not drink it?" To those who had come with Judas He said, "When I was
   daily with you in the temple, ye stretched forth no hands against me:
   but this is your hour, and the power of darkness.'' Luke xxii. 53.

   The precise point of time at which the anticipated hour and power of
   darkness had its commencement is thus clearly indicated,--the moment in
   which the cup, in reference to which He had prayed, was put into our
   Lord's hand--the moment at which the baptism began, as to which He was
   straitened until it should be accomplished. And I ask attention to
   this, because the record clearly separates between the actual
   experience which these expressions, "hour,"--"cup,"--"baptism," refer
   to, and the agony in the garden, in which that experience was only
   anticipated, being still the subject of the prayer, if it were
   possible, that it should not be, as well as of the prayer that if the
   Father so willed, it should be.

   The history of the hour and power of darkness, now come, follows, and
   is given with a fulness of detail commensurate with its importance;
   while it is widely separated from all recorded suffering of man from
   man by the preternatural circumstances that accompanied it;
   circumstances which, in their awfulness, accorded with that relation
   which the sufferings of the sufferer bore to the sin of man; yet which,
   in their connexion with what was visible of Christ's bearing under His
   sufferings, had that character impressed upon them which drew from the
   Roman centurion the acknowledgment, "Truly this was the Son of God."
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER XI.

   HOW WE ARE TO CONCEIVE OF THE SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST, DURING THAT CLOSING
   PERIOD OF WHICH SUFFERING WAS THE DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER.

   THE sufferings of Christ during the hour and power of darkness have
   been dealt with in two quite opposite ways.

   I. They have been regarded in their simply physical aspect; and aid to
   the imagination and the heart in realising their terrible amount has
   been eagerly sought in pictured representations or picturing words; and
   thus a lively feeling of the pain endured by our blessed Lord, under
   the hands of wicked men, has been cherished as a help in measuring the
   evil of our sins and our obligations to the Saviour. I am not afraid to
   regard all that was attained of knowledge of the sufferings of Christ
   in this way as only a knowing Christ after the flesh, and therefore
   what had no virtue to accomplish any spiritual development in men,--no
   virtue to impart a true knowledge of sin, or to raise the spirits of
   men into the light of what our sins are in the sight of God,--what they
   are to the heart of God. Feelings of a strong and solemn, as well as
   tender character, have, doubtless, been thus cherished; and, doubtless,
   the element of gratitude has been present: yet there was not, for there
   could not be, in images of physical suffering anything of the nature of
   spiritual light,--however such light may have been present along with
   them, being received otherwise.

   II. But there has been manifested also, and this especially recently, a
   tendency to deal with the detailed sufferings of Christ, as these were
   endured at the hands of wicked men, in the quite opposite way of making
   as little account of them as possible; I do not mean denying their
   reality,--denying that our Lord's flesh was suffering flesh--but rashly
   admitting the justness of a comparison of them with other cases of
   suffering inflicted by man on man.

   Of such other cases it is not difficult to find many recorded that
   would bear the comparison; cases in which the cruellest tortures have
   been submitted to with such fortitude and patience of endurance as, if
   this way of viewing the subject had been admissible, would excuse the
   sneer of the infidel. Indeed, dealing with the sufferings of the
   Saviour on this principle, those who have done so have escaped from
   justifying that infidel sneer only by referring the language of our
   Lord, in relation to the cup given Him to drink, to an apprehension of
   what the cup contained, altogether unrelated to His being delivered
   into the hands of sinful men. Nay, because of its seeming to shut us up
   to the view which they have taken of what that cup contained, viz.,
   that it was filled with the wrath of God, the concession has been
   willingly made of the alleged disproportion between our Lord's agony in
   the garden of Gethsemane, in looking forward to the coming hour and
   power of darkness, and those sufferings which the history of that hour
   records.

   And here let me say that I entirely feel that our Lord's physical
   sufferings viewed simply as physical sufferings, and without relation
   to the mind that was in the sufferer, could not adequately explain the
   awful intensity of the feelings which accompanied His prayer in the
   garden of Gethsemane. But, on the other hand, apart altogether from the
   insuperable objection that presents itself on other grounds to the
   conception that the cup which was the subject of Christ's prayer
   contained the Father's wrath, it seems impossible, without putting
   aside the record, not to connect that cup with these minutely detailed
   sufferings, foretold, as they had been, to the disciples on the way up
   to Jerusalem, and having their commencement immediately after the
   answer of His prayer in the garden was revealed to the Lord; being
   also, as we have seen, met and submitted to by Him, with words which
   identified them with the cup as to which He had prayed.

   While John records the words already quoted as addressed to Peter, "The
   cup which my Father gives me to drink shall I not drink it." Matthew
   gives these--"Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and He
   shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?" words
   which, as well as all else, suggest, not a wrath coming forth from the
   Father, but a power of evil which the Father permitted to have its
   course. We cannot indeed doubt what the impression on the disciples as
   to that to which their Lord was subjected, must have been; and
   accordingly, after our Lord's resurrection, in that interview of
   touching tenderness with the two disciples on the way to Emmaus, when
   He joined Himself to them and said, "What manner of communications are
   these which ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?"--their
   sad thoughts were "concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet
   mighty in deed and word before God and all the people: and how the
   chief priests and our rulers delivered Him to death, and have crucified
   Him." On these events were their minds going back, and on these events
   did He give them light. "O fools, and slow of heart to believe all the
   prophets have spoken: ought not Christ to have suffered these things,
   and to enter into His glory? And beginning at Moses and all the
   prophets,

   He expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
   Himself." Luke xxiv. 17, 19, 20, 25, 26, 27.

   But both the errors now noticed,--the minute dwelling on the physical
   suffering as such, on the one hand, and on the other hand, the turning
   away from it altogether, for the explanation of the intensity of our
   Lord's agony in the garden, and seeking that explanation in the
   assumption that the wrath of the Father was the bitterness of the cup
   given to the Son,--both these very opposite errors have alike
   originated in the root error of regarding our Lord's sufferings as
   penal, and so being occupied with their aspect as sufferings merely,
   when they were truly a moral and spiritual sacrifice, to which the
   sufferings were related only as involved in the fulness and perfection
   of the sacrifice.

   In St. Matthew xvi. 21, we have the record of an intimation to the
   disciples of the sufferings to which the Lord looked forward, earlier
   than that quoted above. And both the outburst of natural feeling in
   Peter at the thought of his Master s suffering such things, and our
   Lord's rebuke, that in so feeling he savoured not the things that be of
   God, but the things that be of men, connected with the teaching that is
   immediately added,--"Then said Jesus unto them, If any man will come
   after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me:
   for whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose
   his life for my sake shall find it"--illustrate to us the relation of
   the sufferings foretold to the life which the Son of God was presenting
   to the faith of the disciples, and to the fellowship of which He sought
   to raise their desires and their hopes.

   The later occasion of His speaking of His anticipated sufferings to His
   disciples already quoted, is also marked by an incident which is in its
   teaching to us entirely to the same effect, I mean the request of the
   two sons of Zebedee. They, with Peter, were the three privileged to be
   present with our Lord during His agony of prayer in the garden; as they
   had also been to be with Him on the Mount of Transfiguration, when, "as
   He prayed, the fashion of His countenance was altered, and His raiment
   was white and glistering. And behold there talked with Him two men,
   which were Moses and Elias, who appeared in glory, and spake of His
   decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem." Whether the scene on
   the Mount, along with the words with which their Lord's intimation of
   His approaching suffering, had concluded,---" And the third day He
   shall rise again,"--though not fully understood, had carried their
   thoughts at once beyond the sufferings to the glory that should follow,
   and so moved the desire which the request to "sit the one on His right
   hand, the other on His left in His kingdom," expressed, we know not;
   but nothing can be more conclusive as to the relation --the abiding
   relation of the sufferings which the Lord foretold, to the development
   of the life that was in Him, than His reply to this request. First, in
   accordance with the awful impression of what He looked forward to,
   which it was His intention to convey. He says,--''Ye know not what ye
   ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be
   baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" But when they
   reply, "We are able," He adds, "Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be
   baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with:" plainly preparing
   them for that fellowship in His anticipated sufferings which His words
   on the former occasion, as to the necessity of "bearing His cross," had
   equally implied.

   For, indeed, although this period of which the distinctive character is
   suffering in connexion with a permitted hour and power of darkness, is
   so clearly marked off to us; yet had the disciples been, as we have
   seen, before this time taught to see their Lord as bearing the cross,
   and to understand that they were called to take up the cross and follow
   Him. And now, when they were taught to associate a deeper meaning than
   it had yet to them, with their Lord's cross, it was still as that cross
   which they would have themselves to bear in following their Lord, that
   they were to contemplate it.

   The continuity of the life of sonship, therefore, is unbroken in the
   transition to this third and last period, the character of the Father's
   dealing with the Son as what related to the development of that life,
   is unchanged, and the interest of the progress of that development to
   us as the development of the life given to us in the Son of God, and
   which we are ourselves to partake in, is unaltered. We are to meditate
   on the details of our Lord's sufferings with that personal reference to
   ourselves, and, therefore, with that expectation of light as to their
   nature, which is justified by the words, "Ye shall drink indeed of my
   cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with." If we
   ponder these words well, they will indeed give a peculiar character to
   our consideration of the cup given the Son of God to drink; and
   realising in their light something of the depth of our calling as a
   call to fellowship in Christ's sufferings,--as in the light of the
   transfiguration we may realise something of the high hope set before
   us,--we shall, in our ignorance of the forms of trial which our
   Father's love may yet take in accomplishing in us the good pleasure of
   His goodness, feel it needful to fall back, as we may peacefully do, on
   the faith that " the height and the depth and the breadth and the
   length of the love of God in Christ passeth knowledge; "for that its
   end is, that we may be "filled with the fulness of God."

   The faithfulness of our Lord's personal ministry and the unclouded
   light of His life, had been already the realisation in humanity of a
   loving trust in the Father, and a forgiveness towards men, which were a
   victory of sonship and brotherhood in the sight of God of great price.
   But the extent to which sonship could trust the Father, the extent to
   which the true brother could exercise forgiving love, had to be further
   manifested,--or, rather, this life of love had to be further developed;
   and if we enter into the reason for Christ's suffering at all through
   being exposed to the enmity of the carnal mind to God, instead of being
   protected from its malice by "twelve legions of angels," we can see how
   it should please the Father to bruise Him, and put the Son of His love
   to grief, such as the restraint put upon the power of the wicked up to
   a certain point had not permitted. We can see how it was fit that He
   should be exposed to suffer at the hands of wicked men, what would be a
   measure at once of man's rejection of God, "This is the Son, let us
   kill Him, and the inheritance shall be ours," and of the forgiving love
   of Him who could die for His enemies; and we can see how as a revealing
   of the Father this must take place in the power of the life of sonship,
   that is to say, in the strength of the Son's conscious oneness of mind
   with the Father, in the strength of the life which is in the Father's
   favour.

   Therefore, in following the path of the Son as the Father orders it,
   and keeping our ear open to the voice which says, "This is my beloved
   Son," we can, without feeling it a contradiction to that voice,
   contemplate the coming to the Son of "the hour and power of darkness."

   17--2

   But we should feel very differently if called to believe in any
   outcoming of the Father's mind towards the Son, or any aspect of His
   countenance towards Him that did not accord with the words, "This is my
   beloved Son." For this we should feel quite unprepared. When Satan was
   permitted to try Job, it was with this reservation, "but save his
   life." In our Lord's case, it is the higher life, the life in the
   Father's favour, that we are prepared to see untouched. That He should
   die, by the grace of God tasting death for every man,--so dying as
   through death to destroy him who had the power of death, that is the
   devil, we can understand, seeing in this the triumph of the eternal
   life. Whatever can have been contained in the permission of an hour and
   power of darkness, we can believe to have entered into the divine
   counsel, because anything that these words can express could only prove
   the might of the eternal life;--for nothing simply permitted--nothing
   external to God Himself--nothing that was not in the divine aspect
   towards Christ, could reach that life to touch it as a life in God's
   favour, or suspend its flow from God. But the wrath of God as coming
   forth towards Christ, would be indeed the touching of that very life in
   the Father's favour, whose excellence and might was to be proved at so
   great a cost. Accordingly we have seen that it was as a cup from the
   Father's hand that Christ received the cup given Him to drink, and that
   the unbroken sense of the Father's favour was expressed in the rebuke
   to the unbelieving, though affectionate zeal of Peter, "Thinkest thou
   that I cannot now pray to my Father, and He shall presently give me
   twelve legions of angels?" And, most conclusive of all, we have the
   revelation of the nature of the strength in which the anticipated trial
   was met, and in which doubtless it was victoriously borne, in the
   express words of our Lord in reference to one most bitter element of
   its bitterness,--"Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye
   shall be scattered every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: and
   yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me."

   We can understand, then, the permission of an hour and power of
   darkness, as what could only prove the might of the eternal life
   presented to our faith in the Son of God. We do not so easily
   understand the measure of the proof which such an hour was fitted to
   be. And it is here that the error and shortcoming have been, which have
   permitted the comparison of our Lord's sufferings during the hour and
   power of darkness, with the ordinary case of man's suffering at the
   hands of man.

   The actual treatment to which our Lord was subjected is but one of two
   elements in His suffering; and it has surely been a grave error to
   leave the other element, which, is indeed, the important element, out
   of account. We may find cases where the physical infliction and the
   indignities offered have been as great or greater, but how shall we
   calculate the infinite difference that the mind in which Christ
   suffered has made? That mind, indeed, made Him equal to what He had to
   bear, for its might was the might of the eternal life which is in God's
   favour; but this great might was not the might of mere power, nor was
   it that the life of sonship imparted an insensibility to His humanity,
   or that because of the light of God which belonged to it, it made all
   that He had to encounter to be to Him as nothing. On the contrary, the
   very opposite of all this was the truth. It was not a might of power at
   all, but the might of realised perfect weakness, whose only strength
   was the strength of faith. It was not a bearing of the things that came
   upon Him in insensibility. The most tender sensitiveness proper to
   humanity, as possessed and lived in in the truth of humanity, was there
   open to all that came to wound it. It was not that in the light of God,
   and in the knowledge that He came from God and went to God, there was a
   raising of the Lord above His circumstances, making them to Him as
   nothing. In the light of God, which is the light of love, all these
   circumstances as they were indeed the form taken by an hour and power
   of darkness had their true import and magnitude, and awful substance of
   sin and enmity as these are estimated by the divine love. In truth, we
   are to judge that according as was the love which, in the strength of
   love to God and man, was able to drink that cup, so was the bitterness
   of that cup. And that according to the measure of the true sense and
   consciousness of humanity, in Christ, was the sensibility to that
   bitterness, the capacity of suffering through it. And that according to
   the absolute felt weakness of the flesh to which no strength at all
   remained, was the need of sustaining faith, as the need of one
   believing in "the dust of death."

   If we are not turned away from meditating on this subject in the light
   of the life itself which we are seeing tried and triumphing, and do not
   unwisely occupy ourselves with the record of physical sufferings, as if
   we were called on to look at what could be known according to the
   flesh,--until the unsatisfactory result cast us upon the opposite error
   of supposing that our Lord's agony in the garden could not really have
   its explanation in His anticipation of what the hour and power of
   darkness would be to Him,--we shall find even our ordinary experience
   of human suffering as connected with man's inhumanity to man, giving a
   right direction to our thoughts.

   We are familiar with the fact, that unkindness affects quite
   differently a meek, gentle, loving spirit, and a proud, independent,
   self-relying spirit. The comparative ease with which some men encounter
   all manner of ungracious and unbrotherly treatment at the hands of
   others in the conflict of life, is because they meet pride and
   unbrotherliness in the strength of pride and unbrotherliness. This too
   often passes for manliness;--and it would be unjust to say that it may
   not often be combined with, and upheld by, the instinctive feeling of
   manhood, and of what is due to oneself. But assuredly the state of
   mind, as a whole, tends to make the apparent victory not so much a
   victory as an insensibility. The evil treatment experienced does not
   really, in these cases, cause the pain it would cause to that
   brotherliness in which it should be met, and which, being recognised,
   has always a witness in men's consciences as the right and highest way
   of meeting injuries; though the pride that hinders a man from feeling
   it himself, makes him slow to give another credit for it. But it is
   surely not difficult to see that, if our feeling of what is due to
   ourselves be free from pride, and only commensurate with our feeling of
   the love due from us to others,--if our sense of manhood be in harmony
   with the true and pure feeling of the oneness of all flesh, and if the
   claim of others on love from us be felt to be altogether untouched by
   failure in love on their part,--being discharged by us in the reality
   of a love that, notwithstanding such failure, loves them still,--loves
   them as we love ourselves, making their sin our burden, as well as also
   their unkindness to be felt as the disappointing response of hatred to
   love; then must unkindness be to us, so minded, a suffering and trial
   just commensurate with the measure of the unkindness to which we are
   subjected, on the one hand, and the measure of this life of love in us,
   on the other.

   But it is not alone the amount of suffering implied in the treatment to
   which our Lord was subjected, that we must fail to estimate aright,
   unless we see that suffering in the light of the life that was in Him.
   It is still more as to the nature of that suffering that we shall err.
   This we feel the moment we turn from contemplating it as physical
   infliction on the part of men, and physical endurance on the part of
   Christ, to contemplate it in its spiritual aspect as the form of the
   response of enmity to love.

   There is surely very special instruction for us here in the fact that
   shame--indignity--is so marked a character of the injuries inflicted on
   Christ. I need not illustrate this point. The Apostle speaks of "the
   shame of the cross," as if the great victory through the faith of the
   joy set before our Lord was victory over that shame: and, both in the
   historical narrative, and in the related Psalms, indignity and
   contumely, that is to say, all that would most touch that life which
   man has in the favour of man, and which strikes more deeply than
   physical infliction, because it goes deeper than the body,--wounding
   the spirit,--is the most distinguishing feature of the evil use made by
   sinful men of the power that they received over the Son of God when He
   was betrayed into the hands of sinners.

   All along, the relation of the cross to shame was ever present to our
   Lord's mind. It is against the consequences of being "ashamed of Him
   and of His words," as the opposite of "confessing Him before men," that
   His warnings are given. He knew in His own honouring of the Father as
   bringing upon Him, as its consequence, dishonour to Himself from men,
   the shame of which He spake, according to the words,

   ''The reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell upon me."

   How related the shame, against which He warned men; was to their laying
   down their life in this world, so that, being content to bear it, was
   identical with being contented to lay down that life, our Lord plainly
   declares, when preparing men for the sacrifice that would be implied in
   becoming His disciples. So the desire of the honour which is the
   correlative of that shame, is represented by Him as hindering the faith
   to which He called men,--"How can ye believe, which receive honour one
   of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God only?" (John
   v. 44.)

   What are we taught by all this in relation to the cup of suffering
   which our Lord received from His Father's hand? For the shame that was
   an ingredient in that cup would not have the place it has if it were
   not peculiarly the occasion of suffering to the suffering Saviour.

   Here we feel that, notwithstanding all our great, our sinful bondage,
   to what others think of us, a bondage of which the measure is never
   known until we attempt to assert our freedom, as the strength of an
   iron fetter is not known until the attempt is made to break it, still
   we little realise what the shame to which our Lord was subjected was to
   His Spirit. And this is the case partly because our own bondage in this
   matter, however real, and however excused by us to ourselves because of
   its universality all around us, never has the sanction of conscience,
   never is what we can confess before God, or confess to ourselves
   without a certain sense of degradation. How different the feeling with
   which a man says, "I must do as others do," from that with which he
   says, "This is the will of God. I must do it." The former obedience is,
   I say, felt to be a degradation, even while it is rendered, while the
   latter, being rendered, is felt to exalt and ennoble. But because of
   the sinful and polluted form of that reference to the thoughts of
   others regarding us, to which we are conscious in ourselves, we have
   the more difficulty in entering into "the shame of the cross" as an
   element in Christ's sufferings. And yet the importance assigned to it
   is, as I have said, undeniable.

   I have already had occasion to quote that which is said in reference to
   our Lord's early life at Nazareth, that He grew in favour with God and
   man. In the book of Proverbs iii. 4, the virtues commended are
   commended with this promise annexed, "So shalt thou find favour and
   good understanding in the sight of God and man." The first and great
   commandment is, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart,
   and mind, and soul, and strength," and the second is like unto it,
   "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." As our life in God's favour
   is related to the first commandment, and our capacity of that life is
   the preparation of our being for our having that command addressed to
   so is there a life like unto that life related to the second
   commandment, having also preparation made for it in the constitution of
   humanity, viz., a life in man's favour,--a life like, I say, to the
   life which is in God's favour, in that it is a life in favour, i.e., a
   life not in possessions, but in the feelings of a heart towards us. As,
   then, it is proper to the life of sonship,--the perfect love to God as
   the Father of our spirits,--to desire His favour, and know that favour
   as the light of life, so it is proper to the life of brotherhood, which
   is the perfect love to our neighbour, to desire our brother's favour,
   to desire that living oneness with Him which is only possible in unity
   of Spirit, such as ''favour," if a spiritual reality, implies.
   Therefore our

   Lord, the true brother of every man, desired this response of heart
   from every man; and the refusal of it, the giving of contempt instead
   of favour, and scorn instead of that accord of true brotherhood, which
   would have esteemed Him, as was due to Him, as "the chief among ten
   thousand, and altogether lovely," was as a death to that life which
   desired the favour thus denied.

   No doubt, as it was, that favour was withheld on grounds that quite
   strengthened the Son of God, to submit to the loss of it. He "came in
   His Father's name, and they received Him not." No doubt it was thus
   peculiarly an ingredient in His bitter cup, which He was enabled to
   drink in the strength of sonship; but it was not the less on that
   account bitter to the heart of perfect brotherhood. He was able to bear
   the loss of the life that is in man's favour, in the strength of the
   higher life which is in the Father's favour. But in itself that loss
   was bitter in proportion to the pure capacity of life in brotherhood,
   which was in Him.

   God is not the author of confusion, but of order. In giving us two
   commandments, He has not placed us under two masters. The first
   commandment is absolute, and its requirements reach to the whole extent
   and circle of our being, leaving nothing to the man that it does not
   claim for God; the second our Lord says is like unto it, and, coming
   after so extensive a first commandment, would be what we could not meet
   with obedience, had not "likeness" amounted to such a relation to the
   first, as that obedience to the second commandment must flow out of
   obedience to the first. Therefore, as the strength to obey the second
   commandment must be in that love to God which is the obeying of the
   first commandment, when the obedience of that second commandment is not
   followed by its due response from those in relation to whom it is
   fulfilled, the consciousness that pertains to obeying the first
   commandment must still sustain the spirit. But that second commandment
   has not been really obeyed, the love it calls for has not been truly
   cherished, unless the refusal of that due response, and the return of
   enmity for love in that most trying form of scorn and contempt, be
   painful. And painful it must be in the measure of the love that is thus
   put to grief.

   As to our fleshly experience in this matter,--our experience of life in
   the favour of others,--it is but too clear, that, though the desire of
   that favour has a true root in humanity, yet not love, but selfishness,
   renders that desire the occasion of the bondage to which we are
   conscious. But in Christ's case the love to men to which men made so
   evil a response--that very love itself was what demanded that coming to
   them in His Father's name because of which they refused Him. His so
   coming to them was true love to them, as well as faithfulness to His
   Father,--the true brotherhood, which, while seeking men's favour, seeks
   their good still more than their favour. Therefore, if we would
   understand the forgiveness which, by giving occasion for its exercise,
   our Lord's sufferings during the hour and power of darkness developed
   in Him, we must see that His love was forgiving injuries which were, in
   the strictest sense, injuries against itself,--injuries sustained by
   the love as love, and not merely touching Him against whom they were
   directed in some more outward and lower part of His being, some
   inferior capacity of suffering.

   But still more, even the element in our Lord's sufferings that is most
   purely physical, is not what our own physical experiences prepare us to
   understand. There is no doubt that it was part of the perfect truth of
   our Lord's consciousness in humanity, to have felt what was physical in
   His suffering with a pure and simple sense of what it was in itself;
   which we in suffering physical pain escape in various ways, either in
   the way of nerving ourselves to bear, or in the way of forcibly turning
   our minds from the pain to other considerations. Nor does our Father
   see it necessary, even when He subjects us to physical suffering, to
   leave us to prove its fulness.

   President Edwards, in speaking of the elements of our Lord's
   sufferings,--and in this others have followed him,--speaks of that
   vision of evil which he supposes to have pressed on our Lord's spirit,
   as "unaccompanied by counterbalancing comfortable considerations and
   prospects." His object being simply to inquire what elements of
   suffering could accord with our Lord's holiness, in trying to conceive
   to Himself what God could use to fill full a cup of penal suffering, he
   was led thus to suppose holiness in Christ subjected to what would give
   it pain, and that pain left unmitigated by the presence to His spirit
   of what would, to the holiness thus pained, be counterbalancing
   comfort. That for the joy set before Him our Lord endured that which He
   endured, does not accord with this conception. While, as I have already
   said, 1 do not believe that the question was at all as to the way in
   which most suffering could be accumulated on the sufferer.

   But there was a reason, though not this, why our Lord, having taken
   suffering flesh, and being subjected to suffer in it under an hour and
   power of darkness, should prove its full capacity of suffering. For He
   was to manifest to the utmost the power and courage of love, refusing
   the favour of man when that follows not the favour of God; as well as
   the forgiveness of love, when those who can kill the body, but after
   that have no more that they can do, put forth that power in enmity;

   Among the comparisons which have been so unwisely permitted of our
   Lord's sufferings under this hour and power of darkness, with what
   others have suffered, the sufferings of His own martyrs have been
   mentioned. As to the sufferings of martyrs, suffering in His spirit and
   sustained by His strength, they are obviously a part of the fulfilment
   of the word, "Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the
   baptism that I am baptized with:" but, unless we are prepared to claim
   for them the life of love, in the fulness in which it was present in
   Him from whom it has flowed in them, we cannot conclude as to the
   comparative amount of their sufferings from the external circumstances
   of suffering in which we see them.

   But, apart from this, though His church be called to fill up what is
   behind of Christ's sufferings, and though the counsel of God in that
   Christ is the vine, we the branches. He the head, we the members,
   implies that, in a sense, and an important sense, there is that behind
   which remains to be filled up; yet in suffering, as in all else, there
   was a fulness and perfection in Christ Himself, of which we severally
   receive but a part. Accordingly, measures of comfort under sufferings,
   even to the extent of partially neutralising these sufferings, have
   been often granted to martyrs, though not to their Lord. Nay, even in
   more ordinary cases of physical suffering, as a cup which our Father
   may give us to drink, while it is good for us, though children, to
   learn obedience by the things which we suffer, yet it is sometimes our
   Father's will, in seasons of suffering, to reveal in the spirit so much
   of His glory in Christ as neutralises the physical suffering. Thus
   David Brainerd, to whom a very unusual measure of physical pain was
   appointed, sometimes when that pain was most acute, had granted to him,
   along with it, a joy in the Holy Ghost, which so counterbalanced that
   pain, that on the whole he judged that condition far happier than an
   ordinary measure of religious joy, with ordinary health. But as to our
   Lord's experience during that hour and power of darkness, it would seem
   inconsistent with the purpose of subjecting Him to the experience of
   the weakness of suffering flesh at all, to conceive of this experience
   as other than, so to speak, perfect. In this view, the reason that has
   been assigned for His refusing the drink offered to deaden pain,
   commends itself to us.

   I believe these thoughts as to the elements of our Lord's sufferings as
   suffered at the hands of men, and as to the weakness of suffering flesh
   in which He bore them, are true, and will help us to realise the trial
   to which forgiving love in the Son of God was put, and the mind of love
   in which He endured the trial, the manner of the victory of love. This
   it concerns us to know, because it is with this same love as in Him
   towards ourselves, and as, alas! tried by our sins, that we have to do.
   This it concerns us to know, also, because it is this same love as in
   us through participation in Him as our life, that we are called to
   manifest towards others, and for the developing of which in us, it may
   be the Father's will that we shall have a personal experience of
   drinking of our Lord's cup and being baptized with His baptism even in
   outward form of trial, which, if it comes to us, we, without this
   light, are ill prepared to welcome. In thinking of what has been, and
   may yet be, of literal conformity to the sufferings of Christ, and in
   considering the probable history of any attempt to persecute for
   Christ's name, or to constrain men to deny Christ,--an hour and power
   of darkness coming to the church towards the close as to her Lord,--it
   is a solemn thing to think that of the many who would be found prepared
   to die rather than deny Christ, few might be found so partaking in the
   life of Christ as that dying would be to them the true fellowship of
   His cross,--the fellowship of His love to those who crucified Him,--of
   that love as in itself the deepest capacity of suffering,--of that love
   as in its deepest experience of suffering, proving its fountain to be
   in God by being forgiving love. And yet such a victory of love would be
   but what Christ is daily calling us to prove in measure, in calling us
   to take up our cross daily and follow Him.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER XII.

   THE SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST, IN WHICH THE ATONEMENT WAS PERFECTED,
   CONSIDERED IN THEIR RELATION, 1ST, TO HIS WITNESSING FOR GOD TO MEN,
   AND 2DLY, TO HIS DEALING WITH GOD ON BEHALF OF MEN.

   I. THESE sufferings were the perfecting of the Son's witnessing for the
   Father, being the perfected manifestation of the life of love as
   sonship
   towards God and brotherhood towards man.

   The trial of our Lord's love to men, and its triumph in the prayer on
   the cross, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do,"--and
   the trial of His love to the Father, and trust in the Father, of which
   the final and perfected expression was these words in death, "Into thy
   hands, O Father, I commend my spirit,"--were accomplished together by
   one and the same elements. The power of the life of sonship and of
   conscious oneness with the Father in His mind towards His brethren, to
   enable Christ to abide in love, and overcome evil with good, is in
   truth that which we have now been contemplating. The sense of His
   Father's fatherliness was the strength in which He manifested this
   perfection of brotherhood. For that perfection of brotherhood was just
   His following of the Father as a dear child,--and all He suffered in
   this path came to Him as doing His Father's commandments, and abiding
   in His love; and thus was the Father in all this glorified in the Son.
   The very words, "Father, forgive them," testify how within the light of
   the Father's love and favour the Intercessor abode while
   suffering,--finding in that favour strength to suffer, and not only to
   suffer, but to intercede. And as the experience of the utter weakness
   of suffering flesh was necessary to the completeness of the trial of
   His love to men, so was it also essential to the development of perfect
   trust in the Father,--for there remained to the sufferer no strength
   but the strength of faith.

   The outward history of the hour and power of darkness we have detailed
   to us by the Evangelists. We have not, however, much from them to help
   us to see that "hour" as from Christ's side. But there is a portion of
   Scripture, one of the Psalms, which is usually received as having this
   special interest to us, and which therefore is taken in supplement of
   the gospel narrative; and our Lord's own partial quotation of this
   psalm on the cross, as well as its own contents, seem to justify our so
   receiving it. I refer to the 22nd psalm, which I shall now venture to
   use in this way--being the more desirous to do so, because, while I
   believe that it is altogether confirmatory of the view now taken of the
   cup given our Lord to drink,--I mean especially as a permitted trial of
   the faith of the Son in the Father, and not an expression of wrath in
   the Father towards the Son,--the first words of the psalm, as quoted by
   our Lord, have been the words chiefly rested upon as the intimation to
   us of our Lord's having been the object of such wrath,--an
   interpretation which seems to me a violent straining of these words,
   taken alone; but which, if we take them as a part of the psalm, and to
   be understood in harmony with it, is altogether untenable, being indeed
   directly opposed to the tone and character of the psalm, as a whole.
   Its concluding verses, by the largeness of the reference to men,
   connect this psalm with the character of the crops as a trial of the
   love of brotherhood in Christ. But the first and larger portion of it
   places the suffering

   Saviour before us as an individual sufferer, drinking the bitter cup
   given Him to drink, and uttering the trial of faith which He is
   experiencing in drinking it.

   The psalm opens with a cleaving appropriation on the part of the
   Sufferer, of God as His God: "My God, my God." He asks God, His God,
   why He leaves Him in the hands of the wicked, and interposes not on His
   behalf, delaying to answer His prayer: "Why hast thou forsaken me? why
   art thou so far from helping me, and from the voice of my roaring? O my
   God, I cry in the day-time, but thou hearest not; and in the
   night-season, and am not silent." He refuses any explanation of this
   silence that would be dishonouring to God: "But thou art holy, O thou
   that inhabitest the praises of Israel." He refers to God's former
   justifying of faith in the case of others of old: "Our fathers trusted
   in thee; they trusted, and thou didst deliver them. They cried unto
   thee, and were delivered. They trusted in thee, and were not
   confounded." But the acknowledgment of God is delayed in His case as it
   had not been in theirs, and the delay is exposing the sufferer to
   contempt and scorn, and the bitter reproach that His professed trust in
   God has been a delusion, or a false pretension: "But I am a worm, and
   no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people. All they that
   see me laugh me to scorn. They shoot out the lip, they shake the head,
   saying, He trusted on the Lord that He would deliver Him: let Him
   deliver Him, seeing He delighted in Him." Therefore does the tried one
   go back on that which God has been to Him,--therefore does He fall back
   on the faithfulness of God, as the "faithful Creator:" "But thou art He
   that took me out of the womb: thou didst make me hope when I was upon
   my mother's

   .

   breasts. I was cast upon thee from the womb. Thou art my God from my
   mother's belly." Thus His faith is strengthened, and the prayer, the
   delay in answering which has been the subject of the opening question,
   is renewed; for His hope in God, His God, is not let go: "Be not thou
   far from me; for trouble is near; for there is none to help." The
   trouble is very great. The outer circle of His being is possessed by
   His enemies. He turns from it to that inner region, where God's
   nearness is to be known, for elsewhere there is no help: "Many bulls
   have compassed me; strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round. They
   gaped on me with their mouths, as a ravening and roaring lion." And
   this is while the depths of the utter and absolute weakness of humanity
   are proved by the Sufferer as by one cast entirely upon God, and who
   puts not forth one effort on His own behalf, nor gives place to one
   movement of self-relying energy or self-dependent strength of the
   flesh: "I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint:
   my heart is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels. My
   strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue cleaveth to my
   jaws; and thou hast brought me into the dust of death." Thus low in
   suffering at the hands of the wicked is He brought. "For dogs have
   compassed me: the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me: they pierced
   my hands and my feet. I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon
   me. They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture."
   All this is permitted to the wicked; for "they would have had no power
   at all, unless it had been given them from above." All this is received
   as therefore to Him from God: "Thou hast brought me into the dust of
   death." But God is Himself to Him "His God'' still; so He is only the
   more cast upon God, made the more to cleave to Him: "But be not thou
   far from me, O Lord: O my strength, haste thou to help me. Deliver my
   soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog. Save me from
   the lion's mouth."

   And now we meet the returning answer of prayer,--the justification of
   the Sufferer's unbroken trust,--the clearing up of God's faithfulness
   and truth in the whole transaction: "Thou hast heard me from the horns
   of the unicorns. I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst
   of the congregation will I praise thee." His experience of God was not
   found to be in contradiction to God's justification of the trust of the
   fathers, to which He had referred. That of God to which they were
   witnesses, has been, through the divine dealing with Him, only more
   deeply revealed:--as we see in the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
   testimony of the cloud of witnesses, connected with that of our Lord
   Himself, as "the author and finisher of faith," i. e., He whose faith
   perfects the revelation of that in God which we have to trust.
   Therefore he proceeds, "Ye that fear the Lord, praise Him: all ye the
   seed of Jacob, glorify Him: and fear Him, all ye the seed of Israel.
   For He hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted;
   neither hath He hid His face from Him; but when He cried unto Him, He
   heard." Then follows the expression of the purpose, to declare to men
   what in this great trial of faith He has been experiencing of God's
   faithfulness, and a prophesying of the result that would follow, viz.,
   universal trust in God, who had not hid His face from the afflicted,
   but had heard His prayer: "My praise shall be of thee in the great
   congregation: I will pay my vows before them that fear Him. The meek
   shall eat, and shall be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord, that
   seek Him: your heart shall live for ever. All ends of the world shall
   remember and turn unto the Lord; and all the kindreds of the nations
   shall worship before thee," &c.

   The character of this psalm as a whole is, therefore, quite
   unequivocal, viz., a dealing of the Father with Christ in which the cup
   of man's enmity is drank by Him to its last drop, in the experience of
   absolute weakness,--the true weakness of humanity realised, whereby
   scope is given for the trust of sonship towards the Father; and we may
   add, considering the reference to men and their salvation with which
   the psalm closes, the love of brotherhood to men. But trust in God,
   personal trust, is that of which the trial is most conspicuous as
   pervading the psalm,--trust in utter weakness,--trust in the midst of
   enemies,--trust which the extremity of that weakness and the perfected
   enmity of these enemies tries to the utmost,--trust which the Father
   permits to be thus tried, but trust, the root of which in the Father's
   favour, has not been cut off, nor even touched by any act of the
   Father, or expression of His face as if He were turned into an
   enemy,--as if He looked on the suppliant in wrath,--as if He regarded
   him as a sinner, imputed sin to him. Not this, not the most distant
   approach to this. Nay, on the contrary, language is put into the mouth
   of the tried one that would seem to preclude the possibility of such a
   misconception, as completely as if chosen for that purpose; and the
   very ground on which the exhortation is given, "Ye that fear the Lord,
   praise Him; all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify Him; and praise Him, all
   ye the seed of Israel," is, "For He hath not despised nor abhorred the
   affliction of the afflicted; neither hath He hid His face from him; but
   when he cried unto Him, He heard," leaving no place even for that
   negative wrath, if the expression be not a contradiction, which, in
   clinging to the idea that the cup given to Christ was the cup of the
   Father's wrath, while yet shrinking from what such words should mean,
   has, as we have seen above, been set forth as a hiding of the Father's
   face.

   A measure of freedom of pleading with the Father while drinking of the
   bitter cup, is, indeed, here recorded, which is of the same character
   and has the same special impress of a life upon it which the words, "if
   it be possible let this cup pass from me" as used in the anticipation
   of drinking it, have. But that we are to see here an interruption of
   the continuity of that life which was in the consciousness of the
   Father's favour, an exception to the experience of abiding in the
   Father's love because keeping His commandments--that a moment had
   arrived in which the confidence was disappointed which He had expressed
   when He said, "Ye shall flee every man to his own, and shall leave me
   alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me,"--that
   having said, "I lay down my life that I may take it up again, therefore
   my Father loveth me," the love of which He thus spoke was not His
   strength in dying, but that He tasted death under the Father's wrath;
   of this, or anything in the most distant way suggestive of this, there
   is no trace.

   And this remains true whatever width of meaning we may give to the
   expression "hour and power of darkness." Many have dwelt upon the part
   that he who is said to have the power of death, viz., the devil, may
   have had in our Lord's sufferings on the cross and in all this season.
   Considering the manner of trial which he was permitted to be to our
   Lord at His entering on His ministry, there is nothing that we need be
   repelled by in the thought that, in the invisible, a part of the trial
   appointed for our Lord may have been a permission to him to express his
   malice. But on this supposed element in the cup given Christ to drink,
   I must be silent as to positive statement, not seeing that anything is
   revealed. Only this much may be confidently asserted, that anything
   permitted now could only be what that permitted formerly was, that is,
   a trial of the faith of sonship; for indeed as to the former trial,
   while the devil is represented as met by the Saviour with quotations
   from Scripture for which the tempter's appeal to Scripture was one
   reason, we shall lose much if we do not mark that the bringing forth of
   the meaning of the words quoted by the enemy, by placing them in their
   true harmony with other passages, is a use of Scripture for which no
   verbal knowledge of Scripture can qualify, but of which those alone are
   capable who are the children of wisdom. That the fiery darts of the
   wicked of which so many have had experience, may be a participation in
   one element of their Lord's cup, it is not difficult to understand. But
   if so, these fiery darts have been met by Him with the shield of faith
   in the Father's fatheriiness, and can have had nothing at all to do
   with the real aspect of the Father's face towards Him; nor could any
   supposed amount of such an element as this in His cup, be in the
   smallest degree an approach to what has been conceived of as the wrath
   of God. This is certain, as neither could any suffering from this
   supposed source, whatever its amount, be consistent with the idea of
   penal suffering, any more than any other element of suffering which was
   painful because of the holiness of the sufferer,--however it might
   accord with the purpose of making our Lord perfect through sufferings
   as the Captain of our salvation and He who led our captivity captive.

   If the 22nd psalm help us to conceive more truly of what our Lord felt
   while suffering at the hands of the wicked, it must, in the measure in
   which it does so, add to the value to us of the words of forgiving
   intercession which He uttered on the cross,--as all unadvised
   depreciating of what men's treatment of Him was to Christ must lessen
   their value. In proportion, also, as this psalm presents to us the
   trial to which the faith of sonship in Christ was subjected, it helps
   us to realise the victory of that faith which is revealed in the peace
   of the words in death, "Into thy hands, O Father, I commend my spirit."
   But the triumphant close of the psalm, and its large prophetic
   intimations, shed important light back on the purely individual tone of
   the earlier part of it. We are not told in the psalm itself what the
   answer to "the cry of the afflicted" has been: only the language of
   supplication so accords with what is said in the Epistle to the
   Hebrews, (v. 7,) of our Lord's having "In the days of His flesh offered
   up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto Him that
   was able to save Him from death, and being heard in that He
   feared,"--that we cannot hesitate in assuming the relation of these
   passages, or in connecting the last with what is said in the 21st
   psalm, ver. 4, "He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it Him, even
   length of days for ever and ever;" an answer according with the peace
   of the words, "Into thy hands, O Father, I commend my spirit." The
   comfort of this answer is indeed, so far as the language goes, as
   purely individual as the tone of the agony and the pleading. Yet the
   prospect for men which is seen to open to the suppliant, reveals an
   interest of all men in the answer of His prayer, as well as the
   consciousness of a relation to all men in the previous suffering in
   which the cry was uttered, the divine response to which, is thus
   salvation to men. So that, notwithstanding of the individuality of the
   tone of the earlier part of the psalm, we are justified in ascribing to
   the sufferer an inward sense of His relation to all men corresponding
   with the expression used by Him in anticipating His sufferings: "And I,
   if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me,"--a reference such as the
   words imply, "who for the joy set before Him endured the cross."
   Notwithstanding, therefore, of the individual tone of this psalm which,
   at first sight, does not seem to accord with its unquestionable
   reference to the crucifixion of Christ, we see in its close, that it
   indeed belongs to Him who bore our sins in His own body on the tree,
   and who, having made peace by the blood of His cross, came and preached
   peace to them who were afar off, and to them that were near.

   But it is not only as indicating to us that the interests of all
   humanity were involved in that suffering and that cry of the afflicted,
   and in the divine response to that cry, that the latter part of this
   psalm is so important. It is still more important, as shedding light
   upon the atonement by the representation made of the way in which the
   happy result as to men which is prophesied, is to be accomplished. It
   is the Father's acknowledgment of the faith of the Son, which, being
   made known to men, is to cause "all the ends of the world to remember
   and turn unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of the nations to worship
   before him." However much the afflicted One whose cry had been heard,
   was, as the Holy One of God, separated from all men; however it might
   be assumed that He had grounds to plead in prayer peculiar to Himself;
   however free also He was from all that cause of fear and hesitation in
   lifting up the heart to God in prayer, which ordinary men are conscious
   to as sinners: still His prayer must have been offered on a ground that
   all may occupy, and from which sin need exclude none. This is clear;
   otherwise, that His prayer was heard, would not have been that Gospel
   to a sinful world, which it is here set forth as being. We must believe
   that any sinner of the human race to whom the nature of that cry and
   the grounds of it, and that which it sought from God, would be revealed
   in the Spirit, would see in the divine answer what would quicken faith
   and hope towards God in that sinner. He who in coming to this world had
   said, "Lo I come to do thy will, O God,"--who could, as to the
   fulfilment of this purpose, say to the Father, "I have glorified thee
   on the earth, I have declared thy name, and will declare it," is seen
   here at the close of His course, as one holding fast the beginning of
   His confidence, and in this last trying time, and while subjected to
   the hour and power of darkness, sustained by the simple faith of that
   original fatherliness of the Father's heart, which He had come forth to
   reveal and TO REVEAL BY TRUSTING IT.

   Thus, the Holy One of God, God's holy child Jesus, having glorified his
   Father on the earth in all living righteous fulfilment of His will, now
   perfects His glorifying of the Father's Name, by being seen trusting in
   that Name alone when brought into the extremest need of a sure hold of
   God,--trusting simply in that Name, and not raising a claim of merit on
   having so perfectly honoured that Name. The sinless One is seen
   trusting simply in that Name which he had come to reveal to sinners,
   that they also might trust in it, and be saved; and thus the Father's
   response to that trust is preached as the gospel to the chief of
   sinners. When one who has seen the glory of God in the face of Jesus
   Christ, and who through Christ has faith and hope towards God, invites
   a brother sinner to share in his joy in the Lord, to share in his
   confidence through Christ, it is not an uncommon reply to be told, "But
   you are much better than I am. If I were only as religious as you are,
   and obeyed God as you seem to do, I should cherish hope." And when such
   a person replies, "But you do not understand the secret of my peace. I
   am not trusting to my own merits. I am trusting simply and entirely to
   the free grace of God: the mercy of God revealed in Christ, and which
   has just the same relation to you that it has to me, is the source of
   all my peace. I indeed do seek to please God. Indeed I seek my life in
   His favour. But I do so altogether in the strength of that mind and
   heart of God towards me which the gospel reveals, and my doing so is
   only my welcoming of the salvation which is given me in the Son of
   God;"--he has often the pain of finding all he thus urges going for
   nothing, because it is set down as only Christian humility on his
   part,--only the effect of the high standard which he is setting before
   himself; and so, while it is thought to be very becoming in him to be
   thus humble, yet it still is felt that he must be trusting to that in
   which he is seen to differ from others; and so his peace is no gospel
   to those who feel themselves so unlike him.

   To meet this is painful and embarrassing when one would say with the
   Psalmist, "O taste and see that God is Good: blessed is the man that
   trusteth in Him." But it may surely serve to clear up this matter, and
   to remove all darkness from the subject of peace with God, to consider
   that our Lord Himself at the last as at the first, trusted simply and
   purely in the fatherliness of the Father. "But thou art He that took me
   out of my mother's womb. Thou didst make me hope when I was upon my
   mother's breasts." That which is not understood while men's conceptions
   of salvation are self-righteous, whether they are still flattering
   themselves with the hope that they are in some measure succeeding in
   recommending themselves to God's favour, or are less or more disturbed
   by the sense of failure in this attempt, is the simple nature of trust
   in God as the response of sonship to the heart of the Father
   apprehended by faith. The oneness of sonship as perfect in Christ, and
   as in measure in us through participation in Christ, I have sought to
   keep before my reader's mind all along. To understand this oneness is
   what is needed to enable us to understand how the Father's response to
   the cry of the Son, as "the afflicted one," the trial of whose faith is
   so far set before us in this psalm, is expected to have power, being
   made known, to cause "all the ends of the world to remember and turn
   unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of the nations to worship before
   Him."

   II. The sufferings of Christ, which thus perfected His witnessing for
   God to men, had an equally close relation to His dealing with the
   Father on our behalf,--giving its ultimate depth to His confession of
   our sins, and the excellence of a perfect development of love and faith
   to His intercession for sinners, according to the will of God.

   The expectation as to the great results that were to follow, because
   "God had not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted,
   neither had hid His face from Him, but when He cried unto Him He
   heard," with the expression of which the 22d psalm concludes, is in
   effect the preaching to us of the gospel that God has given to us
   eternal life in His Son;--for it is the declaration that the knowledge
   of the Son's trust in the Father will introduce us to the fellowship of
   that trust. But we are to learn from what we know otherwise of that
   cross of the Redeemer, which, in one aspect of it, this psalm so sets
   before us, how this should be so. It was in making His soul an offering
   for sin that this terrible trial of the faith proper to sonship came to
   Christ. He was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised, for our
   iniquities,--that which

   He suffered was the chastisement that was to issue in peace to us and
   His stripes were for the healing of our souls; for He suffered the just
   for the unjust, that He might bring us to God,--bearing our sins in His
   own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto
   righteousness. In accomplishing these results, we have now seen that,
   in order to the perfection of the work of Christ as witnessing for God
   to men, it has appeared to the divine wisdom necessary to subject His
   love and trust towards the Father, and His long-suffering forgiveness
   in bearing the contradiction of sinners against Himself, to the trial
   of the hour and power of darkness. Nor was the bitter cup thus
   appointed by the Father for the Son less important to the full
   development of the other element in the atonement, viz., the dealing of
   the Son with the Father on our behalf, as confessing our sins and
   making intercession for us, according to the will of God.

   The intercession of forgiving love in the words, "Father, forgive them;
   for they know not what they do," has already engaged our attention, as
   it was the expression of Christ's own forgiveness of His enemies,--and
   so also a part of His testimony for the Father, as He says, "Love your
   enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
   pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you; that ye may
   be the children of your Father which is in heaven." But contemplating
   our Lord as bearing us on His Spirit before the Father, and dealing on
   our behalf with the righteousness and mercy of God, confessing our sin
   with that confession which was the due response to the divine wrath
   against sin, and interceding for us according to the hope that was for
   us in God; this prayer on the cross,--"Father, forgive them; for they
   know not what they do," belongs to the perfecting of this intercession
   of redeeming love in making our peace with God--that peace which,
   because perfected on the cross, is set forth to us as made there.

   It is obvious that all, by which the pressure of our sins on the Spirit
   of Christ was increased, and He was brought into closer contact with
   them, and deeper experience of the hatred of the darkness to the light,
   must have given a continually deepening character to Christ's dealing
   with the Father on our behalf;--giving an increasing depth to His
   response to the divine condemnation of our sin, causing that response
   to be rendered in deeper agony of spirit, and, at the same time,
   rendering His persevering intercession a casting Himself more and more
   on the further, and deeper depths of fatherliness in the Father.
   Adhering to the conception of a progressive development of the eternal
   life in our Lord's human consciousness, and looking at all that was
   appointed for Him by the Father, as adapted by the divine wisdom for
   the end of forwarding this development, we indeed see abundant reason
   for that perfected personal experience of the enmity of the carnal mind
   to God to which our Lord was subjected. Without this the Son could
   never have proved in human consciousness, as we have just been
   contemplating Him as doing, the forgiveness that is in love;--or the
   strength to overcome evil with good, which brotherly love can exercise,
   sustained by the faith of sonship trusting in the love of the Father;
   or the sufficiency that is in the Father's favour for the life of
   sonship, however absolutely cast upon God. And so neither without this
   could an adequate confession of man's sin have been offered to God in
   humanity in expiation of man's sin, nor intercession have been made
   according to the extent of man's need of forgiveness.

   Therefore, though not as filling a cup of penal suffering, yet as
   essential to the living reality of a moral and spiritual atonement for
   sin, are all those painful experiences which President Edwards has so
   fully entered into in his illustrations of Christ's suffering for our
   sins, when He bore them in His own body on the tree, to be weighed
   equally by us also. I have already noticed the limits which Edwards has
   recognised as to be observed, in conceiving to ourselves the elements
   of the inward mental sufferings to which our Lord was subjected while
   the malice of the wicked was poured upon Him from without,--being
   thankful that he has recognised such limits; nor, as I have said above,
   is it to his representation of the amount of Christ's sufferings, or of
   their nature, that I object, but to the conception that these
   sufferings were penal. Assuming that idea to be precluded, as urged
   above, by the very nature of the sufferings endured, I am only the more
   anxious that we should not come short in our apprehension of the
   terrible reality that was in these sufferings, or of the real and
   necessary proportion that was between our sins and that wounding to
   which Christ submitted, in making His soul an offering for sin.

   The peace-making between God and man, which was perfected by our Lord
   on the cross, required to its reality the presence to the spirit of
   Christ of the elements of the alienation as well as the possession by
   Him of that eternal righteousness in which was the virtue to make
   peace. All the considerations that had a claim in the truth of things
   to be taken into account must have been taken into account: and, though
   God's wrath against sin was not felt by the Son of God as coming forth
   against Himself personally, as if the Father saw Him as a sinner; yet
   must that wrath in the truth of what it is, have been present to and
   realised by His spirit;--and though He suffered not from it as "having
   its revenges inflicted on Him," yet must the realisation of it and
   confession of its righteousness, in perfect sympathy with that
   righteousness, have been a suffering proportioned to His spiritual
   perfection; and while He interceded in the faith of the infinite love
   of the Father and knowing that the will of God was our salvation, yet
   must the love that was taking this form have suffered in itself, while
   interceding, all the pain proper to the heart of perfect sonship, in
   its sympathy with the feelings of perfect fatherhood against which His
   brethren had sinned. Surely the soul that was made to be filled with
   the consciousness which these thoughts imply, was made a sacrifice for
   sin. Surely, while freed from all that it is so impossible to harmonise
   with the faith of a true consciousness in this great
   transaction--either in contemplating the mind of the Father towards the
   Son, or the mind of the Son towards the Father, which is implied in the
   imputation of our sins to Christ, and the assumption that His
   sufferings were penal--there is seen still in this great peace-making
   an awful coming together, in the inner man of the Son of God, of moral
   and spiritual elements; the harmonising of which in the result of peace
   between man and God--a peace in God realised in humanity for man to
   know and partake in, a peace to be preached to the chief of
   sinners--has been a work of love, in which the Son of God is seen
   bearing the chastisement of our peace; suffering for us, the just for
   the unjust, to bring us to God.

   Let it not seem to any as if, while rejecting the conception of penal
   suffering as the atonement, I were still anxious to keep the idea of
   suffering before the mind; and to raise as high as possible the
   conception of that suffering, as feeling a demand for suffering in the
   history of the pardon of our sins to be what is to be ascribed to God,
   a demand for suffering as suffering. That would indeed be to cherish
   indirectly the wrong conception of atonement, deliverance from which I
   feel so important. I am only anxious that the elements of the dealing
   of the Son with the Father in His intercession for us should be
   realised by us, so that the mind of God in relation to us and our sins
   should be truly apprehended; and the hatefulness of our sins, as well
   as our personal preciousness to the Father of our spirits, be revealed
   to us through the apprehension of the elements of the peace which
   Christ accomplished on the cross. Nothing can be more vague or
   practically unsuited to the real need of our spirits, polluted with the
   pollution of sin, than the kind of meaning associated with our being
   "washed in the blood of Christ," while the thought of the shedding of
   His blood is the thought of the punishment of our sins, as endured by
   Christ for us. The nearest approach to a meaning which the common
   prayer, "to be washed in the blood of Christ," has, as used in this
   connexion, is, I think, the expression of the feeling in the suppliant
   that he deserves wrath, and a recognition of the sufferings of Christ
   for his sin as the only ground on which he can expect pardon; and a
   certain element of self-despair, and of hope in free grace, may be
   present, and, I doubt not, often is present in this form of thought.
   But if the blood of Christ be to our thoughts the spiritual reality
   which was in Christ's making His soul an offering for sin, then, to be
   washed in the blood of Christ must be to have the moral and spiritual
   elements of that offering revealed in our spirits, so bringing us into
   spiritual harmony with them, making us to partake in them; which, to
   call a spiritual cleansing is no figure of speech, but the simplest and
   most natural expression for a spiritual reality. But in this view every
   element in the great peace-making, which the Gospel proclaims as having
   been altogether and perfectly successful, and as resulting in a true
   spiritual peace for man,--a peace for man to be enjoyed in fellowship
   with the Father and the Son in the Spirit,--is of the utmost
   importance; and to leave any one element out unembraced by our faith,
   is to be practically without the knowledge, and so without the use of a
   part of the unsearchable riches which we have in Christ.

   In the full and clear apprehension of the moral and spiritual atonement
   made by the Son of God,--in the faith of the peace made by Him on the
   cross, then perfected,--but in relation to which He was all along "the
   blessed peace-maker," it is most surely felt that the true and perfect
   atonement, expiation, and satisfaction for man's sin is known; that we
   are in the light of it; and that that light is the light of life.

   As respects what the atonement is in itself, and Christ's consciousness
   in making it, we see that, if Christ had been literally, as Luther has
   attempted to believe, made the reality of sin for us,--if He had been
   in personal consciousness the one sinner, guilty of all the sins of all
   men, and, under this load of guilt, had sought, in the strength of
   conscious perfect righteousness, the Father's face; such confession of
   the evil of sin, such entrance into the Father's mind regarding it,
   such responsive unity with the Father in the condemnation of it, as we
   have been ascribing to Him as presented by Him to the Father with
   reference to our sins, would have been the atonement He would have
   made; and such trust in the fatherliness of the Father, as we have
   assumed to have encouraged and sustained His intercession for us, would
   have been the strength of hope in which He would have made that
   atonement. Therefore, being the holy one of God, and separate from sin,
   in personal consciousness as well as in reality, yet bearing our sins
   on His heart before the Father, dealing with the Father's righteousness
   and mercy on our behalf, asking for us that which was according to the
   Father's will, we feel that the confession and the intercession made by
   Him--divine, while human--must have been made with the consciousness of
   its suitableness, and the assurance of its acceptance. "I said, I will
   confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
   iniquity of my sin." Psalm xxxii. 5.

   As to ourselves and the light in which we see all that concerns our
   relation to God, in contemplating the Son's dealing with the Father on
   our behalf, if we understand the elements of that which we contemplate,
   we must feel that it is what, could we have offered it to God, was due
   from ourselves; and that, could we have offered it, it would have been
   an atonement such as no endurance of punishment could ever have been:
   this we must feel, though at the same time we feel that to have made it
   was as impossible for us as to have made ourselves divine; while yet we
   also see that we must partake in it, and must have its elements
   reproduced in us, for that these elements constitute the mind in which
   we who have sinned against God, and been rebellious children, must
   return to the Father of our spirits if we are to return at all; that
   Christ is indeed the way and the truth and the life; that no man can
   come to the Father, but by Him.

   In the way opened for us into the holiest by the blood of Christ, we
   see what in its own light is discerned by us to be at once a way into
   the holiest, and the only way. In exercising faith in that blood we are
   consciously under a cleansing and purifying power, the only power that
   could cleanse and purify us, but as to which we feel that it has in
   itself no limit, and that its result in us will only be limited as the
   measure of our being yielded up to it is limited. In our begun life of
   sonship through the faith of the Son of God, in our feeble lisping of
   the Father's name,--we have consciously the earnest of the eternal
   inheritance. The perfecting of our conscience as worshippers by the
   sprinkling of the blood of Christ, we discern to be the commencement of
   that experience which will hereafter utter itself in the song, "Unto
   Him that loved us and washed us from our sins in His own blood, and
   hath made us kings and priests unto God and His Father, to Him be glory
   and dominion for ever and ever. Amen."

   Finally, when from thus contemplating the atonement as accomplished by
   Christ, and seeing ourselves in its light--realising how hopeless our
   state had been apart from it, while conscious to the living faith and
   hope towards God which the faith of it is quickening in us--we lift up
   our thoughts to the Father, and consider what the great work of
   redeeming love has been to Him, and hear in relation to it the
   testimony of the Father to the Son,--"This is my beloved Son, in whom I
   am well pleased, hear ye Him," we are, indeed, filled with the glory of
   God in the face of Jesus Christ. Seeing the Father in the Son,--seeing
   the eternal, divine elements of the work of the Son in the Father,
   seeing that what we are contemplating is, indeed, but the perfect doing
   of the Father's will, the perfect declaring of His name--raised up by
   the faith of the will of God as done,--of the name of God as declared
   to the apprehension of the Eternal Will, the Unchanging Name, we
   understand the complacency of the Father in the Son; we understand the
   excellence in the sight of the Father of the work of Christ, viewed
   simply in itself, we understand how it pleased the Father to bruise the
   Son and put Him to grief, we understand how the Father saw it good to
   put into the hands of the Son of His love the cup concerning which He
   had prayed that if it were possible it should pass from Him;--for we
   understand how, viewed in itself, the revelation of love in all its
   long-suffering, forgiving, self-sacrificing might and depth, was a
   result worthy of God to accomplish, even at so great a price; while yet
   we understand that this neither was nor could have been but in relation
   to the further results which this revelation of the name of the Father
   contemplated,--that it was as being "bringing many sons to glory," that
   "it became Him of whom are all things, and by whom are all things, to
   make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings." And
   the oneness of sonship, the identity of the life of sonship, as seen
   accomplishing the atonement and as partaken in by men through
   participation in the atonement, and the excellent glory of the hope of
   sonship in its inheriting of the Father,--as it is said, "heirs of God,
   heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ,"--is to us the full
   justification of the Father in all that travail of the soul of Christ,
   of which our salvation is the fruit.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER XIII.

   THE DEATH OF CHRIST CONTEMPLATED AS HIS "TASTING DEATH," FOR EVERY
   MAN;" AND THE LIGHT IT SHEDS ON HIS LIFE, AND ON THAT FELLOWSHIP IN HIS
   LIFE, THROUGH BEING CONFORMED TO HIS DEATH, TO WHICH WE ARE CALLED.

   I HAVE nothing to add in direct elucidation of the view now taken of
   the nature of the atonement; but both the necessity for the perfecting
   of the atonement in the death of our Lord on the cross, which the fact
   of His death in connexion with His prayer in the garden implies, and
   the constant reference to the cross as suggestive of the whole work of
   redemption, are reasons for presenting here to the reader's attention
   some thoughts in relation to the death of our Lord, viewed in itself
   and in the light of His consciousness in passing through death, which
   may be profitable, and especially, practically.

   The words of our Lord in death, "Into thy hands, O Father, I commend my
   spirit," are given to help us to understand the life of sonship, which
   we are seeing passing out of our sight, and to reveal to us in this its
   final triumph the secret of its victory all along. For, in this trust
   in death, we are not contemplating a new manner of faith. The
   perfection of its development and measure of its manifestation only are
   new. The faith which this last utterance of the voice of sonship
   presents to our faith, is not anything else than that trust in the
   Father manifested in death, which had pervaded the Lord's whole life;
   for, Christ's following of God as a dear child, walking in love, always
   implied that direct and immediate living by the Father, which these
   words used in death expressed. He ever through the Eternal Spirit
   offered Himself without spot to God. To hold and use this life in the
   flesh in sonship, and to yield it up in sonship, these were divers
   actings of one faith. Therefore, the words, "Into thy hands, O Father,
   I commend my spirit," should shed light back to us on the whole of our
   Lord's path on earth. There was a saying, "Not my will, but thine be
   done," a dying to live in all our Lord's life, as well as at the close.

   I have already spoken of the shame of the cross in its relation to that
   second commandment of which Christ's perfect brotherhood towards man
   was the fulfilment, as His sonship towards the Father was the
   fulfilment of the first. If we know anything of life as a meeting in
   the strength of sonship the call which the first commandment makes on
   us, and know that rejection of all independent life in self and our
   neighbour which this implies, our own experience will help us in
   endeavouring to realise the oneness of the faith in which Christ lived,
   seeking not His own glory, but His glory who had sent Him, with the
   faith in which in death He said, "Into thy hands, O Father, I commend
   my spirit." The Apostle speaks of "dying daily;" and, if we are
   attempting to "follow God as dear children, walking in love," we know
   that this implies such a dying daily as is possible only in a faith
   which is a constant commending of our spirit into the Father's hands.
   For lonely as death is, not less lonely is true life at its root and
   core,--I mean lonely as respects the creature, a being left alone with
   God.

   But, while the faith tried and proved in our Lord's tasting death was
   the same that had been tried and proved in His whole life, yet was the
   trial peculiar and extreme, and in its nature fitted to be the final
   trial, as well as to shed light back on all former trials. I have
   already noticed the sinless,--I should rather say righteous,--desire of
   the life that is in man's favour, which our Lord's fulfilment of the
   second commandment implied, and which explains to us the intenseness of
   feeling under the injustice done to Him in men's estimate of Him,
   expressed in the words, "Reproach hath broken my heart." In bearing the
   contradiction of sinners, our Lord was continually drinking of cups,
   which naturally and sinlessly, nay, because of love, and therefore
   righteously, He must have desired not to drink; which yet as presented
   to Him by His Father He desired to drink, and which, in the strength of
   the eternal life which is in the Father's favour, He did drink.

   Now death itself, as the close of life so lived and passed through in
   the strength which the words reveal, "Into thy hands, O Father, I
   commend my spirit," "was in harmony with such a life and its fitting
   close; for it was the perfect manifestation and consummation of the
   faith in the Father, which was the secret of that life. I say, it was
   the "perfect manifestation" of that faith, because it revealed the
   strength in which our Lord had been able to do without the honour which
   cometh firom man,--the life that is in man's favour,--and how it was
   that He had not feared those whose power can go no further than to kill
   the body. The life which was common to them and to Him, the life
   through which they could reach Him and cause Him pain, that life had
   conferred upon them no power over His spirit; for that life He had
   held, as He now parted with it, in the strength and freedom of sonship.
   I have also said, "consummation," because it was the perfected
   development of that faith. I cannot help having the words in reference
   to Abraham's offering up of Isaac here recalled to me, "Now I know that
   thou lovest me." "By works was faith perfected." The faith that could
   offer up Isaac was there before it was proved; yet something further
   had come to pass in the spirit of Abraham, and in the sight of God,
   when it was proved. So of all our Lord's sufferings, in that, though a
   Son, He learned obedience by the things which He suffered. The sonship
   was there perfect all along; yet something came to pass, something was
   developed in the humanity of the Lord in each successive outcoming of
   the obedience of sonship under suffering; something which the Father
   had desired to see in humanity, and now saw, and which the incarnation,
   simply as such, had not accomplished, but which was being accomplished
   as the life of the Son in humanity progressed under the Father's
   discipline, and educating of Him as the Captain of our salvation. And
   if this be a true apprehension as to the previous sufferings of the
   Lord, and their progressive intensity, so also must it be of His
   tasting death. In substance, in spirit, He had all along said, "Into
   thy hands, O Father, I commit my spirit." In actual death He now said
   so.

   The simplest positive idea which I am able to form of the glory given
   to the Father, in saying, in death, "Into thy hands, O Father, I
   commend my spirit,"--I receive in realising the nakedness of simple
   being, stript of all possession but what is possessed in the heart of
   the Father, which is suggested to us as that in the consciousness of
   which this trust is exercised. It is the most perfect and absolute form
   of that experience, "I am not alone, for the Father is with me." It
   takes away creation and leaves but God. It is not difficult to see the
   glory given to God in this faith. Never does the Son, who dwells in the
   bosom of the Father, utter more to our hearts what it is to possess the
   Father as our Father, and to be sons of God, than when He says in
   death, "Into thy hands, O Father, I commend my spirit."

   And we must note, that this is not said in simple naked existence, as
   it might be the utterance of sonship in a spirit just awakened to the
   consciousness of existence, knowing yet no possession but God, who has
   given it being. It is an utterance in death. He who thus puts trust in
   the Father is tasting death while doing so. It is very difficult for
   us, though most desirable, to apprehend what this should add to our
   conception of that declaring of the Father's name which is in Christ's
   death. When I think of our Lord as tasting death, it seems to me as if
   He alone ever truly tasted death. And this, indeed, may be received as
   a part of the larger truth, that He alone ever lived in humanity in the
   conscious truth of humanity. But when I think of death as tasted by our
   Lord, how little help to conceiving of His experience in dying do any
   of our own thoughts, or anticipated experiences, seem fitted to yield!
   What men shrink from when they shrink from death, is, either the
   disruption of the ties that connect them with a present world, or the
   terrors with which an accusing conscience fills the world to come. The
   last had no existence for Him who was without sin; neither had the
   world, as the present evil world, any place in His heart. And even as
   to that purer interest in the present scene, which the relationships of
   life, cherished aright and according to God's intention in them,
   awaken, and the trial that death may be from this cause, there was in
   our Lord's case nothing parallel to it; unless that care of His mother,
   which He devolved upon the beloved disciple. But, death as death, is
   distinct from such accompanying considerations as these, and our Lord
   tasted it in the truth of that which it is. For, as He had truly lived
   in humanity, and possessed and used the gift of life according to the
   truth of humanity, so did He also truly die; death was to His humanity
   the withdrawal of the gift of that life which it closes. As men in life
   know not life as God's gift, neither realise what it is to live; so
   neither do they in death know God's withdrawal of that gift, nor
   consciously realise what it is to die. "For as a man liveth, so he
   dieth." But it was altogether otherwise with our Lord. It was a part of
   His sinless consciousness in humanity to possess life in the pure sense
   of it as God's gift; and, therefore, it was a part of His sinless
   consciousness in humanity to cleave to it,--to desire to retain it.
   This desire was in Him a true and sinless utterance of humanity. And as
   we have seen in what truth of humanity, and how intensely, Christ was
   affected by the malice of the wicked, though as respected the
   perfection of His faith He could say, "I have overcome the world;" so
   are we to understand that the eternal life in which He passed through
   death did not make death as nothing to Him, but that the true
   conception is, that it enabled Him perfectly to taste of death,--to
   taste of it as was only possible in the strength of eternal life.

   Further, as our Lord alone truly tasted death, so to Him alone had
   death its perfect meaning as the wages of sin, for in Him alone was
   there full entrance into the mind of God towards sin, and perfect unity
   with that mind. We have seen before, that the perfect confession of our
   sins was only possible to perfect holiness; and so we may see also,
   that the tasting of death in full realisation of what it is, that God
   who gave life should recall it, holding it forfeited, was only possible
   to perfect holiness.

   How much this thought should suggest to us, as to the bitterness which
   belonged to the cup which Christ drank in tasting death for every man,
   we may not measure. Yet we can see the fitness of the presence of this
   element in Christ's cup of suffering, and that His perfect realisation
   of the relation of death to sin, naturally connected itself with the
   confession of the righteousness of the divine condemnation on sin, and
   the fulness and perfection of that confession,--the fulness of meaning
   of the response, "Thou art righteous, O Lord, who judgest so." For,
   thus, in Christ's honouring of the righteous law of God, the sentence
   of the law was included, as well as the mind of God which that sentence
   expressed. In this light are we to see the death of Christ, as
   connected with His redeeming those that were under the law, that they
   might receive the adoption of sons. Had sin existed in men as mere
   spirits, death could not have been the wages of sin, and any response
   to the divine mind concerning sin which would have been an atonement
   for their sin, could only have had spiritual elements; but man being by
   the constitution of humanity capable of death, and death having come as
   the wages of sin, it was not simply sin that had to be dealt with, but
   an existing law with its penalty of death, and that death as already
   incurred. So it was not only the divine mind that had to be responded
   to, but also, that expression of the divine mind which was contained in
   God's making death the wages of sin.

   This honouring of the law, while it was being made to give place to
   that higher dispensation to which it was subordinate from the first in
   the divine purpose, being also subordinate in its own nature, has,
   indeed, been followed out to its fullest measure, in that our Lord not
   only tasted death, but, that that death was the death of the cross,--as
   the Apostle says, "Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law,
   being made a curse for us; as it is written. Cursed is every one that
   hangeth on a tree." Galatians iii. 13. He who endured the cross,
   despising the shame, did so as He tasted death, of which the cross was
   for this reason the selected form, in that oneness of mind with God
   which rendered His doing so truly a fitting element in the atonement;
   and thus in respect even of all that was most physical and external,
   the real value and virtue was strictly moral and spiritual:--for the
   tasting of death for us was not as a substitute,--otherwise He alone
   would have died; nor as a punishment,--for, tasted in the strength of
   righteousness and of the Father's favour, death had to Him no sting;
   but as a moral and spiritual sacrifice for sin. And thus, as I have
   said above, while death taking place simply as such, and the wages of
   sin, had been no atonement, neither could come to be through the
   subjection to it of the countless millions of our sinful race, death
   filled with that moral and spiritual meaning in relation to God and His
   righteous law which it had as tasted by Christ, and passed through in
   the spirit of sonship, was the perfecting of the atonement. That
   personally our Lord was conscious to perfect freedom in relation to
   death, "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life,
   that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down
   of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
   again. This commandment have I received of my Father," John x. 17-18;
   this accords with the difference between death coming as the wages of
   sin, and passing upon all men, for that all have sinned, and death as
   tasted by the Son of God; tasted in the strength of eternal life, not
   as a punishment, but, on behalf of men in righteous Amen to the
   judgment on sin, of which as the wages of sin, death is the expression.

   In this view we see the suitableness of the awfully solemn
   circumstances with which it seemed right to the Father to accompany the
   death of Christ. That darkness, which the evangelists record to have
   been over the earth from the sixth hour to the ninth hour, has been
   regarded as what in the natural world harmonised with, and was intended
   to symbolize, what was taking place in the spiritual world, when the
   vials of the Father's wrath were pouring out on the Son. Minds in which
   this association has long found a place will not easily receive any
   other explanation of that darkness, as any other explanation must be
   felt to come so infinitely short of that most awful and terrible
   conception. Yet in itself, and apart from this association as already
   in possession of the mind, this darkness no more than accords with the
   presence and place of our sins as borne on the spirit of the Redeemer,
   in that awful, though blessed peace-making, the elements of which we
   have been considering, and which had its consummation on the cross;
   while the language of the Roman centurion under the power of the whole
   scene, when the baptism in the prospect of which the Lord was so
   straitened received its accomplishment, "Surely this was the Son of
   God," recalls to us the testimony of the voice from heaven at His
   baptism by John in Jordan, "This is my beloved Son,"--recalls this
   testimony to us as one with that which reached the spirit of the
   centurion, making itself heard in spite of the permitted hour and power
   of darkness, and prevailing over the seeming meaning of that hour. We
   can, indeed, have no difficulty, apart from a fixed habit of thought,
   in seeing the harmony of the darkness recorded, with the relation of
   Christ's death to our sins as that relation has now been represented;
   while the response from the spirit of the centurion to that which was
   the true expression of the awful scene as a whole, accords with the
   unbroken and continuous acknowledgment of the Son by the Father implied
   in the conception of the atonement, as altogether and throughout,
   "Grace reigning through righteousness unto eternal life."

   Realising the relation of the death of Christ to our sins, we thus feel
   all that was dark and terrible in the circumstances of His death
   justified to our minds; while the peace in which He is seen tasting
   death, illustrates to us the life of sonship in which He does so. But,
   realising further, that He who is putting this peaceful trust in the
   Father in death, is "by the grace of God tasting death for every man,"
   we are learning much more than how the spirit of sonship can trust the
   Father even in death, though this by itself is a most important lesson,
   fitted to help us to realise the truth of our relation to God as "He on
   whose being our being reposes." This we are learning, but we are
   further learning how adequate and accepted the atonement for our sins
   which, in tasting death for us, the Son of God is perfecting, is in His
   own consciousness before the Father. That relation to us in which the
   Son of God is seen tasting death--which relation, indeed, alone
   explains His being tasting death at all--gives this largeness of
   reference to the words, "Into thy hands, O Father, I commend my
   spirit," as we have seen in considering the 22nd Psalm. And so we are
   to connect the words just quoted as to our Lord's personal freedom in
   relation to death, "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay
   down my life that I might take it again," with the words, "Except a
   corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it
   die, it bringeth forth much fruit;" and I, if I be lifted up, will draw
   all men unto me." John xii. 24, 32.

   Therefore, in endeavouring to conceive of our Lord's consciousness in
   cherishing this hope in death in humanity, and in relation to all
   humanity, that is, as a hope which His death was opening up to all men,
   we must have before our minds the atoning elements present in that
   consciousness as entering into that hope; for upon this depends the
   measure in which the death of Christ shall be filled for us with the
   light of life. Faith, it is said, will be imputed to us for
   righteousness, "if we believe on Him who raised up our Lord Jesus again
   from the dead; who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again
   for our justification." Therefore, the faith in God by which we become
   righteous, must embrace our seeing our sins in the light shed upon them
   by the death of Christ, and our seeing our justification in the light
   shed upon it by His resurrection from the dead.

   And the first part of this statement is presupposed in the second. We
   cannot understand the ground of confidence for us in God which Christ's
   resurrection from the dead reveals, unless we understand the mind of
   God in relation to our sins which His death reveals, and in response to
   which He tasted death for us. That ground of confidence is the heart of
   the Father, because with that heart the words deal, "Into thy hands, O
   Father, I commend my spirit;" but the death itself, no less than the
   hope in death, is an element in the Son's revelation of the Father; and
   unless that revelation is seen in that death, as well as in that hope
   in death, the true confidence of sonship to which that hope in death
   calls, is not understood. The condemnation of our sin in that expiatory
   confession of our sin which was perfected in the death of Christ, is
   not less a part of the revelation of the Father by the Son, than the
   trust in the depths of fatherliness in which life was asked and
   received for us. Indeed, these are ultimately but two aspects of one
   mind of God, who must condemn our life as rebellious children,
   according as He chooses for us and desires for us the life of true
   sonship.

   Our being planted in the likeness or fellowship of Christ's death is,
   therefore, a prerequisite to our fellowship in His resurrection from
   the dead. For, not only was His death no substitute for our
   death--superseding the necessity for our dying,--but, more than this,
   His death, as differing from death coming as the wages of sin,--His
   death as a propitiation for sin, tasted in the spirit of sonship, and
   in unity with the Father in His condemnation of sin, that is to say,
   death, as tasted by Christ,--must be not only apprehended by our faith,
   but also spiritually shared in by us. And such participation in the
   death of Christ is, because of the unity that is in His life and death,
   necessarily implied in receiving Christ as our life; for the mind in
   which He died is the mind in which He lived, and that condemnation of
   sin in the flesh, which was perfected and fully told out in His death,
   pervaded His life. Therefore is our "bearing about in the body the
   dying of the Lord Jesus," implied in "the life of Jesus being
   manifested in our mortal bodies." Therefore must we, knowing Christ,
   and experiencing the power of His resurrection from the dead as what
   enables us to have faith and hope in God, have fellowship in Christ's
   sufferings, and be conformed to His death.

   The close and direct consideration of the death of Christ, and of His
   consciousness in tasting death for every man, saying, "Into thy hands,
   O Father, I commend my spirit," now attempted, may, as I have said,
   help us practically; illustrating the directly and absolutely practical
   aspect in which the cross of Christ is contemplated in the Scriptures.
   I have already noticed how we are taught by the hope for men expressed
   in the 22nd psalm, in connexion with God's hearing the cry of the
   afflicted and not hiding His face from him, that that fatherliness in
   God, in which the sinless One is trusting, is a fatherliness in which
   the sinful may trust. It is in the light of the confession of our sins
   as one aspect of the life of sonship in Christ--that side, as I have
   said above, on which the life of Christ is nearest us--that this is
   clear to us. That confession being understood, we feel that in
   receiving it, as a part of the mind of Christ, to be in us and be our
   own mind, we can freely breathe the life of sonship as confidence
   towards the Father,--we can share in the mind which the words express,
   "Into thy hands, O Father, I commend my spirit;" we can share in that
   mind, both as it was through life the inmost element in the victory of
   the Son of God over the world, and as it was His victorious peace in
   death. Acting on this apprehension, taking to ourselves this
   confession, and saying Amen to it, entering by this path into the
   liberty of sonship, and in that liberty meeting life and meeting death,
   we come to know in ourselves what the Apostle meant when he said, "God
   forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
   by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world."
   Galatians vi. 14. The fleshly life which the death of Christ condemns,
   the spiritual life which Christ's hope in death commends to our
   spirits, these are present to us in the enlightened contemplation of
   Christ as dying that we might live; and, therefore, our uniting in the
   condemnation that His death expresses in relation to the life which it
   condemns, welcoming that life to be our life which His hope in death
   reveals and commends,--this, and our receiving Christ as our Saviour,
   are one and the same movement of our being,--a practical movement in
   the deepest sense,--a choice of the will, not as to acts, but as to
   life,--a choosing the life given to us in Christ that we may
   live;--being that same practical judgment which the Apostle Paul
   expresses when he says, "For the love of Christ constraineth us;
   because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
   dead"--or, rather, then have all died--"and that He died for all, that
   they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto
   Him which died for them, and rose again." 2 Cor.
   V. 14, 15. And the Apostle Peter also, when he says, "Forasmuch then as
   Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with
   the same mind. For He that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from
   sin; that He no longer should live the rest of His time in the flesh to
   the lusts of men, but to the will of God." I Peter iv. 1, 2.

   How such practical, living dealing with the cross of Christ as these
   quotations express, will confirm us in the faith to which it belongs;
   how the "bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus," and
   "the manifestation of the life of Jesus in our mortal bodies," will
   progress together and deepen in intensity; how the counsel of God in
   connecting us with Christ as He has done, and identifying us with Him
   in His death, and in His resurrection from the dead, will be more and
   more clearly seen to be to the glory of God according as we are
   conforming to this gracious constitution of the kingdom of God, dead in
   the death of Christ, and living that life which we have hid with Christ
   in God,--this, in the light of the atonement as now represented, we
   easily understand.

   But one caution my reader will here bear from me, supposing the
   teaching of these pages to be commending itself to his understanding,
   and so to be giving me some claim on his weighing what I urge--viz.,
   that it is the conscience much more than the understanding that is
   concerned in a right reception of teaching, which, if true at all, is
   pre-eminently, and in the deepest sense, practical teaching. I shall
   not feel it nothing that the argument should commend itself; but this
   consent of the understanding is a small matter unless the conscience
   feel, that that is presented to it which has power to purge it from
   dead works, to serve the living God;--unless the spirit which has dwelt
   in the darkness land death of sin, see the path of life open before it,
   shining in the light of the divine favour; unless the orphan spirit
   find itself brought into the presence of its long-lost Father, who is
   waiting to receive it graciously, whose heart yearns to hear it cry,
   Abba, Father. To this result it is as necessary that the death of
   Christ, as filled with the divine judgment on sin, shall commend itself
   to the conscience, as that the life of Christ and His resurrection from
   the dead, revealing the hope which, when we had destroyed ourselves,
   remained for us in God, shall so commend itself.

   And let no man deceive himself, as if it were his experience that
   conscience responded to the latter revelation, and welcomed the light
   of life, while it responded not to the former, nor said "Amen" to that
   Amen to the divine judgment in relation to sin which was in the death
   of Christ, and gave it its atoning virtue. That would be to say that
   light may be light, and yet not make the darkness manifest. I have
   dwelt above on the fixedness of that law of the kingdom of God which
   the words express,--"No man cometh to the Father but by the Son." But
   no man cometh by the Son who cometh not in the fellowship of His
   death,--"Thou hast washed us in thy blood, and made us kings and
   priests unto God.''

   The deep and awful impression of what sin must be in the eyes of God,
   which men have received while contemplating the suffering of Christ for
   our sins as His having the vials of divine wrath poured out on Him, has
   been recognised above as in itself a great gain, notwithstanding the
   darkness in which the mind of God towards sin and sinners was left by
   that view, and even the positive misconception which it contained. So
   real a gain has that deep and awful impression on the subject of sin
   been, that it would be an indication of having gone out of the right
   path to find that we were parting with it. But, assuredly, not less
   profound or awful, while accompanied by a light of the glory of God not
   seen in that other system, is the sense of the evil and guilt of sin
   which is received when the sufferings of Christ become to our minds not
   the measure of what God can inflict, but the revelation of what God
   feels; that which the Son of God in our nature has felt in oneness with
   the Father, that into the fellowship of which He calls us in calling us
   to be sons of God.

   I freely confess that to my own mind it is a relief, not only
   intellectually, but also morally and spiritually, to see that there is
   no foundation for the conception that when Christ suffered for us, the
   just for the unjust. He suffered either "as by imputation unjust," or
   "as if He were unjust." I admit that intellectually it is a relief not
   to be called to conceive to myself a double consciousness---both in the
   Father and in the Son, such as seems implied in the Father's seeing the
   Son at one and the same time, though it were but for a moment, as the
   well-beloved Son to whom infinite favour should go forth, and also as
   worthy in respect of the imputation of our sins to Him of being the
   object of infinite wrath. He being the object of such wrath
   accordingly; and in the Son's knowing Himself the well-beloved of the
   Father, and yet having the consciousness of being personally through
   imputation of our sin the object of the Father's wrath, I feel it
   intellectually a relief neither to be called to conceive this, nor to
   assume it as an unconceived mystery. Still more do I feel it morally
   and spiritually a relief, not to be required to recognise legal
   fictions as having a place in this high region; in which the awful
   realities of sin and holiness, spiritual death and spiritual life, are
   the objects of a transaction between the Father and the Son in the
   Eternal Spirit. And though it may seem to some that this admission may
   excuse in the reader the fear that I have been less free of bias in
   considering this subject than was desirable, and that I have been less
   able to weigh justly the claims of the system which I have rejected, in
   proportion as I feel it a relief to be justified in concluding that it
   is not true, I must still in fairness make the admission.

   But while so many, as we have seen above, of those who believe in an
   atonement have latterly made the same avowal on the subject of
   imputation, and transferred guilt, and merit, that I now make,--to whom
   therefore this avowal on my part will be no source of distrust as to
   the conclusions at which I have arrived,--it is to my own mind an
   additional source of freedom of feeling, besides the positive weight of
   the intellectual and moral difficulties involved in the system which I
   am rejecting, that the conception of the nature of the atonement which
   I have seemed to myself to receive in seeking to see it by its own
   light, is altogether independent of the question of imputation, neither
   needs the denial of imputation for its commendation. Whatever be
   supposed to have been the nature of the link between Christ and our
   sins, it was needful that He should on our behalf deal with the
   righteous wrath of God against sin in that way which accorded with the
   eternal and unchanging truth of things. And that which has now been
   represented as the way in which He has actually done so, commends
   itself, as I have said above, as what would still have been the right
   and God-glorifying way had the identification of Christ with us and our
   sins been of a nature to justify even the boldest and most unbelievable
   language ever ventured on this subject. The point of divergence of the
   two conceptions of the atonement is that at which, as we have seen,
   President Edwards stood when these two ways of satisfying divine
   justice in relation to sin were together before his mind: an infinite
   punishment and an adequate repentance. Had these alternatives been
   dwelt on, even in connexion with that manner of taking of the place of
   those whom He came to save on the part of Christ which Edwards
   conceived of, the latter alternative would have commended itself as
   most to the glory of God; although its claim to be, as I hold, the only
   satisfaction to divine justice that could be called an atonement or
   propitiation were not at once perceived: for it would be felt to be the
   higher and more real satisfaction to the divine righteousness, while
   the former could be contemplated only as an infinitely unwelcome
   necessity.

   But these alternatives could not be fully realised, and their different
   natures considered, without the mind's being led to that perception of
   the deep and fundamental distinction between the conception of Christ's
   enduring as a substitute the penalty of sin, and Christ's making in
   humanity the due moral and spiritual atonement for sin; and this
   perception, once reached, would have commanded for the truth the assent
   both of the understanding and the conscience, and would have claimed
   for it all the varied expressions of Scripture on this subject as what,
   however they had clothed another conception in men's systems, belonged
   of right to it, and expressed it--and it alone--naturally and truly.

   It would be a suitable and satisfactory sequel to what I have now
   presented to the reader's attention, to examine all those portions of
   Scripture which are most identified in men's minds with the conception
   of the atonement as penal suffering endured by Christ as our
   substitute, and shew how much more naturally they express a moral and
   spiritual atonement, and how they are by the conception of such an
   atonement filled with light; but I must satisfy myself for the present
   with what I have incidentally done in this way already. Nor, assuming
   the view expounded to be truth, can the reader who has fully received
   it have difficulty in doing this for himself. Of the passages to which
   I refer, those as to which I would most urge the reader to engage in
   this task, are those in which the death of Christ is made the measure
   of the evil of sin; earnestly desiring as I do that His death may be
   that measure to our spirits, and feeling that it never can be so as God
   has intended, unless we are understanding our calling to die to sin in
   the fellowship of His death, unless to us, as to the Apostle, to "win
   Christ, and be found in Him, not having our own righteousness, which is
   of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
   righteousness which is of God by faith,"--be identified with knowing
   Christ, and the power of His resurrection, and the fellowship of His
   sufferings, being made conformable to His death."
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER XIV.

   COMPARATIVE COMMENDATION OF THE VIEW NOW TAKEN OF THE NATURE OF THE
   ATONEMENT AS TO (1) LIGHT, (2) UNITY AND SIMPLICITY, AND (3) A NATURAL
   RELATION TO CHRISTIANITY, AND (4) HARMONY WITH THE DIVINE
   RIGHTEOUSNESS.

   MY conception of the nature of the atonement, and of its relation to
   the remission of sins and the gift of eternal life, being now before my
   readers, I might stop here, and leave it to receive that measure of
   consideration which, in the naked statement of it, it may be felt to
   claim for itself. If it come with that self-evidencing light to others,
   with which it has come to me, it will not only commend itself as the
   truth, but also, by its light, reveal the root of error in any
   erroneous view which it may find in possession of the mind. Yet I
   cannot conclude without pointedly directing attention to some of the
   aspects in which it contrasts with the system with which it will be
   most compared.

   1. Understanding the words, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God," to be
   the key to the atonement, and to contemplate that Eternal Will of God,
   in respect of the nature of which it is true that "God is love;" and
   that therefore the doing of this will by Christ is to be seen in this,
   that love was the law of the spirit of the life that was in Him; which
   took form in its outcomings according to its own nature, and as the
   path in which the Father led Him gave it development and
   manifestation,--the conception of the atonement received in tracing the
   work of redemption, has been full of light.

   For, however imperfectly I have executed the high task which I have
   attempted, I hope it has been felt that the path in which I have led
   the reader has been one in which the mind has advanced in conscious
   light. I do not, of course, mean the light of the conviction that what
   I have set forth as the atonement, has been the atonement; this has
   been my own consciousness, and may, I trust, have been that of many of
   my readers: but I mean a conviction distinct from this, and which, I
   hope, has been felt even when that further conviction may not have been
   imparted, viz., the conviction that all the elements of the work of
   Christ stated, were really present in that work; are seen clearly to
   have arisen out of the life that was in Him; and are all what, in the
   light of that life, we can as to their nature understand, though their
   measure be beyond the grasp of our capacity. For this has been so,
   whether these elements in the work of Christ do, or do not, constitute
   its atoning virtue.

   Now this is an important point of contrast between what has now been
   taught, and the conception of the atonement as Christ's being, in
   respect of the imputation of our sins, the object of the Father's
   wrath; and so bearing, as our substitute, the punishment of our sins.
   Whatever light may be recognised in that system as shining from the
   work of Christ's as a whole, the great central fact in it is so
   represented, as to remain necessarily shrouded in darkness. But what
   our Lord would feel in bearing our sins as His doing so has now been
   represented, we can in measure enter into; and that, too, a measure
   which must enlarge, as the life of Christ progresses in us: while, as
   to its fulness, as it is our blessedness, in contemplating the work of
   our redemption, to be occupied with the height, and depth, and breadth,
   and length of a love which passes knowledge; so is it also to an
   experience of suffering and self-sacrifice on our behalf, which passes
   knowledge, that our faith is directed; the measure as the nature of
   Christ's sufferings being that of the divine love which experienced
   them.

   But the difference is immense, even the difference between light and
   darkness, between knowing in measure what passeth knowledge, and not
   knowing at all: and this, and nothing less, is the difference between,
   knowing, as to their nature, the elements of Christ's sufferings, being
   ourselves called to the fellowship of them, and knowing nothing of
   their nature at all. And, assuredly, whatever elements of Christ's
   sufferings are still held to be what we are to understand, and to share
   in, that special suffering which was proper to the assumed
   consciousness of having our sin imputed to Him, and its punishment
   inflicted on Him; that which is represented as the personal sense of
   the Father's wrath coming out on Him personally,--the wrath of God
   coming forth on the Son of His love: this is, and must be to us, simply
   darkness--a horror of darkness, without one ray of light.

   The conception that Christ suffered as our substitute--so by His
   suffering superseding the necessity for our suffering, itself implies
   that the sufferings of His which such expressions contemplate, must
   remain in the nature unknown to us; an experience in our Lord's
   humanity which, though it has been an experience in humanity, we have
   not been intended to share in: a conception that seems to me improbable
   in the bare statement of it. For an experience of the Son of God in
   humanity not within reach of man's vision as partaking in the divine
   nature, is to me what there is a strong presumption against. How much
   that deeply-meditating believer in Christ, President Edwards, has
   ventured to expect in the way of understanding the elements of Christ's
   sufferings, we have seen above; while we have also seen how unsuited to
   his conception of their being penal sufferings, the sufferings which he
   has specified are, though altogether in accordance with the conception
   of the atonement now advocated. But all beyond what he has thus
   specified, which the words "the Father's wrath," may be expected to
   suggest, however awful it must be supposed to be, must be felt to
   remain--necessarily to remain--unconceived of. Men's minds are indeed
   accustomed to this darkness as resting upon the central point in the
   great work of redemption. Yet surely it is a presumption in favour of
   the view of the atonement now taken, that it makes that central point
   no longer darkness, but light--the light of the life of Christ
   concentrated in His death; or rather present in His death, in a fulness
   which sheds back light on all His life.

   ;2. The life of Christ being the light of life to us, and the atonement
   being the form of that life, it must needs be light, and not darkness.
   That which sheds light on all else must needs be light in itself, and
   be visible in its own light; as we not only see all things by the light
   of the sun, but also the sun itself. Further, that in the nature of the
   atonement, which imparts to it this character of light, also imparts
   that of simplicity and unity.

   Although I have found it necessary to consider the work of Christ in
   the two aspects of a dealing with man on the part of God, and with God
   on behalf of man; and in the two references of a retrospective relation
   to the remission of sins, and a prospective relation to the gift of
   eternal life; I trust the unity and simplicity and natural character of
   a life has been felt to belong to all that has been thus traced. It is
   all grace reigning through righteousness unto eternal life. All is in
   harmony with the purpose, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O

   God;" and is its natural development terminating in its perfect
   accomplishment. An unbroken testimony on the part of the Father to the
   beloved Son in whom He is well pleased; an unbroken consciousness in
   the Son as hearing the Father's voice, abiding in the Father's love,
   strong in the strength of the life that is in the Father's favour, able
   to drink the cup of suffering given Him to drink because receiving it
   from His Father's hand, the last utterance of His inner life in man's
   hearing being the words in death, "Into thy hands, O Father, I commend
   my spirit;" from first to last the Son doing nothing of Himself all His
   speaking because of an inward hearing of the Father, all His works the
   doing of the Father that dwelleth in Him, all His strength the strength
   of faith, all His peace, all His joy,--peace and joy in conscious
   oneness with the Father, all His consolation in the prospect of
   desertion drawn from the assurance, that, though all forsake Him, He is
   not alone, because the Father is with Him; the bearing of the heavy
   burden of our sins, accomplished in the might of a hope sustained by
   the consciousness that what of pain they were to His heart, they were
   also to the Father's heart; that what of interest we were to His heart
   we were also to the Father's heart: therefore His separating between us
   and our sins. His intercession, "Father, forgive them; for they know
   not what they do,"--a separating, an intercession, in the assurance of
   the response of the Father's righteous mercy:--in this I say is unity,
   and harmony, and divine simplicity. We can trace all this back to the
   purpose, "Lo, I come to do thy will." Had it been given to us to hear
   the expression of that purpose, and were it permitted to us to follow
   its fulfillment with a perfect spiritual vision, all would be seen to
   be in accordance with it, and to be made clear to us, step by step, by
   its light. The path thus trode we should expect to find all lying
   within the light of the Father's favour; and it has been so. Suffering
   and sorrow we should not anticipate, apart from what we might
   understand of the nature of sin, with which the Son of God was come to
   deal in the might of the eternal righteousness; but for suffering and
   sorrow and self-sacrifice in accomplishing the end of righteous love,
   we should understand that love was prepared; and if any difficulty
   should be felt as to suffering coming to the holy One and the true, it
   must pass away,--I can only express my own experience by saying it has
   passed away, in contemplating these sufferings as they arise, and in
   considering and apprehending their nature; the unity with the Father
   out of which they spring, the unity with the Father in which they are
   born; and the justification of the Father in relation to them, in their
   divine fitness to accomplish the ends of the Father's love in sending
   the Son to do His will in humanity, and reveal His name to men,--even
   as they were thus justified to the sufferer Himself, "Now is my soul
   troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour; but for
   this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name."

   What is thus seen endured in conscious oneness with the Father, as a
   necessary element in the Son's glorifying of the Father, and in the
   strength and with the comfort of the Father's acknowledgment, we can
   believe in as a cup which the Father gave the Son to drink, and which
   the Son welcomed from the Father's hand. But if we are asked to see the
   path which the Son is treading in doing the Father's will, declaring
   His name, as, at a certain point, passing out of the Father's favour
   into His wrath; and that a demand is made on us for the faith of a
   consciousness both in the

   Father and in the Son, in their relation to each other, which would
   make this statement a reality: or if the conception be not that of
   transition,--but that we are asked to combine with the faith of a
   favour always resting upon the Son, the faith of a wrath from the
   Father as also proceeding forth upon Him; however other grounds for
   this faith may be urged, or whatever weight may be asserted for
   them--which question I am not at this moment considering--it is clear
   that the unity and harmony and natural character of what we have been
   contemplating as the fulfilment of the purpose, "Lo, I come to do thy
   will," is marred, and the commendation on this ground at least, of that
   which is presented to our faith, ceases.

   3. This unity and simplicity and natural character of the atonement,
   contemplated as the form which the life of love in Christ took--the
   natural development of the incarnation--is still further commended to
   us by its imparting a corresponding unity and simplicity to the
   relation of the atonement to Christianity. If the atonement be the form
   which the eternal life took in Christ, that eternal life which the
   Father has given to us in the Son, then, as the atonement is the
   development of the incarnation, so is Christianity the development of
   the atonement; and this is only what the words, "I am the vine, ye are
   the branches," express.

   The fitness of all the elements that have been now recognised as
   present in the personal consciousness of Christ in humanity in making
   His soul an offering for sin, to enter into the experience of
   Christians, and be the elements of their lives, must have been
   commending itself to the reader as we have proceeded. These elements of
   our Lord's consciousness as the rays of the light of the life that was
   in Him, have that relation to us and our state, that, shining in us in
   faith, they necessarily reproduce themselves in us, that is, according
   to the measure of our faith; man and God, sin and holiness, becoming to
   us in the light of Christ what that light reveals them to be, and the
   confession of sin and the choice of holiness, self despair and trust in
   God, springing up in us: a confession of sin in unison with Christ's
   confession of our sins, a trust in God quickened by the faith of His
   trust in the Father on our behalf, and laying hold on that in the
   Father's heart on which His intercession laid hold. The atonement thus
   through faith reproduces its own elements in us, we being raised to the
   fellowship of that to which Christ descended in working out our
   salvation. "We are crucified with Christ" in actual consciousness, as
   we were in the death of Christ for us in the counsel and grace of the
   Father: "Nevertheless we live; yet not we but Christ in us."

   Let our minds rest on this unity between the atonement and
   Christianity. How natural a sequel to the atonement is Christianity
   thus seen to be! Christ's work shared in through being trusted to, or
   rather trusted to with a trust which is of necessity a sharing in it.
   No need here to watch ourselves that we may not only trust to Christ,
   but also receive Him as our life; for in the light in which we are,
   these are but two forms of expression for one movement of our inner
   man. For, as I would ever keep before the reader's mind, trust in the
   work of Christ is, in its ultimate reference, trust in that fatherly
   heart in God which that work reveals, and such trust is the pulse and
   breath of our new life--the life of sonship.

   But this natural relation of Christianity to the atonement, and which I
   believe to be a part of the simplicity which is in Christ, disappears
   when we would pass to Christianity from that other conception of the
   work of redemption according to which the atonement and the life given
   to us in Christ are totally distinct and diverse in their nature; so
   that we are taught to keep them distinct in our thoughts, trusting to
   the one while we welcome the other.

   To any seeking a clear, intelligent consciousness in religion, the
   complexity of this teaching appears to me to involve practical
   difficulties which have been unaccountably little felt. As to the
   sufferings of Christ, whatever sufferings of His may still be
   considered as what we are to share in, (and the words "if we suffer
   with Him we shall also reign with Him," must be held to imply that such
   sufferings there are,) it is clear, that sufferings assumed to have
   been the punishment of our sins, endured by Christ as our substitute,
   we cannot be intended to share in, not even though, as to their outward
   form and circumstances, they should be repeated in our history; for
   still they would not be sufferings endured as the wrath of God and the
   punishment of sin, inflicted on us as having the guilt of sin imputed
   to us. Indeed, were we to see one professing trust in Christ, suffering
   with this consciousness, we should feel that he was therein denying
   Christ, and making His death for sin of none effect. Therefore any
   consciousness that is ascribed to Christ, on the assumption of His
   being consciously bearing our sins as what the Father imputed to Him,
   and what drew forth the Father's wrath upon Him personally, must be
   excluded from what the example which Christ is to us comprises.

   But even as to the righteousness of Christ as that is conceived of, how
   was He in fulfilling all righteousness, as His doing so is represented
   in this system, an example to us? He is supposed as one under the law,
   to be consciously engaged in meeting its demands, working out a legal
   righteousness to be imputed to us. But this is not a consciousness
   which we are supposed to be called to share, being not under the law
   but under grace. So while His righteousness is represented as a perfect
   legal righteousness, it is as such put in opposition to the
   righteousness contemplated for us, which is the righteousness of faith.
   Now I am not at present considering the objections otherwise to this
   manner of conception; I here consider it only in relation to the
   recognition of Christ as our example, and I request those who, while
   adopting these distinctions, propose to themselves to follow Christ as
   an example, to consider how, adhering to these distinctions, they can
   attempt to follow Christ as an example in relation to His inner
   life--the springs of His action--the conscious rightness of His
   righteousness--His conscious confidence towards God--His walk with God.
   I do not see how they can do so with conscious inward consistency. No
   doubt Christ did fulfil the law--did fulfil all righteousness; not,
   however, in a legal spirit, but as the Son of God following God as a
   dear child. Therefore, in the true conception of this matter there is
   no practical difficulty, Christ's righteousness as the form of the law
   of the spirit of the life that was in Him, being, in the strictest and
   most absolute sense, an example for us who have the life of sonship in
   Him, and in whom the righteousness of the law is to be fulfilled in our
   walking in His spirit.

   The complication introduced in consequence of this departure from the
   simplicity of the truth, is obviously still further increased when we
   add to the assumed presence in Christ of the sense of an imputation of
   sin, the presence in us of the sense of the imputation of
   righteousness; a consciousness which could have had nothing
   corresponding with it in the consciousness of Christ.

   But, in whatever way these practical difficulties in walking in the
   footsteps of the Son of God, in the highest sense which these words can
   bear, may be dealt with, the fitness of the atonement, as now
   contemplated, to be reproduced in us, and, on the other view of its
   nature, its unfitness to be so reproduced, are alike clear; and, apart
   from other and more fundamental aspects of the subject, I certainly
   feel that greater simplicity, a more natural character in the
   transition from the work of Christ to our calling as Christians, is a
   consideration to which weight is due.

   4. I say ''apart from other and more fundamental aspects of the
   subject." For, while it certainly accords to my mind with the
   assumption that the true conception has been reached, that the
   atonement is thus seen filled with the light of the life of
   Christ--characterised by the simplicity and unity proper to a life--and
   standing to Christianity in the natural relation of the life that is in
   the vine to the life that is in the branches; yet these appearances are
   comparatively superficial, and must be delusive, however beautiful,
   unless the atonement which they commend is in harmony with the divine
   righteousness, and such as meets the demands of the eternal laws of the
   kingdom of God. Therefore an appeal to these must still remain.

   I have already expressed my accordance with President Edwards in his
   founding on the absolute righteousness of God, and my greater sympathy
   with him than with those who ascend no higher than what they express by
   the words "rectoral justice." Doubtless what meets the requirements of
   absolute righteousness must secure the interests of rectoral justice;
   while it is not easy to see--I cannot see--how the interests of
   rectoral justice can be felt secure if the requirements of absolute
   righteousness are compromised, or even are not seen to be taken into
   account. But in whichever relation the atonement is contemplated, the
   superiority of the moral and spiritual atonement, which I have now
   attempted to illustrate, seems to me clear. That such an atonement lay
   within the limits of the principles of eternal rectitude on which
   Edwards builds, we have seen in the alternatives which he states. And,
   being contemplated as within these limits, I have no doubt that, if
   realised, its higher character must be recognised. I would indeed
   rather speak of its exclusive claim to meet adequately the demand of
   the eternal righteousness; but its higher character as a meeting of
   that demand is beyond question; and, if so, then also its superiority
   as that moral demonstration and vindication of God's rectoral
   government which the teachers of the modified Calvinism regard as what
   was called for.

   This much I feel justified in saying, even looking at the question with
   exclusive reference to the honouring of the divine law. But when we
   consider, that the highest honouring of the law cannot be recognised as
   an atonement for sin apart from the prospective result
   contemplated,--as, indeed, but with a view to such a result an
   atonement could never have been,--the natural relation of the atonement
   to Christianity now illustrated, and which in its first aspect so
   commends itself to us, is seen, when more deeply considered, to be of
   fundamental importance.

   Some, I know, are so far from feeling that a natural relation between
   the atonement and Christianity is necessary, or to be looked for, that
   they draw back from the attempt to trace such a relation as what they
   would call reducing the work of atonement to the mere setting an
   example before us,--and, considering the associations which exist with
   making the example of Christ the sum and substance of Christianity,
   great jealousy on this subject may well be excused. Yet that jealousy
   may go too far. If to represent the atonement as what we are intended
   to participate in, having its elements reproduced in us, be to lower
   the conception of an atonement, must it not be held also that it is a
   lowering of our conception of the divine nature to say that the gospel
   contemplates our participation in it--that it is a lowering of our
   conception of what is said when it is said "God is love," to speak of
   men as "dwelling in love," and so "dwelling in God?" I know that such
   thoughts of the relation of the human to the divine may be so
   entertained as to lower our conceptions of God, rather than to raise
   our conceptions of that to which God calls man; but that the latter,
   and not the former, ought to be their operation, is unquestionable. So
   of the atonement as now represented, if it has been a form which the
   eternal life took in Christ, a form determined by the nature of that
   life and the circumstances in which it was developed, it follows, that
   in the measure in which we partake in that eternal life, we shall
   partake in the atonement, and have it reproduced in us: though not with
   the same personal consciousness as in the Saviour, who, as I have said,
   came down in saving us to that to which in being saved we are raised.
   But so to conceive is surely not to have our conceptions of the
   atonement lowered, but only our conceptions of Christianity exalted.
   And let not the expression "example" turn us away. For as to the
   dignity that may belong to an example let us remember the exhortations
   "Be ye followers of God as dear children," "Be ye therefore perfect
   even as your Father in heaven is perfect."

   But, indeed, apart from this, the truth is that the use of the
   expression "example" is misleading. The relation of our participation
   in the atonement to the atonement, is radically a different thing from
   what the words "following an example" suggest. Each slender branch,
   each leafy twig of the tree, with its fruit-blossom or ripened fruit,
   may recall the plant in its first form as a single stem, yet with all
   its proper nature and beauty already visible in it, with that richness
   of leaf, and blossom, and fruit which belongs to the first development
   of the life of plants; but these reproductions of the original plant in
   its branches are not individual, independent, self-reliant plants. It
   drew, as it draws, its life from the ground; they draw their life from
   it: Christ is the vine: we are the branches. As it is no depreciating
   of the life seen in the plant while yet a single stem, to say, that
   that same life is the contemplated life of its future branches; so
   neither is it a depreciation of the atonement to say, that that eternal
   life which glorified God, and wrought redemption for man, in the
   personal work of Christ on earth, is the same that is to be seen
   bearing fruit to the glory of God in us in our participation in
   redemption. Such conceptions neither depreciate the atonement nor
   affect the absoluteness of our dependence on Christ; on the contrary,
   the relation of the branch to the vine alone represents that dependence
   adequately. And this will, I trust, meet a difficulty which really
   arises from feeling the expression "example" suggestive of
   individuality, and individual independence, as if we were to be
   individually each another Christ, and our participation in the
   atonement itself an atonement, our participation in the propitiation
   itself a propitiation.

   But, it is not only that this recognition of a natural relation between
   the atonement and Christianity is in itself no objection to the view
   which implies it, and can only under misapprehension of what is taught,
   be regarded as reducing the work of Christ to a mere example. The truth
   is, that the discernment of this natural relation becomes essential to
   our faith in the adequacy of the atonement in proportion as we see the
   subject of atonement in the light of God. No doubt the perfect response
   from humanity to the divine mind in relation to our sins, which has
   been in Christ's confession of our sins before the Father, has been the
   due and proper expiation for that sin,--an expiation infinitely more
   glorifying to the law of God, than any penal suffering could be; but
   that confession, as it would not have been at all, but in connexion
   with that intercession for the transgressors which laid hold of the
   divine mercy on our behalf, so neither would it have been the suitable
   and adequate atonement for our sin apart from its fitness to be
   reproduced in us, and the contemplated result of its being so
   reproduced. No doubt the perfect righteousness of Christ seen as the
   perfection of sonship in humanity, and acknowledged in the words, "This
   is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased," is a higher,
   righteousness than obedience in any legal aspect of it; and, if fruits
   of righteousness could be dispensed to us, either in connexion with
   imputation, or without imputation, on the ground of the righteousness
   of another, otherwise than in the reproduction of that righteousness in
   ourselves, here was the highest righteousness, the divine righteousness
   in humanity: but that righteousness could never have been accounted of
   in our favour, or be recognised as "ours," apart from our capacity of
   partaking in it; that is to say, apart from its being a righteousness
   in humanity, and, therefore, for all partaking in humanity.

   In order that the importance of this natural relation between the
   atonement and Christianity may be clearly seen, the relation in which
   the joy of God in Christians stands to his perfect delight in Christ,
   must be understood.

   I have already had occasion to express my objection to what is held on
   this subject in connexion with imputation of righteousness, or the
   transference of the fruits of righteousness, assumed to be implied in
   justification by faith. There has been in this matter a subverting of
   the natural relation of things, which has caused much darkness. The end
   has been represented as valued for the sake of the means; not the means
   for the sake of the end. The very excellence inherent in the means has
   partly led to this. When we look at the work of Christ, viewed simply
   in itself, it is seen filled with a divine glory, and a moral and
   spiritual excellence is felt to belong to it so great that God alone
   can perfectly appreciate it. To say that it is the Eternal Will of God
   fulfilled, is to say that it is in itself infinitely acceptable to God.
   When, then, the remission of our sins, and the gift of Eternal life,
   are preached to us in connexion with that excellent glory to God in
   humanity, we feel that any acknowledgment of it that can be, is to be
   looked for; and, also, that nothing granted on the ground of it can be
   otherwise than safely granted, for that mercy flowing through such a
   channel must be holy: so that we easily receive the statement, that
   pardon of past sin, and prospective blessings, are all given to us for
   Christ's sake, and because of the perfect atonement which Christ has
   made for our sin, and God's perfect delight in him; and this, if we are
   in the light of God in the matter, we cannot do too readily or too
   confidently. And yet our lack of spiritual discernment, and of
   participation in the mind of God, combined, also, I would say, with our
   unenlightened sense of the evil and danger of our condition as sinners,
   may lead to our resting in notions of the meaning of the expression,
   "for Christ's sake," which are superficial and even erroneous. And this
   is sure to be the case if we enter not into these two great truths,
   viz.
    1. Though, in a true sense, and one which it is most important that we
       should apprehend, remission of sins, and the gift of eternal life,
       are presented to our faith as resting on the atonement, and as the
       redemption which Christ has accomplished for us; yet is the
       ultimate ground of these, and of the atonement itself in its
       relation to these, to be seen in God, who is to be conceived of,
       not as moved to give us remission of sins and eternal life by the
       atonement, but as self-moved to give us remission of sins and
       eternal life, and as giving them through the atonement as what
       secures that what is given shall be received, on the ground of that
       in God which moves Him to this grace, and in harmony with His mind
       in bestowing it. So that to stop at the atonement, and rest in the
       fact of the atonement, instead of ascending through it to that in
       God from which it has proceeded, and which demanded it for its due
       expression, is to misapprehend the atonement as to its nature, and
       place, and end. It has been truly said, that men have perverted
       creation, and, instead of using it as a glass through which to see
       God, have turned it into a veil to hide God. I believe the greater
       work of redemption has been the subject of a similar perversion. It
       is the commendation of the light in which Christ's doing of the
       Father's will, Christ's declaring of the Father's name, has now
       been contemplated, that, as I have said, it ever raises the mind to
       the Eternal Will, the Unchanging Name.
    2. As it is thus necessary, in order that we may not misunderstand the
       expression ''for Christ's sake," that we ascend from the work of
       Christ, and through it, to that in God because of which that work
       has itself been, and to which, therefore, we must refer all

   that springs out of it; so is it necessary that, on the other hand, we
   descend from the work of Christ to its results, and, viewing these as
   its fruits, see that work as means to an end, and, therefore, as having
   its ultimate value in the sight of God in the excellence of that end,
   and its adequacy to accomplish it. This going forward to the result is
   inevitable if we go back to where redemption has its origin in the
   divine mind. We cannot stop between. For the work of Christ, while of
   infinite excellence in itself, has its special value as the work of
   redemption in the excellence of its result. If Christ were a mere man,
   His excellence in Himself, could such excellence have been in a mere
   man, would have been enough to satisfy the mind as to God's glory in
   Him: but, seeing the perfection of sonship--like the perfection of
   fatherliness--as divine, and eternal, and, as respects the Son of God,
   only manifested in humanity and not then come into existence, this
   divine excellence in humanity in the person of Christ, is seen as in
   humanity with a view to results in all humanity. Therefore these
   results are not to be regarded as excellent in the sight of God, and
   justified because of that divine excellence in humanity; but rather the
   existence of that divine excellence in humanity is to be seen by us in
   the light of these results, and God's ultimate glory in it is to be
   seen in them. This is saying no more than what our Lord plainly
   teaches, when He says, "I am the vine, ye are the branches. Herein is
   my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit.''

   Now the origin of the atonement in God, and its result in man, have
   been kept constantly before the mind in the view now given of the
   nature of the atonement; and any misconception of the expression "for
   Christ's sake" has been precluded: as it is also obvious, that all
   practical using of the atonement as now represented--all turning the
   knowledge of it to account in our personal intercourse with God,--must
   be in the way of an ascending through it to that in God from which it
   springs, and a yielding ourselves to God to have that which it has
   contemplated accomplished in us.

   This movement in our inner being--this moulding of us to itself--the
   atonement, apprehended by a true and living faith, necessarily
   accomplishes; and its tendency to secure this result, is one element in
   our faith, when we first believe; as also the experience of this power
   in it is the great subsequent strengthening of our faith. Ascending
   upwards to the mind of God, into the light of which the atonement
   introduces us, and descending again to the ultimate fulfilment of that
   mind in men washed from their sins in the blood of Christ, and made
   kings and priests unto God, and reigning with Christ, we not only feel
   a harmony and simplicity and beauty in the natural relation of the
   atonement to Christianity, but we are also conscious to finding in that
   natural relation a chief and most sure ground for our faith in the
   atonement, and in remission of sins, and eternal life, as presented to
   us in connexion with it. Every time we are enabled, in spirit and in
   truth, through participation in the spirit of Christ, to confess sin
   before God, and meet His mind towards sin with such a response as, in
   the faith of pardon and liberty of sonship, we are enabled to give, we
   have a clearer glimpse of the excellence of Christ's expiatory
   confession of our sins, and of the righteousness of God in accepting it
   on our behalf, to the end that we might thus share in it. Every time we
   lisp, in whatever feebleness, the cry, Abba, Father, having that cry
   quickened in us by the revelation of the Father by the Son, we see with
   the peculiar insight which the experience of the fulfilment of the
   divine counsel in ourselves can alone give, the excellence of that
   kingdom ordained in the hands of a Mediator, according to which eternal
   life in the Son is the Father's free gift. But this direct occupation
   of our own conscience with the elements of the blood of Christ, and
   with the nature of the hope in God in which He tasted death for every
   man, is a source of deep certainty as to the glory of God in our
   redemption through Christ, which exclusively belongs to the view of the
   atonement, according to which our trust in it is necessarily fellowship
   in it--that fellowship a light in which the sure grounds of our trust
   are ever more and more clearly seen. For this character can only belong
   to an atonement, whose nature admits of its reproduction in us, so that
   its elements become matter of consciousness to ourselves.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER XV.

   THAT GOD IS THE FATHER OF OUR SPIRITS, THE ULTIMATE TRUTH ON WHICH
   FAITH MUST HERE ULTIMATELY REST.

   THAT natural relation of the atonement to Christianity, on which so
   much weight has now been laid, is the full meeting of a demand which
   must be more or less felt in any deep realisation of the divine
   righteousness; the demand which is so far met when those who represent
   our acceptance with God as turning upon our trust in the merits of
   Christ's work, are I still careful to illustrate the moral tendency of
   such trust, founding systems of "Christian Ethics" on the atonement;
   the demand which is recognised when those who regard the actual
   imputation of Christ's righteousness as what justifies us in the sight
   of God, are careful to deny the character of justifying faith to any
   faith that does not sanctify: for Luther alone have we found setting
   forth the excellent righteousness which is in the faith which justifies
   viewed in itself. In truth, all care to exclude antinomianism, in
   whatever way that care is expressed, is an indication of the depth and
   authority of the feeling which forbids our ascribing to the righteous
   God any constitution of spiritual and moral government, which does not
   contemplate results in harmony with the divine righteousness, and which
   has not its justification in these results. So that, though, in form of
   thought, a near approach is made to saying, that the great husbandman
   values the fruitful branch, not because of His delight in the fruit it
   bears, but because of His delight in the imputed excellence of the
   vine; still the real feeling of the heart is in harmony with the words
   of our Lord, "Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit."
   But, as these words, "Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much
   fruit," indicate, we find that it is only in the light of the relation
   in which the scheme of redemption stands to the fatherliness of God
   that the necessity for a natural relation of the atonement to
   Christianity can be adequately conceived of.

   The great and root-distinction of the view of the atonement presented
   in these pages, is the relation in which our redemption is regarded as
   standing to the fatherliness of God. In that fatherliness has the
   atonement been now represented as originating. By that fatherliness has
   its end been represented to have been determined. To that fatherliness
   has the demand for the elements of expiation found in it been traced.
   But the distinction is broad and unmistakeable between simple mercy
   proposing to save from evils and bestow blessings, and finding it
   necessary to deal with justice as presenting obstacles to the
   realisation of its gracious designs,--which conception is that on which
   the other view of the atonement proceeds; and this of the love of the
   Father of our spirits going forth after us. His alienated children,
   lost to Him, dead to Him through sin, and desiring to be able to say of
   each one of us, "My son was dead and is alive again. He was lost and is
   found."

   Not, indeed, that supposing the only elements of the divine character
   concerned in determining the nature of the atonement to have been mercy
   and righteousness, the conception to which I object, would meet the
   requirements of these attributes more adequately than that which I
   offer instead. On the contrary, the moral and spiritual expiation for
   sin which Christ has made, has dealt with the justice of God, whether
   contemplated as absolute or as rectoral, in a way infinitely more
   glorifying to the law of God, and more fitted to open a free channel
   for mercy to flow in, than an atonement consisting in the endurance of
   penal sufferings by the Son of God as our substitute, would have done.
   But while this lower ground is tenable, we should not be justified in
   coming down from the point of view to which the gospel raises us, to
   what, while true, is not the ultimate truth revealed. So to do, would
   be to forget that the gospel, and not the law, affords us full light
   here; the law being subordinate to the gospel, as our relation to God
   as our righteous Lord, is subordinate to our relation to Him as the
   Father of our spirits,--the original and root-relation, in the light of
   which alone all God's dealings with us can be understood. How far,
   indeed, this subordinating of our relation to God as we are the
   subjects of His righteous rule, to our relation to Him as we are His
   offspring, is from depreciating that which is subordinated, has, I
   trust, been made abundantly manifest, seeing that it is the law of the
   spirit of the life that is in Christ Jesus, that is to say, sonship, in
   which alone the power is found to accomplish the fulfilment of the
   righteousness of the law in us, and that our being reconciled to God,
   whose law we have violated,--the writing of His law on our hearts, so
   that it becomes to us a law of liberty, is the result of revealing to
   us our Father in our Lawgiver, and shewing us the law of the Lawgiver
   in its fountain in the Father's heart.

   But while to reveal the Father in the Lawgiver is that which reconciles
   us to the Lawgiver, the only adequate statement of the high result
   accomplished, is, that it is reconciliation to the Father,--the
   quickening in us of the life of sonship. However high a conception it
   is that the "disobedient should be turned to the wisdom of the just,"
   that alone is commensurate with the excellence of the salvation granted
   to us which is conveyed by the words, "Following God as dear children
   walking in love."

   As to the place now recognised as belonging to the fatherliness of God
   in the history of our redemption, viz., that it is the ultimate ground
   for faith, I would add to what I have urged above these two
   considerations: 1st, It is a special glory to God that the
   fatherliness, which originates our salvation, and determines its
   nature--that it shall be the life of sonship--is itself that in which
   the saving power resides. For, as we have seen, the Son of God saves us
   by a work whose essence and sum is the declaring of the Father's Name.
   A result so high, accomplished by the power over our spirits found to
   be in the Name of God,--that is to say in what God is, is manifestly
   the highest glory to God. No result referable to simple Almightiness
   could be the same glory. That God should by a miracle change a
   rebellious child into a loving child, would be no such glory to God, as
   that the knowledge of the fatherliness rebelled against, should, by
   virtue of the excellence inherent in that fatherliness, accomplish this
   result. "We love Him because He first loved us." The power to quicken
   love in us is here ascribed to the love with which God regards us,
   considered simply as love. For it clearly is not the meaning, that,
   because God loved us. He wrought a miracle of Almighty power to make us
   love Him. And do we not feel a special glory to accrue to the divine
   love from this, as the history of our love to God? a special glory
   which vanishes, whatever other manner of glory may be supposed to
   remain, the moment the fact of our loving God is resolved into a
   miracle of Almighty power. 2nd, But not only is this history of our
   being reconciled to God what is full of glory to God. If we consider
   well we must see that our being reconciled to God must have this
   history. We have seen that the words "Lo, I come to do thy will, O
   God," indicate the difference between that blood of Christ which
   cleanseth from all sin, and the blood of bulls, and of goats, which
   could not take away sin. And so the Apostle, when illustrating this,
   goes on to say, "By the which will we are sanctified through the
   offering of the body of Jesus Christ once." Our sanctification
   therefore is accomplished by the will of God as acting on our will by
   the moral and spiritual power of what that divine will is in itself.
   For the will of God, in order to be welcomed with that welcome which is
   holiness, i. e., the free consecration of our will, must be welcomed
   just because of WHAT IT IS.

   This is a point which it is most important that we should see clearly.
   Nothing extraneous to the nature of the divine will itself to which we
   are to be reconciled, can have a part in reconciling us to that will.
   Fear of punishment, hope of reward, have here no place. However they
   may have been included in the history of our awakening to the
   importance of the relation in which our will stands to the divine will,
   they must go for nothing--they have ever been found to go for
   nothing--when the soul is alone with God, feeling itself under His
   searching eye, all its self-consciousness quickened by the realisation
   of the divine knowledge of its thoughts "when yet afar off." Simple
   earnestness, intense desire to be safe and assured of happiness, is
   then valued only at its true value; neither is itself deceivingly
   supposed to generate anything better than itself. In the light of God,
   all that springs from the desire of safety and happiness, is seen to
   continue but the desire of safety and happiness still; and this, though
   not wrong,--nay, though in a lower sense right, as the working of an
   instinct in our being which God acknowledges, and which God
   addresses,--yet assuredly is not holiness, nor any approach to a
   delight in God's holy will. Nor, if we should, on any ground, have come
   to conclude that we are assured of the safety and happiness which we
   have desired, and, in consequence, should feel grateful to God for this
   great boon, is such gratitude, though a higher feeling than mere fear,
   or hope, to be recognised as holiness, or as what implies our being
   reconciled to God spiritually and truly.

   At how great a distance from all oneness of will with the Holy God a
   human spirit may still be, even when esteeming itself saved, and
   thanking God for salvation, is most instructively illustrated by
   President Edwards, in his analysis of delusive appearances of
   conversion which had come under his own observation, occurring under
   the awakening power of much urging of the importance of salvation. But,
   indeed, clearly understood, the statement is felt to be self-evident,
   that the will of God must reconcile us to itself by the power of what
   it is, or not at all. Therefore that the Son reconciles us to the
   Father by revealing the Father, is not only a way of salvation full of
   glory to God, but is, in truth, the only possible way. So that our
   salvation would have been impossible had there not been in the heart of
   the Father what, being revealed to us, and brought to bear on our
   spirits, would reconcile us to Him, making His condemnation of our sin
   to become our own condemnation of it. His choice for us our own free
   choice for ourselves, His love the light of life to us, His
   fatherliness the quickening of sonship in us. There being that in God
   which was adequate to this result, our salvation was not only possible,
   but the way and manner, as well as the nature of our salvation, were
   thereby fixed and determined.

   The Apostle John says, "And we have seen and do testify that the Father
   sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world." I John iv. 14. I have had
   occasion above to notice the way in which the Divinity of the Saviour
   has been contemplated in relation to the atonement in the two forms of
   Calvinism; in the one as implying a capacity of infinite suffering,
   adequate because infinite; in the other, as giving infinite value to
   any suffering in respect of the dignity of the sufferer; instead of
   recognising the divinity of the sufferer as what has determined the
   nature of His sufferings, and has given them their moral and spiritual
   fitness to expiate sin and purge it away. There has not been the same
   result of positive error, but there has beyond doubt been great loss of
   light of truth, through an unwise resting of attention on the simple
   fact of the divinity of Christ, which has veiled the teaching of the
   words "the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world," chosen
   by the Apostle to express that light of eternal life in which He
   consciously was. Labour has been bestowed on proving the divinity of
   the persons thus spoken of in connexion with our salvation,--that the
   Father is God, that the Son is God--and the excellent dignity and
   importance of salvation have doubtless been in this way magnified. But
   the special teaching intended by the Apostle is clearly that which is
   received in contemplating the Father as the Father, and the Son as the
   Son. Thus considered, the statement that the Father sent the Son to be
   the Saviour of the world, sheds light on the whole scheme of
   redemption, its origin, its end, and that by which that end is
   accomplished.

   Exclusive occupation with the personal dignity claimed for the Saviour
   by the name "the Son of God," has, indeed, had the general result of
   causing men to lose the teaching contained in that name, so that it has
   suggested the greatness only of the love of God to man revealed in
   Christ, and not its manner and nature; and yet neither is its greatness
   known, while its nature is not understood. "In this was manifested the
   love of God toward us, because that God sent His only begotten Son into
   the world, that we might live through Him:" let the name "Son" here
   suggest to us what it has been intended to suggest, and the nature of
   the life which it has been intended that we should "live through Him"
   will be taught by it. "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that
   He loved us, and sent His Son to be the propitiation for our sins:" let
   the name "Son" here teach us what it should teach, and it will shed
   light upon that propitiation for sin which Christ is, and illustrate to
   us the relation of the life of sonship to the atonement,--the relation
   of the revelation of the Father by the Son to our being reconciled to
   God.

   Fatherliness in God originating our salvation; the Son of God
   accomplishing that salvation by the revelation of the Father; the life
   of sonship quickened in us, the salvation contemplated: these are
   conceptions continually suggested by the language of scripture if we
   yield our minds to its natural force; and they are conceptions which
   naturally shed light on each other, and which, in their combined light,
   and contemplated together, so illustrate the nature of the atonement,
   as to impart a conviction like that produced by the internal light of
   axiomatic truth. Our Lord complains that He had come in His Father's
   name, and they had not received Him: yet as coming in the Father's name
   must He be ultimately received; any other reception is not the
   reception of the Son of God by which we become sons of God. "He came
   unto His own, and His own received

   Him not. But as many as received Him, to them gave He power to be the
   sons of God, even to them that believe on His name." This those
   understand whose deepest conviction of having found salvation in Christ
   is as the experience of orphans who have found their long lost Father.
   For, corresponding to the yearning of the Father's heart over us, while
   yet in our sins, is the working of the misery of our orphan state as
   the ultimate contradiction to the original law of our being; some
   measure of conscious realisation of which misery is the truest
   preparation for receiving the gospel, being the first yielding to the
   teaching of the Father drawing us to the Son, who alone reveals the
   Father,--that in articulate groaning of our spirits to which Philip
   gave expression in saying, "Shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us."

   It is justly held that the faith that there is a God, has a root in us
   deeper than all inferential argument, a root in relation to which all
   inferential argument is but, so to speak, complemental; owing its
   authority rather to that root than that root at all to it, though being
   what that root demands and prepares us to expect. And surely those who
   deal with men who are attempting to be atheists, act most wisely when
   they throw them back on this root of faith in God in their own inner
   being, instead of permitting a course of argument which allows their
   thoughts to run away to find without them what unless found within them
   will never be found at all. That this God, in whose existence we
   necessarily believe, is the Father of our spirits, is to be regarded as
   a further truth, the faith of which has a corresponding depth of root
   in us; and this I understand the Apostle to recognise in the use he
   makes, in preaching to the Athenians, of the expression as used by one
   of their own poets, "For we are also His offspring."

   That one of their own poets had said so would have been no reason for
   assuming that they ought to have believed that it was so, and to have
   determined their manner of worshipping God accordingly, unless these
   words of the poet had been the utterance of a truth that was deep in
   all their hearts. In assuming, as I have been doing, a relation of men
   to God as the Father of spirits, antecedent to, and to be regarded as
   underlying their relation to Him as their moral governor, I have, in
   like manner, been calculating on a response from the depths of
   humanity. And it is in the hope of awakening that response into a
   distinct consciousness that I have proceeded in treating our
   relationship to God as the Father of our spirits, as the ultimate
   truth, in the light of which we are to see the scheme of our
   redemption, the Father's sending the Son to be the Saviour of the
   world. If we are in very truth God's offspring, if it is as the Father
   of our spirits that He regards us while yet in our sins, it accords
   with this that the Father should send the Son to save us, that the Son
   should propose to save us by the revelation of the Father, and that our
   salvation shall be participation in the life of sonship.

   There is a corresponding witness of truth in the results which the
   faith of the atonement accomplishes. These in being the truth of
   sonship towards God and the truth of brotherhood toward men, deepen the
   conviction that it is the very truth of God that our faith is
   receiving.

   1. Sonship quickened in us by the revelation of the fatherliness that
   is in God, is sonship in the true and natural sense of the expression.
   If our redemption has its origin in the feelings with which God regards
   us as the Father of our spirits, if the Son of God accomplishes our
   salvation by revealing the Father to us, then is our salvation
   necessarily the truth of sonship. In living harmony with the light of
   life, drawn by the Father to the Son, knowing the Son as He is present
   in our inmost being--our true life, and ever seeking to be our actual
   life--yielding our hearts to Him to reign in them, "receiving with
   meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save our souls," we call
   God "Father;" and the utterance is from us a true and natural and
   simple approach to the Father of our spirits, such as He desires, a
   speaking to Him according to the truth of what He is to us, the
   cherishing of an immediate direct confidence in His fatherly heart. For
   indeed our right confidence in the Father is direct, and is confidence
   in His fatherly heart towards us, as also is our confidence in the Son
   direct, viz., a direct confidence in Him as our proper life; which
   several manners of confidence we are to discriminate and to realise.
   For in the Son it is, and not apart from the Son, that we have the life
   of sonship; and as to exercise confidence in the Father is to confide
   in Him as our Father, so to exercise confidence in the Son is to
   welcome the life of sonship which we have in Him. And this is the
   manner of our being alive to God through Jesus Christ, and it is
   self-evidenced to my mind as the truth of sonship, as what and what
   alone we can believe to meet and satisfy that fatherliness in God which
   it presupposes, and by the revelation of which to our spirits by the
   Son it is quickened.

   I cannot recognise this truth of sonship, in what, in connexion with
   the other conception of the atonement, is held as "adoption;" of which
   I desire to speak plainly, yet warily, knowing how much more difficult
   it is to do justice in the choice of one's words to the faith of
   others, than to one's own faith; and having, also, the awe on my spirit
   of the true savour of the life of sonship, which it has been my
   privilege to meet in connexion with the form of thought on this subject
   which yet I feel constrained to reject.

   The adoption of us as sons, as superadded to justification by faith, no
   element of sonship being present in the faith that justifies us, nor
   exercise of fatherliness contemplated as an element in the divine
   acceptance of us, the adoption itself a boon bestowed upon us in
   connexion with the imputation of Christ's merits to us,--this is a
   manner of sonship as to which it is obvious that the confidence with
   which we may so think of ourselves as sons of God, and draw near to Him
   expecting to be acknowledged as such, is no direct trust in a Father's
   heart at all, no trust in any feeling in God of which, we are
   personally the objects as His OFFSPRING, but is in reality a trust in
   the judicial grounds on which the title and place of sons is granted to
   us.

   I know that it is held that, when in connexion with the faith that
   justifies, God bestows on us the adoption of sons, He gives us also the
   spirit of sonship, that we may have the spiritual reality as well as
   the name and standing. But the spirit of sonship is the spirit of
   truth, the Son himself is the truth--"I am the way, the truth, and the
   life." That the Son should say, "I am the way"--"no man cometh unto the
   Father but by me," teaches us that sonship alone deals with
   fatherliness as fatherliness; that we must come to God as sons, or not
   come at all. On this co-relativeness of sonship and fatherliness, I
   have dwelt above. So also that He should say, "I am the life," fixes
   our faith on Him as our proper life, according to "the testimony of
   God, that God has given to us eternal life, and that this life is in
   His Son,"--but that He should say, and say in humanity, "I am the
   truth," teaches us, that not only is it the case that to come near to
   the Father we must come near in the Son, and that the life of sonship
   is the life to which we are called, but, besides, that to come to God
   in the Son, and so to come to Him as sons, is, and alone is, in harmony
   with THE TRUTH of our relation to God.

   I have in some measure anticipated this contrast between sonship
   towards God, as quickened in us by the revelation to us of the Father
   by the Son, and sonship conceived of as added to our legal standing of
   justified persons, through the imputation to us of Christ's merits,
   when noticing above the practical difficulty of harmonising, in
   conscious experience, two manners of confidence, so opposite in their
   nature, as a legal confidence, on the ground of the imputation to us of
   a perfect righteousness, and a filial confidence such as the faith of a
   Father's heart is fitted to quicken. In truth, the assumed filial
   confidence, being cherished in this dependence on the legal confidence,
   and the fatherliness conceived of being, not a desire of the heart of
   God going forth towards us as His offspring, to which sonship is the
   true and right response, but the divine acknowledgment of a standing
   granted to us according to the arrangement assumed, though our
   conception of the mercy and grace of which we assume ourselves to be
   the objects may still be high, the true and simple feeling of dealing
   with a Father's heart is altogether precluded.

   But thus to think of the intercourse with God which eternal life
   implies, as resting for its peace and security on another ground than
   its own essential nature;--to think of sonship as cherished freely
   otherwise than as the natural response to the Father's heart, to think
   of the Father as rejoicing in this sonship as present in us otherwise
   than as the Father;--to feel that the prodigal son feels secure in the
   welcome of his forgiving father on any other ground than the fatherly
   forgiveness itself which has embraced him, falling on his neck and
   kissing him;--to feel that the father is justified in his own eyes, or
   would justify himself in the eyes of the rest of his family, in the
   gracious welcome which he accords to the returning prodigal, on any
   other ground than that which he expresses when he says, "My son was
   dead, and is alive again;"--to suppose that the filial standing must
   rest on a legal standing, and that all this intercourse between the
   Father of spirits and His redeemed offspring must be justified by the
   imputation to them of Christ's righteousness, and that this reality of
   communion with the Father and the Son must be reconciled, in this way
   of at least seeming fiction, with the moral government of God, instead
   of recognising that communion itself as what is the highest fulfilment
   of moral government, and the ultimate and perfect justification of all
   the means which God has employed in bringing it to pass: these are
   thoughts which can have no place in the light in which the Apostle
   says--"It became Him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
   things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their
   salvation perfect through sufferings."

   The natural character now claimed for the consciousness of sonship as
   belonging to our communion with God in Christ,--that is to say, that it
   shall be felt the due response to the Father's heart, and not the mere
   using of a privilege and right graciously conferred upon us,
   corresponds with, or, I should rather say, is one with, the
   self-evidencing character claimed above for justifying faith.

   The liberty to call God Father, which we feel in the light of the
   revelation of the Father to us by the Son, we in that light cannot but
   feel: for in that light we not only apprehend the divine fatherliness,
   through the perfect response of sonship yielded to it by the Son of God
   in humanity, and, at the same time, the sonship itself, which is that
   response, but we have this apprehension necessarily with a personal
   reference to ourselves.

   How important this statement is--assuming its truth--those will feel
   who are acquainted with the questionings on the subject of adoption by
   which the most earnest and deeply exercised spirits have been most
   tried, while their right to call God Father has been conceived of by
   them as turning upon the previous question of their justification
   through imputation of Christ's righteousness, and that again upon the
   soundness of the faith from which justification has been expected. What
   is here taught is that to call God Father, and draw near to Him in the
   confidence of sonship, is simply to conform to, and walk in, the light
   of life which shines to us in Christ.

   Assuredly that word from heaven--"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
   well pleased: hear ye Him"--each man that hears is called to hear as a
   word addressed to himself,--a revelation of a will in God in relation
   to him. This is not to be questioned. Why is this divine sonship
   manifested in humanity? Why, brother man, is our attention called to
   it? Why are we told of the Father's being pleased in the Son, and in
   this connexion bade to "hear the Son?" Surely the fatherliness thus
   presented to our faith is fatherliness in which we are interested, for
   surely it is interested in us--has desires with reference to us; and
   surely the sonship on which our attention is thus fixed concerns us,
   yea, can be nothing else than the very condition of humanity which
   these desires of the Father contemplate and seek for us. Therefore when
   we are turned to the kingdom of God within us,--when that spiritual
   constitution of things, which the words that have raised our eyes to
   the Father, and our hopes to sonship, have pre-supposed, is revealed to
   our spiritual apprehension;--when we know "that the Father sent the Son
   to be the Saviour of the world," as these words state a condition of
   things with the advantages of which we are encompassed, and the truth
   and reality of which is to be known by us in our own inner being;--when
   that testimony of the Father to the Son, and of the Son to the Father,
   which pervades the Scriptures, is known by us as also in ourselves:
   then what is contemplated by the call addressed to us--"Hear ye Him,"
   is understood by us;--we understand how, in the love of the Father of
   our spirits, the Son, in whom the Father is well pleased, has in Him
   the life of sonship for us, and how, through Him, and in Him, we also
   may be sons in whom the Father shall be well pleased.

   Thus are the outward preaching of the kingdom of God, and the
   revelation of that kingdom within us, known in their unity, in the
   experience of salvation; and the light shining in the Scriptures and
   the light shining in man are known as one light,--at once universal and
   individual, as is the nature of light. When I hear, in the most general
   reference to men, the words "God has given to us eternal life, and this
   life is in His Son,"--"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
   pleased: hear ye Him,"--I hear what connects me in my own thoughts, as
   by a revelation of truth, with the fatherliness that is in God the
   Father, and the sonship that is in the Son of God; and so, still, as
   the light of life dawns on me, and brightens, and I become a child of
   light and of the day, when I know, in my own inner being, the Father
   drawing me to the Son, and the Son moving and quickening in me the cry,
   Abba, Father, and have the illustration of a personal experience shed
   upon the words of Christ--"No man knoweth the Son but the Father;
   neither knoweth any man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever
   the Son will reveal Him;" still the fatherliness that is thus calling
   me to sonship, the sonship that is enabling to respond to that
   fatherliness,--I know as one receiving knowledge of the truth of
   things; my experience is that of conforming to what is a revelation to
   me at once of God and of man,--that is to say, as I am a man, of
   myself. In obeying I am obedient to the truth. I do not--I should say,
   I dare not--doubt the voice of that fatherliness by which I am drawn to
   the Son, or doubt that the Son is revealed to me by the teaching of the
   Father for this very end, that I may know the desire and choice of the
   Father of my spirit for me. I do not--I dare not--doubt the light of
   that sonship, or that the Son is truly teaching me, as well as lovingly
   teaching me, how it is right for me to feel towards the Father of my
   spirit,--the response to His heart which accords with the truth of what
   that heart is in relation to me. I do not ask, "Have I exercised a
   faith in Christ which has justified me, and am I certain that that
   faith is so sound as to warrant me to believe that now I am a child of
   God, and entitled to call Him Father?" I am exercising a faith to which
   it is a contradiction to doubt the fatherliness of my Father, or the
   welcome that awaits me in coming to Him as a child. I am exercising a
   faith in which it is impossible for me to be disobedient to the Son,
   quickening the cry, Abba, Father, in my spirit.

   I have been at pains, in relation to justification by faith, to shew
   how faith excludes boasting; not by any artificial arrangement, nor at
   all by denying to the faith itself the attribute of righteousness, but,
   on the contrary, because it is itself the true righteousness, and that
   boasting is impossible in that light of the truth into which faith
   introduces; for in faith we are beholding the glory of God in the face
   of Jesus Christ, and no flesh shall glory in His sight. I would add
   here, that the life of sonship, as now represented as quickened in us,
   excludes boasting.

   That faith is trust in God, as He is revealed in Christ, excludes, as
   we have seen, boasting, and makes the righteousness of faith to be the
   opposite of self-righteousness;--that this faith apprehends the
   fatherliness of God, and that its responsive trust is sonship, this yet
   more and more excludes boasting. The trust of a child in a Father's
   heart is just the perfect opposite of a self-righteous trust; for it is
   a going back to the fountain of our being,--a dealing with that
   interest in us which was before we did good or evil; and, as cherished
   by us sinners towards God, against whom we have sinned, such trust
   deals with fatherliness as what has survived our sins; so that our
   trust, so far from being self-righteous, implies, commences with the
   confession of sin. Doubtless this trust is in itself holy--the mind of
   the Son; but it is not on that account less lowly,--less remote from
   boasting. Are we not, in cherishing it, "learning of Him who is meek
   and lowly in heart"?

   There is, indeed, a further exclusion of boasting, in the consciousness
   that it is in the Son that we are approaching the Father,--that He, who
   made atonement for our sins, and brought into humanity the everlasting
   righteousness of sonship, is not the mere pattern of our life, but is
   Himself that life in us in which we are able to confess our sins, and
   to call God Father;--that He is the vine, that we are the branches. But
   I feel it important that we should realise that in its own nature, and
   apart from its derived character as existing in us, the confidence of
   sonship is essentially and necessarily the opposite of
   self-righteousness.

   I the more insist upon this, while also desirous to fix attention on
   that deepest sense of dependence on Christ, which, in knowing Him as
   our life, our spirits prove, because I believe, that the whole
   attraction to conscience which has been found in the conception of an
   imputation of Christ's merits to us, has been its seeming fitness to
   secure the result of a peace with God free from self-righteousness, and
   which shall be really a trust in God and not in ourselves; the doing
   away with what Luther calls, "The monstrous idea of human merit, which
   must by all means be beat down;" and in reference to which he values
   the law as "a hammer with which to break it in pieces." This right
   result, essential to the glory of God in us, and to our being in
   harmony with the truth of things in the attitude of our spirits towards
   God, the truth of the life of sonship in us secures, and alone can
   secure.

   Nay more, the life of sonship is not only the purest and simplest trust
   in the heart of the Father, but its nature is, because of the
   experience which it implies, to be a continually growing trust in God.
   I must see a Father's heart in God towards me before I can call Him
   Father; but, in calling Him Father, the consciousness which comes with
   so doing, is itself a fresh proof to me that He is my Father, and that
   in so believing I am not welcoming a cunningly devised fable; and thus
   progress in the life of sonship is not the coming to have a new ground
   of confidence towards God, but an experience which enables us to "hold
   fast the beginning of our confidence" more and more firmly. Experience,
   in calling God Father in spirit and in truth, becomes a source of
   increased freedom in doing so; not because it has created any further
   or fresh title to do so, for it has not, but because the rightness that
   is in this mind towards God, its harmony with the truth of our relation
   to Him, and the glory which it gives to Him, become clearer to us in
   that increased light as to what it is to follow God as dear children,
   which is implied in the experience of doing so.

   And, as this holds true as to our trust in the Father, so also, as to
   our trust in Christ as our life, all experience of life in abiding in
   Him as a branch in the vine, only developes into deeper consciousness
   the sense of dependence upon Him, shutting us up to so abiding for all
   expectation of well being; for the more I know what it is to be able to
   say, ''I live, yet not I, but Christ in me," the more simple, and
   absolute, and continuous will be my living by Him. The mystery of God,
   both of the Father and of Christ, being thus experimentally known as
   our fellowship with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ, abounds,
   the fulfilment of God's purpose in us enlightens us more and more in
   that purpose, and thereby deepens our faith in it as His purpose.

   I do not feel that the ground for faith, which is thus found in the
   experience of faith, has been sufficiently valued, especially when the
   object has been to save us from looking for a ground of peace in
   ourselves. We cannot be too jealous of looking to self, if we rightly
   discriminate. But beyond all question, eternal life experienced must
   have its own proper consciousness; and the apprehension of it as given
   in Christ, and the consciousness of receiving it, and being alive in it
   as a conscious life, must be trusted to to exclude self-righteousness,
   as light excludes darkness, and not otherwise.

   It seems to me that Luther, notwithstanding his high estimate of the
   righteousness that is in faith, and notwithstanding the power to
   prevail with God which he recognises as being in the feeblest utterance
   of the cry "Father," has not given its true place to the subjective
   experience of the life of sonship. I have felt justified in saying
   above, that the great Reformer was the preacher of justification by
   faith, according to a truer and stricter meaning of the expression than
   it has had, or could have had, in the teaching of those who have not
   understood as he did, either that condition of things which the gospel
   reveals to our faith, and which by its very nature excludes boasting,
   or that excellent glory which God has in the faith which apprehends and
   trusts God, according to the revelation of Himself which He has granted
   to us in Christ, and in the exercise of which our souls "make their
   boast in God." The difference is indeed broad and unmistakeable between
   the faith that would correspond with the revelation of a work of Christ
   performed on behalf of an elected number, by which he purchased and
   secured for them certain benefits to be in due time imparted to
   them,--according to the teaching of Dr. Owen and President Edwards; or
   the faith that would correspond with the modified Calvinism, which
   preaches a work of Christ for all men, by which a foundation has been
   laid on which God may righteously proceed in dispensing benefits to
   those who will receive them on that footing; and that faith to which
   Luther called men, when he proclaimed a work of Christ by which He had
   redeemed us, even all men, "from the law and death and all evils," and
   procured for us the adoption of sons, so that we are not under the law,
   but under grace, and are called to believe, directly and personally,
   and with appropriation to ourselves, because it is so in truth, that
   Christ is the Father's gift to us, that He is made of God unto us
   wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. For,
   however far Luther is from shedding light on the nature of the
   atonement, however little of the spiritual light which he had himself,
   he has imparted to us in an intellectual form which we can understand,
   and however startling, and incapable of acceptance according to their
   sound, are the expressions of which he makes choice in speaking of the
   relation to our sin, into which Christ came in working out our
   redemption; these things in him are very clear, viz., that he saw the
   Father in the Son, and therefore had confidence towards God, because of
   what he thus saw God to be; and that he saw Christ, and in Him all
   things pertaining to life and to godliness, as the gift of God to men,
   to all men, to every man:--so that he neither spoke of God as having
   come under an obligation to do certain things for an unknown some; nor
   as having put it in His own power righteously to extend mercy to all
   who would receive it on the ground on which it was offered; but as
   having already done the greatest thing for all men, and as calling upon
   all men to believe and enter upon the enjoyment of what He had done.

   Yet while Luther's teaching has all the superiority which is implied in
   a truer conception of what is presented to our faith, as well as the
   advantage of a juster appreciation of the excellent nature of faith
   viewed in itself, it seems to me, as compared with the teaching of the
   Apostles, wanting in its setting forth of that to which the gospel
   calls man; a defect which, in reference to the twofold revelation in
   Christ, the revelation of fatherliness, and of sonship, may be
   expressed by saying, that his preaching is more a setting forth of the
   fatherliness in which we are to trust, than of the sonship to which we
   are called. Luther keeps before the mind

   God as He is revealed to be trusted in,--trusted in at this moment, by
   those who have never trusted in Him before; rather than the
   contemplated life of Christ in us, in the conscious experience of which
   we are to grow day by day in the assurance of faith and free life of
   sonship. I do not at all mean that Luther would deny the soundness of
   all such increase of freedom, assuming it to be indeed that which has
   now been spoken of, viz., increased trust in God, and in His Christ,
   through the experience of trusting; but that this he does not set forth
   or dwell on. Therefore, while the history of his own first peace in God
   is, most profitably for us, present in all his commending of the gospel
   and putting away of the law, there is still in his renewed urging of
   the difficulty of trusting in Christ in seasons of deep realisation of
   our sins, a contrast, and, to my mind, an instructive contrast, to the
   calm consciousness of being living the new eternal life which breathes
   in such words as these, "We know that the Son of God is come, and hath
   given us an understanding, that we may know Him that is true, and we
   are in Him that is true, even in His Son Jesus Christ. This is the true
   God, and eternal life."

   There is a state of mind in relation to the view now taken of the
   sonship quickened in us in faith, which it is right here to notice. The
   character of salvation as now represented, as what is accomplished in
   us by our being "brought out of darkness into God's marvellous light,''
   it is felt difficult to harmonise with the greatness of the change
   which has come to pass in those who are saved, both as respects the
   condition of their own being, and their relation to God. It is asked,
   "If God is the Father of our spirits antecedent to our faith in Christ,
   and that the gospel reveals Him as our Father, how does the Apostle
   say--'In this are the children of God manifest, and the children of the
   devil'? And how, when the Jews said, 'God is our Father,' did the Lord
   seem to deny that it was so?--'If God were your Father ye would love me
   . . . ye are of your father the devil.' " The harmony between the
   abiding truth of our relation to God as we are all His offspring, and
   the oppositeness of the conditions of our being, which are by choice of
   our own will, according as we receive the light of Christ or believe
   the devil's lie, not being understood, it is felt that the expressions
   used in relation to those who are alive to God through faith in Christ,
   cannot have their truth simply in the spiritual conformity of these
   individual men, with a relation of all men to God, and a constitution
   of things in Christ which embraces all men; and therefore the gospel is
   received only as a revelation of a willingness in God to become our
   Father, and so a manifestation of the highest benevolence, but not the
   revelation of the interest of the Father of our spirits in us as His
   offspring.

   In consistency with this conception of the gospel, it is held that in
   such discourses of our Lord as that recorded in the 5th, 6th, and 7th
   chapters of the Gospel of Matthew, the use of the name "Father," on
   which I have dwelt above as a part of our Lord's coming to men in His
   Father's name, is not to be understood as a claim made for God, and the
   setting forth of the conception of God with which men ought to approach
   Him, but as assuming faith and justification and adoption; so that to
   say, "When ye pray, say. Our Father," was not to teach men what they
   were to believe God already to be, but what He would become if they
   believed: so also that to say, "If ye then, being evil, know how to
   give good gifts unto your children, how much more will your heavenly
   Father give the Holy

   Spirit to them that ask Him?" was not intended by our Lord to be
   understood as the proclaiming of a will in God to impart His Spirit to
   all, because He was the Father of the spirits of all flesh, but only of
   such a will as to those who had become His children by faith.

   If it were only meant that our acting on such teaching implies faith,
   and that we only truly pray the Lord's prayer in the measure in which
   we receive the Son to reign in our hearts, there would be in this no
   more than a most needed warning,--seeing the great self-deception
   connected with the use of that prayer in a way of mere fleshly
   repetition of it, void of all life of sonship. But this is not what is
   meant; and so the parable of the prodigal son, on which so much weight
   has now been laid, is denied to be a preaching of the gospel, or a
   revelation of the interest with which God regards men--all men--while
   yet in their sins; its comfort being reduced to what, in consistency,
   can only be offered to men on the assumption that they have been
   adopted through faith, and are such as only need to be encouraged to
   return to their first love.

   But while I notice this state of mind, and do so in much sympathy with
   the deep sense which it implies of the great issues involved in passing
   from death to life, I do not do so with the purpose of attempting to
   offer any help in relation to it, that has not been presented already
   in these pages. To my mind the expression of which I have made so much
   use--"My son was dead, and is alive again, both accords with the great
   change that faith implies, vindicating the strongest language in which
   its important results are ever expressed, and also fully recognises our
   original and abiding relation to God as the Father of our spirits.

   But while some feel as if it were taking from the sense of salvation
   with which they themselves call God

   Father as believing in Christ, thus to regard Him as the Father of the
   spirits of all flesh, others can testify, that the perfect freedom of
   sonship has only been attained by them in seeing the heart of the
   heavenly Father towards all men, to be revealed in Christ, and the life
   of sonship manifested in Christ to be the fulfilment of the divine
   purpose in themselves, because it is the fulfilment of the divine
   purpose in man.

   I have just noticed the increased freedom in living the life of
   sonship, and increased assurance of being in the light of God, which
   comes through the actual experience of a true and living Christianity.
   Now, while this is, in one view, personal, it is in another view only a
   deeper certainty of knowledge as to the will of God in relation to all
   men, and the "common salvation." It is the record that God has given to
   us, that is, to men, eternal life, and that this life is in His Son,
   which he that believeth hath in himself. Therefore is the Christian a
   living Epistle of the grace of God.

   The progress of mind often experienced in relation to the gospel is
   very instructive. Some who have at one time contemplated the atonement
   as having reference to an elected number, and have then felt that their
   own personal hold of salvation would be weakened if Christ had died for
   all men, have afterwards come to see, that they could never have felt
   intelligently certain that Christ had died for them, excepting as that
   fact was included in the fact that He had died for all men; and the
   unsatisfactory shifts had recourse to, in the attempt to combine a free
   preaching of Christ with a limited atonement, have become very palpable
   to them, and they have wondered how, saying, that, "though Christ had
   died only for some, He was freely offered to all," could ever have been
   received by them as an adequate foundation for an appropriating and
   personal faith. And so, as to the results of the work of
   redemption,--what we are called to apprehend as true antecedent to our
   faith,--what the statement "that God has given to us eternal life, and
   that this life is in His Son" amounts to,--many are for a time
   satisfied with the apprehension of a mercy in God embracing them, such
   as Christ's death for their sins implies,--a will in God to bestow
   benefits on them through Christ, who afterwards come to see, that a
   relation to them more internal to their own being, is alike implied in
   the language of Scripture, and required by their need,--if indeed they
   are to be alive to God through faith in Jesus Christ. They, therefore,
   welcome that fuller light of truth which at once reveals to them a gulf
   as left between them and Christ by the simple fact of an atonement
   external to their own being, and that gulf as done away with in the
   actual nearness of Christ to their spirits,--His presence in them as
   their true life. For they now understand the teaching of the Father,
   and His drawing of us to the Son, as what is in the Spirit, and not in
   the Scriptures only, and as what directs us to Christ, as He is present
   in our inner being, there where the sap of the vine passes into the
   branch--a present life to be welcomed or rejected--the ingrafted,
   in-breathed word, which is able to save our souls. To this presence of
   Christ in us is the testimony of God, "that He has given to us eternal
   life, and that this life is in His Son," now known to refer. And as now
   the literal spiritual truth of the testimony that God has given this
   gift, and brought it into the needed nearness--and if He had not, how
   should we?--is apprehended, so now also the manner of the teaching of
   the Son, the manner of His shewing us the Father, is understood. For it
   is found that, according as we receive the testimony of the Father to
   the Son, and, in obedience of faith, receive the Son as our true life,
   and in Him call God Father, the divine fatherliness becomes known by us
   as it can be known to sonship alone. For as, in respect of the natural
   relation which typifies the spiritual, where a father and his children
   are present together, with others also not his offspring, the children
   alone--yea, the children who know that they look upon their father,
   see--with the eyes of the heart--see a father; so also in the higher
   region in which we now are, the Son enables us, God's offspring, to see
   our heavenly Father, when, receiving Christ as our life, we in Him
   raise to the Father the eyes and the heart of true sonship.

   In thus receiving and obeying the testimony of the Father to the Son,
   and, in consequence, knowing the Father as the Son knows Him, and gives
   us to know Him, is the deepest manner of experience of that word--"The
   secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him, and He will shew them
   His covenant."

   But let us be clear as to the elements of our consciousness when this
   is our conscious history. We have not, by any movement of our own
   being, caused this drawing of the Father; we have only yielded to
   it;--neither have we by any movement of our being brought the Son thus
   near to us. He was thus near to us even when we knew it not. Only under
   the teaching of God we have Christ revealed in us the hope of glory.
   The mystery hid from ages and generations is made known to us.
   Therefore, understanding the nature of the grace of which we find
   ourselves the objects, we recognise it as that gracious kingdom of God
   within us which the gospel proclaims. We find our feet in a large
   place,--we are consciously in circumstances to receive and obey the
   word of Christ, "Abide in me;" the personality of these circumstances
   in relation to us, not being less, nor the importance of the issues
   that depend on the faith of them less either, because the grace in
   which we stand is the "common salvation." And, like the man, who at one
   time felt that to believe that Christ had died for all would weaken His
   own conscious hold of salvation, but who has subsequently understood
   that unless Christ died for all there was no certainty that He had died
   for him; so, if we ever felt a distinctive and elective character in
   the divine drawing which draws to Christ, and a distinctive and
   elective character in Christ teaching us to call God Father, an element
   in our religious peace, we now find the stability and depth of that
   peace to consist in the unindividual, the universal character of that
   testimony of the Father to the Son, and of that testimony of the Son to
   the Father, in which we are rejoicing with an individual and personal
   hearing and obedience of faith. Surely that others refuse God's
   teaching no more affects my certainty that I am receiving the light of
   truth in welcoming that teaching, than that others are refusing Christ,
   for whom He died as truly as for me, affects my peace in trusting in
   His death for me. Nay, that the voice of the Eternal Wisdom to which I
   listen, is "unto the sons of men," and to me individually, just as I am
   one of the sons of men, is one element in my certainty that it is the
   voice of God.

   It is a remarkable and instructive fact, that the experience that the
   faith of a work of Christ without us, which left us without the
   knowledge of a presence and power of Christ within us, was inadequate
   to sustain the intelligent purpose of living the life of sonship,--and
   that the recognition of a nearer relation to Christ was needed,--has
   been to some the attraction of the doctrine of baptismal regeneration;
   the spiritual change in our inner being, so conceived of, seeming to
   supply that living link with Christ which has been felt to be necessary
   to our living by Him, and which the fact of the relation of Christ's
   work to all men did not provide. Yet the difference between a spiritual
   relation to Christ as our life, revealed in the preached gospel, and
   made known to us as a spiritual reality in our own inner being by the
   divine teaching, (the drawing of us to the Son by the Father,) and such
   a relation as coming into existence in connexion with the ordinance of
   baptism, and subsequently assumed in a way of faith in that ordinance,
   is one of the greatest possible amount and greatest possible
   importance.

   Christian baptism is into "the name of God, the Father, and the Son,
   and the Holy Spirit." It relates to a gospel proclaiming that name. It
   is administered to those capable of intelligent apprehension of the
   gospel, as believing in that name as the true name of God, and that in
   the light of which they see their relations to Him. Its administration
   to infants is only understandable on the assumption that they are
   already interested in that name of God, and that parents and ministers
   of Christ know them to be so, and are justified in bringing them up in
   the faith of that name as the true name of God. But that we should find
   in our baptism more than is in the name into which we have been
   baptised, and that "more," that spiritual relation to Christ in the
   light of which we can alone hear and respond to the call to follow God
   as dear children; this is, in effect, to believe about baptism that
   which would make it a contradiction of that name of God into which we
   are baptised. For to say that baptism brings us into the needed
   spiritual relation to Christ as our life, is to say, that we were not
   in it antecedently to baptism, that the grace which the gospel reveals
   to our faith has not amounted to this; that is to say, that we might
   know the name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and yet
   not feel in possession of the light of life.

   I would not have risked any distraction of thought by the notice of
   this subject here, were it not for the preciousness in my apprehension
   of that sense of the need of a personal relation to Christ, with which
   to begin to live to God, which the doctrine of baptismal regeneration
   at once recognises and misdirects. As to the more usual objection to
   the doctrine of baptismal regeneration, viz., that it hinders the sense
   of the necessity of being personally alive to God as alone a condition
   of justifiable peace; I do not see how it is possible for any
   thoughtful mind to feel at rest in the contemplation of a fact of this
   kind, whatever it may be believed to have implied, while that fact has
   been common to the history of all the baptised, and has not hindered
   any subsequent manner or measure of evil. No man can believe that
   baptism has secured his salvation: at the utmost it can only be
   conceived of as placing the human spirit in a higher spiritual
   condition; which, if it implies the capacity of higher good, implies
   also that of greater evil--a deeper fall. And so all who believe in
   baptismal regeneration, whether Romanists or Protestants, would speak
   of it.

   2. What affects the conception we form of the sonship towards God to
   which the gospel calls us, must in a corresponding way affect our
   conception of that consciousness of brotherhood with man to which we
   are also called. The light of truth in which I see God as my Father, is
   the light in which I see men as my brethren. If, on the other hand, the
   gospel does not reveal God to me as my Father, neither does it reveal
   men to me as my brethren.

   I have considered above that fulfilment of the righteousness of the
   law, which takes place in us when we walk not after the flesh, but
   after the spirit, and which the Apostle represents as the result which
   God contemplated when He sent His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
   and as a sacrifice for sin, and so condemned sin in the flesh; and I
   then illustrated its relation to sonship as the law of the spirit of
   the life that was in Christ, in which the power was found to make free
   from the law of sin and death. The righteousness of the law is to love
   men as well as to love God; and its fulfilment therefore implies love
   to men as well as love to God. But the life of love which we have in
   Christ, which is sonship towards God, is, in being so, brotherhood
   towards men; and as it is in being sonship that it fulfils the first
   commandment, so it is in being brotherhood that it fulfils the second
   commandment. Therefore, as it is true that until we know God as our
   Father, we cannot love Him with all our heart, and mind, and soul, and
   strength; so is it also true that until we know men as our brethren, we
   cannot love our neighbours as ourselves.

   We know when the question was put to our Lord, by one willing to
   justify himself by the law, "who is my neighbour?" how our Lord
   answered. Let us not under the gospel be found asking, "who is my
   brother?" or coming to conclusions as to the answer of that question
   which will leave us in the position of finding, that some are our
   neighbours who are not our brethren: for to find a neighbour who is not
   a brother, is to find a neighbour whom I cannot love as I love myself;
   for unless I can feel towards him as towards a brother, unless in the
   life of brotherhood given to me in Christ, I can see him with the eyes
   of a brother, and love him with the heart of a brother, I cannot love
   him in spirit and in truth as I love myself.

   It thus more and more appears that the question as to the nature of the
   atonement is in truth nothing else than the question, 'what is
   Christianity?' It is so, as we have seen, as to the God-ward aspect of
   the eternal life given to us in Christ. It is so, we now see, as to the
   man-ward aspect of that life also. In contemplating the eternal life in
   Christ as taking the form of the atonement, the outcoming of love has
   been seen to be one and the same thing as sonship towards God and
   brotherhood towards man; and all that has been presented to our faith
   as entering into the work of Christ, has appeared to have been equally
   called for by love to God and by love to man,--a self-sacrifice which
   was at once devotedness to God and devotedness to man. The eternal life
   being unchanging in its nature, it follows, as urged above, that what
   it was in Christ as an atonement, it will be in us as salvation.
   Therefore Christ, as the Lord of our spirits, and our life, devotes us
   to God and devotes us to men in the fellowship of His self-sacrifice.

   This He does in giving us to know God as our Father and men as our
   brethren. Seen in the light of God, our state of sin, and life of self,
   is solitary in all aspects of it. In it we are ''orphans of the heart,"
   brotherless as well as fatherless: for in it the life of true
   brotherhood is as unknown in relation to man as that of true sonship is
   in relation to God. ''God setteth the solitary in families." This is
   accomplished for us spiritually in our passing from death unto life,
   "for by this we know that we have passed from death unto life, because
   we love the brethren. He that loveth not his brother abideth in death."
   Christ gives us to possess, not God only, but men also as our riches,
   the unsearchable riches which we have in Him. But, I say, in doing so
   He is, at the same time, devoting us to

   God and to men, in the fellowship of His self-sacrifice. He thus calls
   us to poverty, in calling us to the true riches; calls us to have
   nothing, in calling us to possess all things; and thus the pearl of
   great price, which is given us without money and without price, while
   it is above all price, is yet that of which it is said, that a man must
   sell all that he has, that he may buy that pearl. If I am to be rich in
   the consciousness of having God as my Father, this must be in that
   entire devotion of my being to Him which is in loving the Lord my God,
   with all my heart, and mind, and soul, and strength. If I am to be rich
   in the consciousness of having men as my brethren, it must be in loving
   my neighbour as myself.

   Here it may occur, that though to say, that Christ gives me God as my
   Father, has indeed a gospel sound, this is not felt equally as to the
   statement that He gives me men as my brethren. Yet are the gifts
   related, inseparably connected; their bond being the relation of the
   second commandment to the first. No doubt the difference, and more
   especially the immediate difference, between these gifts is very great
   in all views, but especially in this, that, by the latter, Christ lays
   a weight upon me, the burden of others; while, by the former. He lays
   my burden on God, enabling me to cast all my cares upon Him, knowing
   that He careth for me. Yet it is an obvious comfort here that the
   burden of others, which He lays upon me, being truly borne by me,
   becomes a part of that burden which He enables me to cast upon God.

   But that we may see the whole transaction in both its parts, that which
   refers to our relation to men, as well as that which refers to our
   relation to God--as one grace, we must see it in the light of that
   word, "He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he
   love God whom he hath not seen." In the life of love which we have in
   Christ, not only will God have His proper preciousness to us, but men
   also will have theirs--as was Christ's own case. Love will go out to
   men as well as to God, though its goings out may be, in the one case,
   with sorrow and anguish of spirit, while in the other, it is with peace
   and joy. Neither can we know the fellowship of our Lord's peace and
   joy, as what belong to the life which we have in Him in the one aspect
   of it, while we refuse to share with Him the sorrow and anguish which
   pertain to His life in the other aspect of it. If we refuse to be in
   Christ the brothers of men, we cannot be in Christ the sons of God.
   This is in another form of words our Lord's teaching, when He says, "If
   ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
   you your trespasses." We must die to self in the fellowship of the
   death of Christ, if we would live to God; and, so dying as to live to
   God, we shall live to each other also.

   Self is essential and necessary solitude, with what ever society and
   shew of social life it may encompass itself. In the inmost circle of
   our being we abide alone, until, in the death of self, the life of God
   is quickened. Then God becomes the centre which self was while yet we
   were as gods to ourselves, and then the harmony of the first and second
   commandment is known by us. We find that Christ, in reconciling us to
   God, has reconciled us to men; and though comfort, and peace, and joy
   alone come out of the former of these results of His love, and sorrow,
   and vexation of spirit, yea, fellowship in Christ's own sorrow, may
   come abundantly out of its latter result, yet, even as to this latter,
   the sorrow is not unmixed. If the afflictions of Christ abound in us,
   our consolation, even as respects men, shall also abound through
   Christ; and if men are a weight upon our spirits, and a deep and
   constant sorrow as they never were before, yet shall we know now, as we
   could not before, the fellowship of the joy that is in heaven over
   sinners that repent; and, in the communion of saints, shall know what
   man can be to man when met together in the pure light and life of the
   divine love. While as to the hope set before us we know, that united to
   men by the bond of that love in which Christ died for them, our
   fellowship in His death will prove the seed and earnest of fellowship
   in His joy in that ultimate result in which He shall see of the travail
   of His soul, and shall be satisfied.

   Self is most unwilling to die, and can gather around it so many
   sweetenings of life in the form of social relations, which give a
   certain superficial sense of communion of heart and mind without
   touching its (self's) life at the core, that we need not marvel that
   the call to deny self, and take up the cross of Christ, is resisted so
   long as only the sacrifice required is realised, and not also the
   exceeding gain that is to come through that sacrifice; and of this gain
   nothing is, I think, less anticipated than what is found in the new
   aspect which our brother men will present to us, and the sense of
   eternal life that accompanies that new interest of love which they will
   have to us in the fellowship of Christ's love to them, and which will
   take the place of that self-reference with which they were formerly
   regarded;--though broken, it might be, by occasional outbursts of
   kindly and generous feeling--grapes, as it were, from the land of
   promise tasted in the wilderness, but yet their promise not believed.
   Would that these outcomings of a better nature were traced up to their
   ultimate source in the depths of our being, and, instead of the passing
   comfort and satisfaction which in their present form is all they
   usually yield, were employed as threads to lead us back, through the
   labyrinth of our outward life, to meet and know Him within us--the Lord
   of our spirits--who came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
   and give His life a ransom for many, and who would teach us the life of
   self-sacrifice, with all its peculiar and proper sorrows, doubtless,
   but also with all its peculiar and proper joys. Nay, have not the
   bitterest sorrows proper to that life a root of sweetness in them which
   renders them better, more to be chosen than other joys?
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER XVI.

   CONCLUSION

   HAVING, in this attempt to illustrate the nature of the atonement,
   insisted so much on the application of the words, "In Him was life, and
   the life was the light of men," to the whole work of Christ in making
   His soul an offering for sin, I am anxious not to be misunderstood as
   to the aspect of the subject of the atonement, in which it has appeared
   to me reasonable to expect it to be light to us, and not darkness; and
   that, in closing this volume, the reader should carry away with him a
   distinct conception of the limits, which, in writing, I have realised,
   and kept in view.

   I have not attempted to divest the subject of the atonement of all
   mystery. I have not cherished the hope, or, in truth, the desire, of
   doing so. The self-righteousness that takes the form of a submission of
   faith to mysteries, I, indeed, feel to be altogether a delusion. The
   assumed merit of a blind faith, in addition to the error implied in all
   conception of merit on our part in relation to God, involves the
   absurdity of expecting to please God by exalting one of His good gifts,
   to the depreciation of another gift, equally to be traced up to the
   grace of the Father of lights. Any manner of subordinating of reason to
   revelation must be wrong, in which it is forgotten that we honour God
   in assigning to reason its due place, as truly as we do in assigning to
   revelation its due place; for to be jealous for reason is to be jealous
   for God, as truly as to be jealous for revelation is to be jealous for
   God. If self comes in, and forgets that reason is a gift, as well as
   revelation, and, claiming reason as its own, is puffed up on behalf of
   that which we have thus identified with ourselves, the temptation that
   thus arises to exalt reason and depreciate revelation is obvious, and
   the evil consequences to be anticipated great. But the remedy, the true
   and the only remedy, is, that we should hear the voice of God in reason
   as well as in revelation--that God in whose presence no flesh shall
   glory.

   But as to mysteries, reason has its mysteries as well as revelation;
   and to shrink from mysteries, is to shrink from all deep thinking on
   any of the high problems of our existence. The practical question for
   us, as God's thinking, intelligent offspring, always is as to the limit
   of light and darkness; which practical question we are to entertain
   under the sense of this twofold responsibility; that, as it would be
   wrong to attempt to push beyond that limit, or to be impatient of its
   existence, so would it be also wrong to fix it more near to us than it
   is in the truth of things, or at least in relation to the dispensations
   of light vouchsafed to us by God. For would not this be to refuse to
   use some portion of the grace of God to us, and be one form of folding
   in a napkin and hiding in the earth a talent of which an account must
   be rendered?

   Therefore, under the sense of a responsibility of which the twofold
   aspect has appeared to me thus unquestionable, I have now considered
   the elements of the work of Christ as what His participation in
   humanity, and our participation in the divine nature through Him,
   seemed to place within the limit of the light of life that shines for
   us in Him; while I have simply recognised, abstaining from all attempt
   at explanation, or elucidation, the underlying and deeper facts of the
   relation of man to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
   implied in the relation of the work of Christ to all men, and in the
   spiritual reality of that which is stated when it is said, that "this
   is the testimony of God, that God has given to us eternal life, and
   that this life is in His Son." As to these deepest facts of our being
   and of our relation to God, I have not even attempted to determine the
   line that separates the darkness and the light now; or at all to say
   what its eternal and necessary place is; while neither am I to be
   understood as passing any judgment on attempts to do so, or on the
   going of others nearer to that awful line than I have done. But I am
   anxious that the reader should realise how much on the light side of
   that line I have kept, having determined to approach it no more nearly
   than an attempt to illustrate the nature of the atonement required me
   to do.

   Reason has its mysteries as well as revelation, the mysteries of
   deepest interest to us being, indeed, common to them both; though,
   inasmuch as revelation carries us further into the region to which
   mystery pertains, the sense of mystery in occupation of mind with the
   discoveries of revelation is greater. But the aspect in which the
   atonement has now been contemplated does not belong to the proper
   region of mystery at all. That region, whether as respects reason or
   revelation, is the divine and the infinite; and the atonement has now
   been considered simply as a transaction in humanity, contemplating
   results in man, to be accomplished by the revelation of the elements of
   that transaction to the spirit of man, and in a way of participation in
   these elements on the part of man. It is not in this transaction,
   viewed in itself, that mystery was to be expected, or could exist, but
   in that relation of the Son of God to man which this transaction
   presupposes. This relation, whether we contemplate it as participation
   in our flesh, or as that relation to us in the spirit in respect of
   which Christ is our life, having power over all flesh to this end, is
   indeed a mystery as to its nature and manner, and to be known by us
   only in its results.

   And this is true, whether we contemplate the personal work of Christ in
   making His soul an offering for sin, or His work in us in respect of
   which it is true, that when we live to God we must say, "Yet not we,
   but Christ liveth in us." The divine perfection of sonship in humanity,
   presented in Christ to our faith, is, in respect of its perfection,
   what leads us up to the mystery of the divinity of Christ as truly as
   His power to quicken and sustain sonship in spirit and in truth in us
   does. I can realise neither without feeling shut up to the faith of the
   divinity of the Saviour; while that faith so accords with the facts the
   contemplation of which thus leads directly to it, that, being received,
   it sheds light on them. For, believing in the divinity of Christ, we
   see how the atonement has that commensurateness with the infinite evil
   of sin, and infinite excellence of righteousness, which imparts to it
   its peace giving power; we see how Christ is near to us in that
   nearness that accords with His being our life, and has that power in
   relation to us which justifies the confidence that through Christ
   strengthening us we can do all things.

   But viewed in itself, this faith has in it the deepest mystery; but it
   is mystery in the region in which we are prepared for mystery, being,
   first, in the manner of being of God, and then, where the line of
   meeting is between God and man. For here, also, we are prepared for
   mystery; and while we expect to understand what pertains to the human
   side of this line and to the divine nature as in humanity, we do not
   expect to understand what is on the divine side, and pertains to the
   acting of God as God. As to that ultimate mystery which our faith
   receives in believing in God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
   while in itself eternal, and irrespective of all finite existence, we
   can only be called to the study of it in its manifestation in connexion
   with man. But even in this manifestation there remains a necessity for
   recognising the distinction now made. What the divine sonship is in its
   spiritual essence and consciousness, as presented to our faith in
   Christ, and as that to the fellowship of which we are ourselves called
   in Him, this, the very nature of the divine purpose in relation to us
   prepares us to expect to understand. But the nature of the relation of
   the Son of God to humanity, whether we contemplate His own personal
   work in making His soul an offering for sin, making an end of sin, and
   bringing in everlasting righteousness, or His work in men as putting
   forth the power in them which is implied in His being their life;--this
   belongs to the acting of God as God, and to the divinity of the Son of
   God, in an aspect of the subject which all experience in thinking of
   our relation to God prepares us not to be able to understand.

   Nor is the question of how this can be, or what the manner of the
   divine acting is, which it implies, the only mystery here. The faith of
   the divinity of the Saviour, while in one view it affords light and
   explanation as to the facts which constitute the gospel, in truth
   involves and deepens all the moral and spiritual mysteries of our
   existence.

   I believe, as I have said, that the faith of the atonement, and the
   faith that we have eternal life in Christ, is more easy to us when it
   rests on the faith of the divinity of Christ. Indeed, apart from that
   previous faith, the faith of what the gospel reveals Christ to be to
   us, is to me impossible. I cannot believe in one as my life, of whom I
   am not warranted to think as God; while, remembering that in God I
   live, and move, and have my being, I seem prepared to be told--I had
   almost said to understand--that the divine life of sonship is what I am
   to live in and by the Son of God as my life. The universal relation of
   men to the one Son of God, as He in whom they all have the life of
   sonship, accords as perfectly with the divinity of the Son of God, as
   it contradicts every lower conception of His being; and the Apostle,
   who preached to the Athenians, in relation to the unknown God whom they
   ignorantly worshipped, that "in Him they lived, and moved, and had
   their being," must be regarded as only presenting to our faith another
   part of the truth of man's mysterious relation to God, when He makes
   known the mystery hid from ages and generations,--the mystery of
   "Christ in men the hope of glory." Nay, how closely the one revelation
   is related to the other, we must see, if we connect the use which the
   Apostle makes of the recognition of man's relation to God by one of
   their own poets--"For we are all His offspring," with our relation to
   Christ in respect to that life of sonship in which alone men can call
   God Father in spirit and in truth. Surely the parallelism of these
   relationships to the Father and the Son is a help to our faith in the
   divinity of the Son, as it also explains the fact that this mystery of
   the divine existence is made known to us. But still, as I have said,
   this mystery, apart altogether from what men have felt of its
   intellectual difficulty, deepens the previous mysteries of reason with
   which all thoughtful minds have been exercised from the beginning.

   Thus the great mystery of combined dependence and independence, as
   presented by our relation to God,--the mystery implied in the fact that
   in God we live, and move, and have our being, and yet that we may be
   the opposite of what God wills us to be; this is not removed, but only
   deepened by all the thoughts of our relation to God which are connected
   with our relation to the Son of God.

   If we think of the matter in the way of considering how, in the nature
   of things, the spiritual constitution of humanity can be a reality,
   there is no question that a manner of nearness to God and to goodness,
   is suggested by the statement that "God has given to us eternal life in
   His Son,"--understood as implying an actual relation of our spirits to
   Christ as present in us--our true and proper life, which it is still
   more difficult to reconcile in our thoughts with the fact of what in
   sin men are, than even our "living, and moving, and having our being in
   God."

   If, again, we look at the subject in relation to the divine will as a
   will concerning us, the choice of God for men, in proportion as the
   gospel reveals the "love" in which the law has its root, and shews the
   demand "for love" to be the demand of love, the difficulty that exists
   in the fact of our being other than that love desires that we should
   be, is increased, and reaches its maximum of difficulty when the love,
   which is seen seeking our well-being, is seen as the fatherliness that
   is in God, and its choice for us is seen as participation in the life
   of sonship, and the provision for the realisation of that desire, is
   seen in the gift to us of this eternal life in the Son. Assuredly the
   mystery, the moral and spiritual mystery, is here increased in
   proportion as it is seen to be a mystery thus involving infinite love.
   But though increased by all that magnifies God's unspeakable gift, let
   us not forget that it is not less truly the mystery of reason than the
   mystery of revelation.

   Doubtless it is with a sense of mystery, often altogether oppressive,
   that we look upon human sin and degradation, and then pass upwards to
   the Father of the spirits in whom the sin and degradation present
   themselves, and meditate on the thoughts of that Father in relation to
   them, and on all that our faith apprehends of what He has done, and is
   doing, to accomplish in them the good pleasure of His goodness. But
   though this mystery is greatest in the light of the gospel, it is
   great, very great, in the light of all those witnesses for His goodness
   towards men, without which God has never left Himself; and in respect
   of which the charge is just, that, in not being thankful, men were
   refusing to glorify God as God.

   Some would cut this knot by saying, that all contradiction between what
   God is, and what God wills, is but apparent; that nothing is, or can
   be, other than what God wills it to be;--and that facts in the moral
   and spiritual region, even those that seem most contrary to the mind of
   God, are really related to Him just as physical facts are--hatred and
   love as much as cold and heat. Hatred may believe this, but love
   cannot. Self may believe that there is an end present to the divine
   mind which all moral events equally and necessarily subserve, and with
   reference to which it is that God wills them to be, and which it may
   call the divine glory. But love cannot believe that the divine glory is
   of this nature, or that that will, in respect of which God is love, and
   the manifestation of which must be His glory, can, in respect of moral
   beings, be fulfilled but in their loving.

   The existence of a contradiction between what man is, and what God
   wills him to be, is indeed a mystery. The faith of the fact, however,
   is demanded by what is highest and deepest within us; which forbids our
   grasping at a seeming intellectual consistency of thought, at the
   expense of denying this contradiction, and accepting all the fearful
   moral and spiritual results which such denial involves. And even as to
   the intellectual relief sought, in denying that contradiction between
   man and God, which all ascription of goodness to God, and all hope of
   goodness for man alike imply, (for if evil be not contrary to the will
   of God, what hope of deliverance from it?) this seeming intellectual
   relief is but such in seeming; for it is but the removal of the
   contradiction, from where conscience recognises its existence, to place
   it in God Himself, by representing Him as what the Apostle so solemnly
   disclaims His being--a fountain giving forth at the same time sweet
   waters and bitter.

   Nor can we be otherwise than thankful for the utter failure of all
   attempts made in this direction to solve this great moral and spiritual
   mystery; for its weight is nothing in comparison of what would be laid
   upon us by taking away the faith that God is love which involves that
   mystery, and representing the great First Cause as at the most only an
   intelligent fate. Nay, we may surely say, that what of mystery in
   relation to the actual facts of human existence, as it presents itself
   to us, the faith of love involves, the faith of love will itself enable
   us to submit to in the patience of hope.

   But if the love of God to man presents deep mysteries, and mysteries
   that deepen to our apprehension as our faith that God is love is real,
   having also more claim on our attention in proportion as they are not
   intellectual, but moral and spiritual; and, more especially, if that
   spiritual constitution of the kingdom of God in relation to man, which
   the gospel reveals, be the deepening to the utmost of that mystery
   which the contradiction between what man is and what God wills him to
   be presents, how have I now attempted to illustrate the nature of the
   atonement, without entering upon the consideration, either of this
   moral and spiritual mystery, or of the intellectual mysteries to which
   the atonement is related? Because none of the mysteries which encompass
   the atonement are so related to it, as that we must first solve them
   before we can understand it; a course the opposite of this is rather
   that to which we are called; and whether we would ascend upwards to
   questions connected with the name of God the Father, the Son, and the
   Holy Spirit, or meditate on the present or future of man, the due
   preparation for these regions of thought, is, the exercise of faith in
   the actual condition of things which the gospel reveals, and which, in
   the light of the kingdom of God within us, and in the measure in which
   we are taught of God, we know as the truth.

   I have, therefore, felt at liberty to consider the nature of the
   atonement, without first considering the mysteries which encompass it.
   Nay, what I have just said implies, that I must have begun with this
   subject, had my ultimate purpose been to consider these mysteries; so
   that even in regard to those questions in relation to God and man,
   which take us most to the verge of light, the inquiry which has now
   engaged us attaches to itself all the interest and importance which may
   be felt to belong to them.

   But while I hope for good only from all holy and reverent meditation on
   any of the deeper subjects of thought to which I have now referred, my
   immediate purpose has not been to offer help towards such meditation,
   though I should be thankful to be found to have actually done so,--as
   doubtless much of what has now been presented to the reader's
   consideration has been such help to myself,--but my immediate object
   has been the urgent practical one of illustrating that spiritual
   constitution of things in which, in the grace of God, we have a place,
   and to which we must needs be conformed if we would partake in the
   great salvation. Such conformity, that Amen of faith to the atonement
   which I have sought to illustrate, is that to which our Lord calls us
   when He says,--"Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His
   righteousness,"--adding, in order that we may be altogether free to
   give heed to the call, the assurance, "and all other things will be
   added unto you." All inquiry as to what is the truth is solemn, and the
   sense of responsibility that belongs to it, weighty. But, manifestly,
   that inquiry becomes more solemn, and that responsibility more weighty,
   in proportion as the answer to the question,--"What am I to
   think?--What am I to believe?"--becomes one with the answer of the
   question,--"What am I called to be?" And this is the solemnity, this
   the importance that belongs to the question of the nature of the
   atonement.

   The reader who has accompanied me to the close of this volume, in the
   fair mind, and with the patience of love, has, I trust, felt that
   throughout I have simply sought to awaken a response in his own inner
   being,--whether in this I have succeeded or have not,--and that I have
   written, not with the interest of theological controversy, but as a man
   communing with his brother man, and giving utterance to the deep
   convictions of his own heart as to the spiritual need of humanity, and
   the common salvation. For I have written as seeming to myself to hear,
   and as desiring to be used to help others to hear with personal and
   practical application, the Son of God saying to us, "I am the way, and
   the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father, but by me," the
   Father saying to us, ''This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
   pleased; hear ye Him."

   THE END
     __________________________________________________________________

    LIST OF BOOKS QUOTED, WITH THE EDITIONS FROM WHICH THE QUOTATIONS ARE TAKEN.

   Commentary on the Epistle to the Galatians. By Martin Luther. London:
   Printed for Mathews and Leigh, Strand; by S. Gosnell, Little Queen
   Street. 1810.

   The Works of John Owen, D.D. Edited by the Rev. William H. Goold,
   Edinburgh. (Vol. X.) Johnstone and Hunter, London and Edinburgh. 1852.

   The Works of President Edwards, in 4 Vols. A Reprint of the Worcester
   Edition, with valuable Additions, and a copious General Index. New
   York: Leavitt, Trow, and Co. 194, Broadway; London: Wiley and Putnam.
   1844.

   Four Discourses on the Sacrifice and Priesthood of Jesus Christ, and
   the Atonement and Redemption thence accruing. By John Pye Smith, D.D.
   F.R.S. Third Edition. London: Jackson and Walford. 1847.

   Lectures on Divine Sovereignty, Election, the Atonement, Justification,
   and Regeneration. By George Payne, LL.D. Exeter. Second Edition.
   London: James Dinnis, 62, Paternoster-row. 1838.

   On the Extent of the Atonement, in its Relation to God and the
   Universe. By the Rev. Thomas W. Jenkyn. Second Edition. London: John
   Snow, 26, Paternoster-row. 1837.

   Discourses on the Nature and Extent of the Atonement of Christ. By
   Ralph Wardlaw, D.D. Fourth Thousand. Glasgow: James Maclehose, 83,
   Buchanan Street. 1844.

   A Treatise an the Physical Cause of the Sufferings of Christ, and its
   Relation to the principles and practice of Christianity. By William
   Stroud, M.D. London: Hamilton and Adams, 33, Paternoster-row. 1847.

   Institutes of Theology. By the late Thomas Chalmers, D.D. LL.D. in 2
   Vols. Vol II. Published for Thomas Constable, by Sutherland and Knox,
   Edinburgh. Hamilton and Adams, and Co. London. 1849.

   The Atoning Work of Christ. By William Thomson, M.A. Oxford.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [1]iii  [2]v  [3]vi  [4]vii  [5]1  [6]2  [7]3  [8]4  [9]5  [10]6
   [11]7  [12]8  [13]9  [14]10  [15]11  [16]12  [17]13  [18]14  [19]15
   [20]16  [21]17  [22]18  [23]19  [24]20  [25]21  [26]22  [27]23  [28]24
   [29]25  [30]26  [31]27  [32]28  [33]29  [34]30  [35]31  [36]32  [37]33
   [38]34  [39]35  [40]36  [41]37  [42]38  [43]39  [44]40  [45]41  [46]42
   [47]43  [48]44  [49]45  [50]46  [51]47  [52]48  [53]49  [54]50  [55]51
   [56]52  [57]53  [58]54  [59]55  [60]56  [61]57  [62]58  [63]59  [64]60
   [65]61  [66]62  [67]63  [68]64  [69]65  [70]66  [71]67  [72]68  [73]69
   [74]70  [75]71  [76]72  [77]73  [78]74  [79]75  [80]76  [81]77  [82]78
   [83]79  [84]80  [85]81  [86]82  [87]83  [88]84  [89]85  [90]86  [91]87
   [92]88  [93]89  [94]90  [95]91  [96]92  [97]93  [98]94  [99]95
   [100]96  [101]97  [102]98  [103]99  [104]100  [105]101  [106]102
   [107]103  [108]104  [109]105  [110]106  [111]107  [112]108  [113]109
   [114]110  [115]111  [116]112  [117]113  [118]114  [119]115  [120]116
   [121]117  [122]118  [123]119  [124]120  [125]121  [126]122  [127]123
   [128]124  [129]125  [130]126  [131]127  [132]128  [133]129  [134]130
   [135]131  [136]132  [137]133  [138]134  [139]135  [140]136  [141]137
   [142]138  [143]139  [144]140  [145]141  [146]142  [147]143  [148]144
   [149]145  [150]146  [151]147  [152]148  [153]149  [154]150  [155]151
   [156]152  [157]153  [158]154  [159]155  [160]156  [161]157  [162]158
   [163]159  [164]160  [165]161  [166]162  [167]163  [168]164  [169]165
   [170]166  [171]167  [172]168  [173]169  [174]170  [175]171  [176]172
   [177]173  [178]174  [179]175  [180]176  [181]177  [182]178  [183]179
   [184]180  [185]181  [186]182  [187]183  [188]184  [189]185  [190]186
   [191]187  [192]188  [193]189  [194]190  [195]191  [196]192  [197]193
   [198]194  [199]195  [200]196  [201]197  [202]198  [203]199  [204]200
   [205]201  [206]202  [207]203  [208]204  [209]205  [210]206  [211]207
   [212]208  [213]209  [214]210  [215]211  [216]212  [217]213  [218]214
   [219]215  [220]216  [221]217  [222]218  [223]219  [224]220  [225]221
   [226]222  [227]223  [228]224  [229]225  [230]226  [231]227  [232]228
   [233]229  [234]230  [235]231  [236]232  [237]233  [238]234  [239]235
   [240]236  [241]237  [242]238  [243]239  [244]240  [245]241  [246]242
   [247]243  [248]244  [249]245  [250]246  [251]247  [252]248  [253]249
   [254]250  [255]251  [256]252  [257]253  [258]254  [259]255  [260]256
   [261]257  [262]258  [263]259  [264]260  [265]261  [266]262  [267]263
   [268]264  [269]265  [270]266  [271]267  [272]268  [273]269  [274]270
   [275]271  [276]272  [277]273  [278]274  [279]275  [280]276  [281]277
   [282]278  [283]279  [284]280  [285]281  [286]282  [287]283  [288]284
   [289]285  [290]286  [291]287  [292]288  [293]289  [294]290  [295]291
   [296]292  [297]293  [298]294  [299]295  [300]296  [301]297  [302]298
   [303]299  [304]300  [305]301  [306]302  [307]303  [308]304  [309]305
   [310]306  [311]307  [312]308  [313]309  [314]310  [315]311  [316]312
   [317]313  [318]314  [319]315  [320]316  [321]317  [322]318  [323]319
   [324]320  [325]321  [326]322  [327]323  [328]324  [329]325  [330]326
   [331]327  [332]328  [333]329  [334]330  [335]331  [336]332  [337]333
   [338]334  [339]335  [340]336  [341]337  [342]338  [343]339  [344]340
   [345]341  [346]342  [347]343  [348]344  [349]345  [350]346  [351]347
   [352]348  [353]349  [354]350  [355]351  [356]352  [357]353  [358]354
   [359]355  [360]356  [361]357  [362]358  [363]359  [364]360  [365]361
   [366]362  [367]363  [368]364  [369]365  [370]366  [371]367  [372]368
   [373]369  [374]370  [375]371  [376]372  [377]373  [378]374  [379]375
   [380]376  [381]377  [382]378  [383]379  [384]380  [385]381  [386]382
   [387]383  [388]384
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#i-Page_iii
   2. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ii-Page_v
   3. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ii-Page_vi
   4. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ii-Page_vii
   5. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_1
   6. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_2
   7. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_3
   8. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_4
   9. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_5
  10. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_6
  11. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_7
  12. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_8
  13. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_9
  14. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_10
  15. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_11
  16. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_12
  17. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_13
  18. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_14
  19. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_15
  20. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_16
  21. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_17
  22. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_18
  23. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_19
  24. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_20
  25. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_21
  26. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_22
  27. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_23
  28. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_24
  29. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_25
  30. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_26
  31. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_27
  32. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_28
  33. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_29
  34. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_30
  35. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iii-Page_31
  36. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_32
  37. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_33
  38. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_34
  39. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_35
  40. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_36
  41. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_37
  42. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_38
  43. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_39
  44. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_40
  45. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_41
  46. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_42
  47. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_43
  48. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_44
  49. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_45
  50. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_46
  51. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_47
  52. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#iv-Page_48
  53. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_49
  54. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_50
  55. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_51
  56. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_52
  57. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_53
  58. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_54
  59. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_55
  60. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_56
  61. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_57
  62. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_58
  63. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_59
  64. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_60
  65. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_61
  66. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_62
  67. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_63
  68. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_64
  69. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_65
  70. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_66
  71. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_67
  72. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_68
  73. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_69
  74. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_70
  75. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_71
  76. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_72
  77. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_73
  78. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#v-Page_74
  79. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_75
  80. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_76
  81. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_77
  82. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_78
  83. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_79
  84. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_80
  85. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_81
  86. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_82
  87. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_83
  88. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_84
  89. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_85
  90. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_86
  91. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_87
  92. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_88
  93. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_89
  94. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_90
  95. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_91
  96. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_92
  97. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_93
  98. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_94
  99. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_95
 100. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_96
 101. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_97
 102. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_98
 103. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_99
 104. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_100
 105. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_101
 106. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_102
 107. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_103
 108. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_104
 109. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_105
 110. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_106
 111. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_107
 112. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_108
 113. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_109
 114. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_110
 115. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_111
 116. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vi-Page_112
 117. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_113
 118. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_114
 119. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_115
 120. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_116
 121. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_117
 122. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_118
 123. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_119
 124. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_120
 125. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_121
 126. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_122
 127. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_123
 128. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_124
 129. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_125
 130. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_126
 131. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#vii-Page_127
 132. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_128
 133. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_129
 134. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_130
 135. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_131
 136. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_132
 137. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_133
 138. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_134
 139. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_135
 140. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_136
 141. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_137
 142. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_138
 143. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_139
 144. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_140
 145. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_141
 146. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_142
 147. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_143
 148. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_144
 149. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_145
 150. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_146
 151. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_147
 152. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_148
 153. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#viii-Page_149
 154. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_150
 155. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_151
 156. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_152
 157. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_153
 158. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_154
 159. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_155
 160. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_156
 161. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_157
 162. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_158
 163. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_159
 164. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_160
 165. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_161
 166. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_162
 167. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_163
 168. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_164
 169. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_165
 170. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_166
 171. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_167
 172. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_168
 173. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_169
 174. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_170
 175. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_171
 176. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_172
 177. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_173
 178. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_174
 179. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_175
 180. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_176
 181. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_177
 182. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_178
 183. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_179
 184. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_180
 185. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_181
 186. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_182
 187. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_183
 188. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_184
 189. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_185
 190. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_186
 191. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_187
 192. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_188
 193. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_189
 194. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#ix-Page_190
 195. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_191
 196. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_192
 197. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_193
 198. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_194
 199. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_195
 200. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_196
 201. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_197
 202. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_198
 203. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_199
 204. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_200
 205. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_201
 206. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_202
 207. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_203
 208. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_204
 209. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_205
 210. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_206
 211. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_207
 212. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_208
 213. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_209
 214. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_210
 215. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_211
 216. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_212
 217. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_213
 218. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_214
 219. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_215
 220. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_216
 221. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_217
 222. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_218
 223. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_219
 224. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_220
 225. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_221
 226. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_222
 227. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_223
 228. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_224
 229. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_225
 230. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#x-Page_226
 231. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_227
 232. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_228
 233. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_229
 234. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_230
 235. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_231
 236. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_232
 237. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_233
 238. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_234
 239. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_235
 240. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_236
 241. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_237
 242. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_238
 243. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xi-Page_239
 244. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_240
 245. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_241
 246. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_242
 247. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_243
 248. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_244
 249. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_245
 250. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_246
 251. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_247
 252. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_248
 253. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_249
 254. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_250
 255. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_251
 256. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xii-Page_252
 257. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_253
 258. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_254
 259. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_255
 260. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_256
 261. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_257
 262. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_258
 263. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_259
 264. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_260
 265. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_261
 266. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_262
 267. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_263
 268. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_264
 269. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_265
 270. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_266
 271. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_267
 272. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_268
 273. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_269
 274. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_270
 275. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_271
 276. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiii-Page_272
 277. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_273
 278. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_274
 279. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_275
 280. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_276
 281. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_277
 282. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_278
 283. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_279
 284. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_280
 285. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_281
 286. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_282
 287. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_283
 288. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_284
 289. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_285
 290. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_286
 291. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_287
 292. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_288
 293. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_289
 294. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_290
 295. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_291
 296. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_292
 297. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_293
 298. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xiv-Page_294
 299. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_295
 300. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_296
 301. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_297
 302. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_298
 303. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_299
 304. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_300
 305. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_301
 306. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_302
 307. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_303
 308. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_304
 309. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_305
 310. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_306
 311. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_307
 312. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_308
 313. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_309
 314. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_310
 315. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_311
 316. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_312
 317. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xv-Page_313
 318. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_314
 319. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_315
 320. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_316
 321. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_317
 322. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_318
 323. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_319
 324. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_320
 325. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_321
 326. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_322
 327. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_323
 328. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_324
 329. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_325
 330. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_326
 331. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_327
 332. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_328
 333. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_329
 334. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_330
 335. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_331
 336. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_332
 337. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvi-Page_333
 338. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_334
 339. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_335
 340. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_336
 341. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_337
 342. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_338
 343. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_339
 344. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_340
 345. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_341
 346. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_342
 347. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_343
 348. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_344
 349. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_345
 350. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_346
 351. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_347
 352. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_348
 353. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_349
 354. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_350
 355. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_351
 356. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_352
 357. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_353
 358. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_354
 359. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_355
 360. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_356
 361. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_357
 362. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_358
 363. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_359
 364. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_360
 365. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_361
 366. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_362
 367. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_363
 368. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_364
 369. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_365
 370. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_366
 371. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_367
 372. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_368
 373. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_369
 374. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xvii-Page_370
 375. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_371
 376. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_372
 377. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_373
 378. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_374
 379. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_375
 380. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_376
 381. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_377
 382. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_378
 383. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_379
 384. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_380
 385. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_381
 386. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xviii-Page_382
 387. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xix-Page_383
 388. file:///ccel/c/campbell/atonement/cache/atonement.html3#xix-Page_384
